MARKHAM, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-5 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 25-O-2422, passed 11-5-2025; and
State legislation current through 2024 Illinois Legislative Service, Pamphlet
#6
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
Mayor            Roger Agpawa
                 
Clerk            Jennifer Coles
                 
Treasurer        Belinda Richardson
                 
Alderman, Ward 1 Brenna Hampton-Houser
Alderman, Ward 2 Wanda Jean-McDowell
Alderman, Ward 3 Rondal Jones
Alderman, Ward 4 William Barron
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
      
11.   WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Markham shall be
designated as the “Code of Markham” and may be so cited.
(Prior Code, § 10.01)
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
(Prior Code, § 10.02)
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
(Prior Code, § 10.03)
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code, other than the title, chapter and
section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
(Prior Code, § 10.04)
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, ordinary and usual
sense. However, technical words and phrases having a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, MUNICIPALITY or TOWN. The City of Markham,
Illinois.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code, as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNTY. Cook County, Illinois.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in such cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof and, as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of Illinois.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.
(Prior Code, § 10.05)
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
(Prior Code, § 10.06)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
(Prior Code, § 10.07)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(Prior Code, § 10.08)
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
(Prior Code, § 10.09)
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
(Prior Code, § 10.10)
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within the city for the transaction of all municipal
business.
(Prior Code, § 10.11)
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
(Prior Code, § 10.12)
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
(Prior Code, § 10.13)
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
(Prior Code, § 10.14)
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the City Council requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
(Prior Code, § 10.15)
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be effected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
(Prior Code, § 10.16)
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   (1)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a
new chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of
this code, the proper number of such chapter or section.
      (2)   In addition to such indication thereof as may appear in the text of
the proposed ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above
the ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 10.17)
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (65 ILCS 5/3-4-2) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
         § 31.10 MAYOR.
            The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the legislative body.
         (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-1980)
         Statutory reference:
            Powers and duties of the Mayor, see 65 ILCS 5/3-11-6
(Prior Code, § 10.18)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this code for
which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not less than $25, nor exceeding $500. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, § 10.99)
CHAPTER 11: WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
Section
   
11.01   Number of wards
   
11.02   Official ward map adopted
§ 11.01 NUMBER OF WARDS.
   Pursuant to law, the city is hereby divided into four wards.
(Prior Code, § 11.01) (Ord. 98-O-1658, passed 9-2-1998)
§ 11.02 OFFICIAL WARD MAP ADOPTED.
   (A)   The ward map, together with a description of the ward boundaries,
identified “Official Ward Map for the City of Markham”, is hereby adopted as
the official city map for aldermanic election purposes. Wards of the city shall
be properly identified by the word “Ward” followed by the Arabic numeral
corresponding to the ward number assigned by the redistricting ordinance.
   (B)   A copy of the map showing generally the area and boundaries of each
ward together with a supplement describing the boundaries using census blocks
as determined by the United States Census Bureau of each ward is on file in the
City Clerk’s office. In general, the centerline of the identified right-of- way
in a redistricting ordinance shall be the boundary line unless otherwise noted.
   (C)   Territory annexed into the city following the adoption of a
redistricting ordinance shall, upon annexation and without further action by
the City Council be made a part of the adjacent or surrounding ward, provided
that whenever two or more wards surround or are contiguous with the annexed
territory, the City Council shall, provide as part of the ordinance annexing
the territory, what ward or wards the territory shall be made a part of.
(Prior Code, § 11.02) (Ord. 98-O-1658, passed 9-2-1998; Ord. 22-O-2336, passed
8-17-2022)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   CITY COUNCIL
      
31.   CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
34.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
35.   EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS
      
36.   TAXATION
      
37.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
38.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
      
39.   CITY POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: CITY COUNCIL
Section
Meetings; Rules of Procedure
   
30.01   Regular meetings
   
30.02   Special meetings
   
30.03   Mayor to preside
   
30.04   Parliamentary law to govern
   
30.05   Parliamentary procedure at meetings
   
30.06   Limitation on Council action
   
30.07   Order of business
   
30.08   Quorum; attendance of members at meetings required
   
30.09   Smoking prohibited in Council chambers
   
30.10   Remote attendance policy
   
30.11   Disaster remote meeting policy
Committees
   
30.20   Appointment; organization
 
   
30.99   Penalty
MEETINGS; RULES OF PROCEDURE
§ 30.01 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor and Council shall meet for the transaction of business at
the Municipal Building, 16313 Kedzie Parkway, Markham, Illinois, on the first
and third Wednesdays of each month, at 7:00 p.m.
   (B)   The Council may adjourn from time to time, and such adjourned meetings
shall in all respects be considered a regular meeting.
(Prior Code, § 30.01) (Ord. 74-O-872, passed - -1974; Ord. 85-O-1172, passed 5-
6-1985; Ord. 05-O-1838, passed 8-17-2005)
§ 30.02 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the Mayor and City Council may be called by the Mayor or
any three Council members, whenever in his, her or their opinion, the public
good may require it.
(Prior Code, § 30.02)
§ 30.03 MAYOR TO PRESIDE.
   The Mayor shall take his or her chair at the appointed time for the meeting
of the City Council and immediately call the members to order. He or she shall
preserve strict order and decorum in the meeting, and shall decide all
questions of order, and his or her decision shall be final unless an appeal is
taken to the Council. Such appeal can only be taken on the demand of at least
two members of the council in the following form: “Shall the decision of the
chair stand as the decision of the City Council?” Whereupon, the City Clerk
shall call the roll of members, record the vote and, if the majority vote is
“nay”, the decision of the chair shall not be sustained.
(Prior Code, § 30.03)
§ 30.04 PARLIAMENTARY LAW TO GOVERN.
   Insofar as the rights, privileges and immunities of the Mayor and City
Council and the conduct of business during meetings of the Mayor and Council
are not set forth in this subchapter, or in any rules of order or standing
rules adopted from time to time by the Mayor and Council, the meetings shall be
regulated and governed by the general rules of parliamentary law, except
insofar as the particular matter under consideration is governed by statutory
or common law.
(Prior Code, § 30.04)
§ 30.05 PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE AT MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall state all questions distinctly in this form: “As many
as are of the opinion that (as the question may be) say “Aye” and, after the
affirmative voice is expressed, “As many as are of the contrary opinion, say
“No”. Then, the Mayor shall decide whether the question is carried by the
affirmative or negative vote; but, if he or she doubts, or if a division is
called for by any member, the City Council shall decide by a roll call.
   (B)   If any member transgresses the rules of the Council, or commits any
other breach of order or decorum, the Mayor or any other member may call him or
her to order.
   (C)   When two or more members address the chair at once, the Mayor shall
decide who shall proceed first.
   (D)   No member shall speak more than twice on the same question, except by
unanimous consent of the Council.
   (E)   When any motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by the Mayor
before debate.
   (F)   Every member of the Council, who is present when a question is put,
shall give his or her vote, unless the Council for good reason excuses him or
her.
   (G)   After a motion is stated by the Mayor, it shall be deemed to be in
possession of the Council, but may be withdrawn by the mover thereof at any
time before decision or amendment.
   (H)   When any question is pending or under debate, no motion shall be in
order, but to motions to adjourn, to lay on the table, for the previous
question, to commit or to amend; which several motions shall have preference in
the order in which they are arranged in this division (H).
   (I)   The previous question shall be put in this form: “Shall the main
question now be put?” It shall only be admitted when demanded by a majority of
the members present and until decided, shall preclude all amendments. If
decided in the affirmative, the Mayor shall put the question first upon the
pending motions in their order, if there be any, and then upon the main
question.
   (J)   The motion to adjourn shall always be in order; except that, when one
motion to adjourn has been decided in the negative, it shall not be in order to
entertain another motion until some other business has intervened; and all
motions to adjourn, to lay on the table and for the previous question shall be
decided without debate.
   (K)   The vote on the final passage of any ordinance or resolution shall be
by calling the roll and recording the ayes and nays, and any two members may
demand the ayes and nays to be taken on any motion or question and when so
demanded the question shall be so put and recorded.
   (L)   A majority of all Council members elected shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business, but a less number shall have the power to
compel the attendance of absent members and to adjourn to such time as they may
designate.
   (M)   Any member failing to attend any regular meeting of the Council or
special meeting of which he or she has had actual notice shall, when requested
by a member, explain such absence and, if the explanation is not good and
sufficient, may be publicly reprimanded by the Mayor.
   (N)   All ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced by a member of the
Council.
   (O)   No rule shall be suspended, except upon motion, and affirmative aye
and nay vote of two-thirds of all the members of the Council.
   (P)   The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances,
and on all propositions to create liability against the city or for the
expenditure or appropriation of its money; and, in all other cases, at the
request proceedings; the votes of a majority of the members elected to the
Council shall be necessary for the passage of any ordinance or the carrying of
any proposition.
   (Q)   If the Mayor vetoes any ordinance or any part of an ordinance and
returns the same without his or her approval within the time allowed, together
with his or her written objections thereto, the vote by which the same was
passed shall be reconsidered; and, if, after such reconsideration, two-thirds
of all members elect of the Council shall vote, by ayes and nays, to pass the
same, it shall go into effect, notwithstanding the Mayor may refuse the
approval thereof. The vote to pass the same over the Mayor’s veto shall be
taken by ayes and nays and entered on the journal.
   (R)   No vote of the Council shall be reconsidered or rescinded at any
special meeting thereof, unless at such special meeting, there shall be present
as many members as were present when the vote was taken.
(Prior Code, § 30.05) (Ord. 76-O-928, passed - -1976)
§ 30.06 LIMITATION ON COUNCIL ACTION.
   The City Council shall not take up for passage any ordinance or resolution
unless a proposed draft thereof shall have been submitted to the members of the
Council not less than 48 hours prior to the proposed passages thereof. For
purposes of this section, submittal to the members of the Council shall be
deemed to have been effected by delivery to the members’ respective residence
addresses of a copy of the proposed draft ordinance or resolution.
(Prior Code, § 30.06) (Ord. 84-O-1141, passed 2-6-1984)
§ 30.07 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   The following order of business shall be observed by the Mayor and City
Council at their meetings:
   (A)   Call to order;
   (B)   Approval of minutes;
   (C)   Authorization of claims and accounts;
   (D)   City Attorney’s report;
   (E)   City Clerk’s report;
   (F)   New business;
   (G)   Mayor’s report;
   (H)   Public session; and
   (I)   Adjournment.
(Prior Code, § 30.07) (Ord. 93-O-1474, passed 6-16-1993)
§ 30.08 QUORUM; ATTENDANCE OF MEMBERS AT MEETINGS REQUIRED.
   In case of the want of a quorum at any time and in case a majority of the
members present shall direct the Mayor, or presiding officer, to do so, he or
she shall direct any police officer of the city to arrest and bring in any and
all absent members, including the Mayor if he or she is absent, that can be
found in the city who are not unable through sickness to attend. Any member, or
the Mayor if he or she is absent, who purposely absents himself from the city
to avoid attending a meeting of the City Council, or, being in the city,
conceals himself or herself from such officer, or refuses to be brought in when
found, is deemed guilty of non-feasance in office and the Council may, with the
concurrence of two-thirds of all members, expel such member, including the
Mayor if such be the case; in which case, his or her seat shall become vacant
and shall be filled by an election as in other cases of vacancy.
(Prior Code, § 30.08)
§ 30.09 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN COUNCIL CHAMBERS.
   Smoking is not permitted in the City Council chambers.
(Prior Code, § 30.09) (Ord. 87-O-1273, passed 5-6-1987) Penalty, see §
30.99
§ 30.10 REMOTE ATTENDANCE POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. 
      (1)   The purpose of this policy is to allow members of the City Council
of the City of Markham to attend and participate in open meetings of the City
Council by video or audio means as authorized by Section 7(a) through (d) of
the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq., subject to the rules and
limitations applicable to such attendance and participation as set forth in
this policy.
      (2)   This policy shall not apply when a remote meeting is held pursuant
to Section 7(e) of the Illinois Open Meetings Act (as enacted by Public Act
101-0640) and the city's rules and policies implementing and governing same.
   (B)   Definitions. As used in this chapter.
      ACT. The Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
      ALDERMAN. One of the four members of the City Council elected from wards
pursuant to this code.
      CITY. City of Markham.
      CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Markham consisting of the
Mayor and the four duly elected and/or appointed Aldermen pursuant to this
code.
      CLERK. The City Clerk elected pursuant to this code.
      CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.
      MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Markham, Cook County, State of Illinois,
as defined by this code.
      MEETING. Any open meeting of the City Council that is subject to the Act.
      POLICY. This remote attendance policy and any modifications that may be
approved from time to time.
      QUALIFYING EVENT. Means:
         (a)   Personal illness or disability;
         (b)   Employment purposes or the business of the city; or
         (c)   A family or other emergency.
      REMOTE MEANS. Video or audio conference only.
   (C)   Remote attendance permitted. Subject to the limitations set forth in
divisions (D) and (E) below, a member of the City Council may attend any
meeting by remote means if the member is prevented from physically attending
the meeting because of a qualifying event.
   (D)   Restrictions on remote attendance.
      (1)   No member of the City Council may attend any portion of a meeting
by remote means unless:
         (a)   A quorum of the City Council is physically present at the
meeting; and
         (b)   He or she provides written notice to the City Clerk specifying
the qualifying event at least one hour prior to the meeting at the city's
principal office (if the City Clerk seeks to attend a meeting remotely, he or
she shall be required to notify the Mayor as provided herein); and
         (c)   The remote means being utilized is fully functional so as to
allow all members of the City Council and any member of the audience to hear
all communications taking place at the meeting. Before allowing any remote
attendance of any meeting, adequate equipment to accomplish this objective
shall be secured by the City Council at the meeting site.
      (2)   No member of the City Council may attend a meeting by remote means
for any reason other than a qualifying event.
      (3)   For the purposes of this section, "written notice" shall include e-
mail correspondence with read receipt requested.
   (E)   Rules of procedure when remote attendance utilized.
      (1)   When any member of the City Council attends any portion of a
meeting by remote means as permitted by this policy:
         (a)   The minutes of the meeting shall so reflect that such member
attended the meeting by remote means; and
         (b)   Every member of the City Council shall be identified during all
City Council discussions so that each member is aware of which member of the
City Council is speaking at all times.
      (2)   A member of the City Council attending a meeting by remote means
shall:
         (a)   Be permitted to fully participate in the meeting as if he or she
were physically present, subject to division (d) below, and to the City
Council's guidelines and procedures for conducting the meeting; and advise the
City Clerk and City Council if he or she leaves or returns from the meeting;
         (b)   Not allow any other persons in the same room as such member
attending by remote means;
         (c)   Not be permitted to conduct or preside over a meeting; and
         (d)   Not participate in or observe a closed session.
(Ord. 20-O-2272, passed 6-17-2020)
§ 30.11 DISASTER REMOTE MEETING POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. 
      (1)   The purpose of this policy is to govern the procedure by which the
City of Markham may conduct open or closed meetings by audio or video
conference, without the physical presence of a quorum of the City Council, when
circumstances warrant and only as authorized by Section 7(e) of the Illinois
Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
      (2)   To the extent that this policy and rules conflict with any other
rule of the City Council, this policy will control during a disaster and while
this policy is activated. This policy hereby applies to all subsidiary boards,
committees, and commissions unless and until such boards, committees, and
commissions adopt their own rules for remote meetings or hearings held during a
disaster and/or pursuant to Section 2.06(g) and Section 7(e), when and if
enacted, of the Illinois Open Meetings Act.
   (B)   Definitions. As used in this chapter.
      ACT. The Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq., including
amendments made thereto by Public Act 101-0640.
      ALDERMAN. One of the four members of the City Council elected from wards
pursuant to state code.
      CITY. City of Markham.
      CITY COUNCIL.  The City Council of the City of Markham consisting of the
Mayor and the four duly elected and/or appointed Aldermen pursuant to this
code.
      CLERK. The City Clerk elected pursuant to this code.
      CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.
      DISASTER. An event where the Governor or the Director of the Illinois
Department of Public Health has issued a disaster declaration related to public
health concerns because of a disaster as defined in Section 4 of the Illinois
Emergency Management Agency Act, and all or part of the jurisdiction of the
public body is covered by the disaster area.
      MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Markham, Cook County, State of Illinois,
as defined by this code.
      MEETING. Any open meeting of the City Council that is subject to the Act.
      POLICY. This disaster remote meeting policy and any modifications that
may be approved from time to time.
      REMOTE MEANS. Video or audio conference only.
   (C)   Activation of remote meetings policy.
      (1)   Open or closed meetings held by remote means, without the physical
presence of a quorum of the City Council, may be held when the Governor or the
Director of the Illinois Department of Public Health has issued a disaster
declaration related to public health concerns because of a disaster as defined
in Section 4 of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act, and all or part
of the jurisdiction of the public body is covered by the disaster area.
      (2)   Upon such a declaration by the Governor or the Director of the
Illinois Department of Public Health, the Mayor may determine that an in-person
meeting or meeting conducted under the Illinois Open Meetings Act is not
practical or prudent because of the disaster and may activate this policy. Said
determination shall include any specific modifications or requirements related
to in-person meeting attendance as discussed further herein. Any subsequent
modifications that may be necessary during the period of the disaster may be
declared by the Mayor from time to time. The City Council may approve, by
resolution, modifications to conducting meetings under this policy subject to
the limitations of the Act and parameters of this policy.
      (3)   Once this policy is activated, the City Council shall convene open
and closed meetings subject to the parameters of this policy and the Act for
the period of the disaster unless the Mayor earlier determines that there no
longer remains a need for its activation.
   (D)   Disaster remote meeting procedures. When this policy is activated
pursuant to the above division (C), meetings shall be held as follows:
      (1)   At least one member of the City Council, the Mayor, the City
Attorney, or Chief Administrative Officer must be physically present at the
regular meeting location. The Mayor shall determine the official required to
physically attend the meeting. All other Aldermen may participate remotely in
City Council meetings. The Mayor may order some or all Aldermen to participate
remotely. However, the Mayor may declare, or City Council may resolve, that
physical attendance is unfeasible due to the disaster. The Mayor or Council are
not precluded from determining a specific limit on the number of people allowed
to physically attend a meeting. Such determination may be changed from time to
time during the disaster period when this policy is activated as the Mayor and
City Council may deem necessary and proper.
      (2)   Meetings shall comply with any parameters or orders required by the
disaster declaration, any executive orders, rules, regulations, or any other
relevant law.
      (3)   All members of the City Council participating at a meeting,
wherever their physical location, must be verified and shall confirm that they
are able to hear all other participants, all discussion, and any testimony
prior to the meeting commencing. The platform for remote or electronic
attendance and participation at the City Council meeting will be arranged in
advance by the Mayor or his/her designee at least 48 hours prior to the
commencement of the meeting.
      (4)   Each member of the body participating in a meeting by audio or
video conference for a meeting held pursuant to this section is considered
present at the meeting for purposes of determining a quorum and participating
in all proceedings.
      (5)   All votes conducted while this policy is activated shall be by roll
call with each Alderman's vote on each issue identified and recorded. No voice-
votes for routine, procedural motions or otherwise are allowed.
      (6)   A verbatim record, in the form of an audio or video recording,
shall be kept of both closed and open meetings conducted while this policy is
activated. Verbatim records of open meetings shall be made available to the
public and all verbatim records remain subject to Section 2.06 of the Act. In
addition to a verbatim record, minutes shall be kept and approved by the City
Council as is done for any other open or closed meeting.
      (7)   When circumstances warrant and allow one or more city officials to
be physically present at the regular meeting location, the following rules
shall apply:
         (a)   The number of persons admitted to physically attend an open
meeting may be limited based on the nature of the disaster and any such
limitations shall be stated on the meeting notice as discussed herein.
         (b)   The first persons to be admitted to City of Markham City Council
meetings will be its elected and appointed officers choosing or otherwise
required to attend in person. If the in-person attendance maximum is not met,
the next person(s) to be admitted shall be one member of the Associated or
Local Press. To ensure eligibility for entry, the member of the Press must
email City Clerk, Jennifer Coles, at icoles@cityof markham.net. The first email
received will determine the Press member admitted to any City of Markham City
Council meeting held during the disaster period where this policy is in place.
Thereafter, if the in-person attendance maximum is not met, members of the
public shall be admitted. Admittance will be determined by which member of the
public emails City Clerk, Jennifer Coles, at jcoles@cityofmarkham.net and
requests admittance on a first-come, first-serve basis. If no person requests
admittance via email, admittance shall be granted on a first-come, first serve
basis.
         (c)   At the meeting, persons attending in-person shall comply with
any applicable health or other requirements that may be ordered.
         (d)   Members of the public attending in-person at the regular meeting
location of the city must be able to hear all discussion and testimony and all
votes of the City Council.
      (8)   When in-person attendance at the regular meeting location is not
feasible, in whole or in part, due to the disaster, the city shall make
alternative arrangements, and provide notice of such alternative arrangements
on the meeting notice, as discussed herein, whereby the members of the public
must be able to contemporaneously hear all discussion, testimony, and roll call
votes. Such alternative access may include, but is not limited to, offering an
alternative physical location with a video and audio feed of the meeting, a
telephone conference number, or a web-based access link. The city officer
responsible for posting and/or publishing meeting notices shall be responsible
for compliance with all notice requirements provided by this policy and in
accordance with Public Act 101-0640.
      (9)   In addition to providing any in-person comments, any person
desiring to make public comment may also email their public comment to City
Clerk, Jennifer Coles, at jcoles@cityofmarkham.net by 4:00 p.m. on the day upon
which the City Council holds a meeting during the time when this policy is
activated. Public comments received by email will be read during the public
comment section and will be noted in the meeting minutes. Emailed public
comments must be limited to 200 words, must identify the commenter, and are
limited to one comment per person. If the remote meeting platform allows for
live public comment, then the rules applicable to public comment with respect
to length and number of comments shall be applicable thereto. Nothing herein
shall allow members of the public to speak, interrupt the proceedings, or
otherwise attempt to conduct city business unless otherwise recognized and
allowed by the City Council.
      (10)   All persons unable to attend a meeting in-person or by the
alternative arrangement, and who desire to know if action was taken on an
agenda item by the Mayor and City Council for the City of Markham may contact
City Clerk, Jennifer Coles, at icoles@cityofmarkham.net the following day or
thereafter.
      (11)   Except in the event of a bona fide emergency, 48 hours' notice
shall be given of a meeting to be held pursuant to this policy. Notice shall be
given to all members of the public body, shall be posted on the website of the
public body, and shall also be provided to any news media who has requested
notice of meetings pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 2.02 of the Act. The
meeting notice shall include any modifications and/or restrictions to public
attendance, shall include any alternative arrangements to access the meeting,
shall include the information concerning submission of public comments, and
shall include any and all such other rules or modifications to the meeting
rules as determined by the Mayor and City Council. In addition to the meeting
notice, the city shall endeavor to publicize the alternative arrangements to
access the meeting on the city's website and/or social media channels. In the
event of a bona fide emergency declared by the city:
         (a)   Notice shall be given pursuant to subsection (a) of Section 2.02
of the Act, and the Mayor shall state the nature of the emergency at the
beginning of the meeting; and
         (b)   The public body must comply with the verbatim recording
requirements set forth in Section 2.06 of the Act.
(Ord. 20-O-2272, passed 6-17-2020)
COMMITTEES
§ 30.20 APPOINTMENT; ORGANIZATION.
   All committees of the City Council shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council and be determined by the Mayor and Council voting jointly. The number,
name and duties of such committees shall be determined by the Mayor and Council
voting jointly. The Chairperson of any such committees shall be designated by
the Mayor and Council voting jointly.
(Prior Code, § 30.20)
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person who violates or refuses to comply with §
30.09 of this chapter is subject to a fine of not less than $35, nor more than
$500, for each offense and is subject to removal from the City Council
chambers.
(Prior Code, § 30.09) (Ord. 87-O-1273, passed 5-6-1987)
CHAPTER 31: CITY OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Date of termination for terms of elected officials
   
31.002   Official badges; issuance to officials
Mayor
   
31.015   Bond
   
31.016   Powers and duties
   
31.017   Mayor Pro Tempore
   
31.018   Vacancy
   
31.019   Salary
   
31.020   Appointment of engineers to advise
City Clerk
   
31.035   Bond
   
31.036   Powers and duties
   
31.037   Plates, badges and emblems to be furnished by Clerk
   
31.038   Execution of contracts
   
31.039   Record of elections and officials appointed shall be kept
   
31.040   Inventory of property
   
31.041   Separate accounts on property
   
31.042   Execution of tax deeds
   
31.043   Annual report
   
31.044   Custodian of city documents
   
31.045   Duty as Secretary of Board of Local Improvements and Water Department
Deputy Clerk
   
31.060   Office created
   
31.061   Duties
   
31.062   Signing documents
   
31.063   Compensation
City Treasurer
   
31.075   Performance of duties; statutory guidance
   
31.076   Warrants and bonds
   
31.077   Account of each fund to be kept
   
31.078   Special assessment accounts
   
31.079   Transfer of accounts and funds
   
31.080   Accounts to be submitted monthly
   
31.081   Filing cancelled warrants
   
31.082   Keeping books at City Hall
   
31.083   Balancing books monthly
   
31.084   Crediting city with interest received
   
31.085   Deposit of city funds
   
31.086   Keeping of Clerk’s bond
   
31.087   Salary
   
31.088   Delivery of books and moneys to his or her successor
Administrative Assistant to Treasurer
   
31.100   Position created
   
31.101   Authority
   
31.102   Qualifications
   
31.103   Responsibilities
   
31.104   Salary
City Collector
   
31.120   Office created
   
31.121   Duties
   
31.122   Compensation
City Attorney
   
31.135   Establishment; composition
   
31.136   Corporation Counsel
   
31.137   Additional legal counsel
Budget Director
   
31.155   Office established
   
31.156   Qualifications
   
31.157   Duties
   
31.158   Compensation
Animal-Control Officer
   
31.170   Office created
   
31.171   Appointment of assistant
   
31.172   Oath and bond
   
31.173   Powers and duties
   
31.174   Qualifications
   
31.175   Compensation
Health Officer
   
31.190   Office created
   
31.191   Health Inspector; appointment
   
31.192   Duties and powers of Health Officer
   
31.193   Duty to aid Director of Building and Housing; Deputy Director of
Building and Housing
   
31.194   Hearings on violations
Director of Community Development
   
31.205   Office established
   
31.206   Appointment
   
31.207   Term of office
   
31.208   Qualifications
   
31.209   Duties
   
31.210   Compensation
Director of Building and Housing
   
31.225   Office created
   
31.226   Qualifications
   
31.227   Oath and bond
   
31.228   Duties
   
31.229   Reports and records
   
31.230   Powers
   
31.231   Indemnification
   
31.232   Compensation
   
31.233   Non-compliance with orders
Electrical Inspector
   
31.245   Office created
   
31.246   Qualifications
   
31.247   Oath and bond
   
31.248   Duties
   
31.249   Powers
   
31.250   Compensation
   
31.251   Non-compliance with orders
Plumbing Inspector
   
31.265   Office created
   
31.266   Qualifications
   
31.267   Oath and bond
   
31.268   Duties
   
31.269   Powers
   
31.270   Compensation
   
31.271   Non-compliance with orders
Heating and Ventilation Inspector
   
31.285   Office created
   
31.286   Qualifications
   
31.287   Oath and bond
   
31.288   Duties
   
31.289   Powers
   
31.290   Compensation
   
31.291   Non-compliance with orders
Superintendent of Public Works
   
31.305   Position created
   
31.306   Duties
   
31.307   Personnel and advisory functions
   
31.308   Annual estimate of expenditures
   
31.309   Issuance of permits
   
31.310   Appointment of Field Superintendent of Public Works
   
31.311   Public Works Secretary
Community Services Officer
   
31.325   Office created
   
31.326   Oath and bond
   
31.327   Powers and duties
Personnel Director
   
31.340   Position created
   
31.341   Authority
   
31.342   Qualifications
   
31.343   Duties
   
31.344   Salary
Other Municipal Employees
   
31.355   Administrative Assistant
   
31.356   Official Municipal Photographer
   
31.357   Water Supply Operator
   
31.358   Inspector General
   
31.359   Accounts Receivable Coordinator
   
31.360   Accounts Payable Coordinator
   
31.361   Assistant Chief Financial Officer
   
31.362   Human Resources Generalist
   
31.363   Chief of Staff
   
31.364   Public Relations Administrator
   
31.365   City Administrator/Director of Economic Development
   
31.366   Administrative Services Coordinator
 
   
31.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 DATE OF TERMINATION FOR TERMS OF ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   The terms of all elected officials of the city shall be deemed to terminate
on April 30 in the fourth consecutive year following the date of their
election. However, that in the case of an individual elected to fill an
unexpired term of office, the term of such elected official shall be deemed to
expire on April 30 in the fourth consecutive year following the date of
election of his or her predecessor to said office.
(Prior Code, § 31.001) (Ord. 85-O-1165, passed 1-21-1985)
§ 31.002 OFFICIAL BADGES; ISSUANCE TO OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Official city badges bearing a designation of the office held shall be
issued to the persons holding the following offices:
Official Number of Badges Issued
Official                         Number of Badges Issued
Director of Building and Housing 1
Captain of Police                1
Chief of Police                  1
City Clerk                       1
Collector of Assessments         1
Council members                  6
Health Department                1
Juvenile officer                 2
Lieutenant of Police             1
Mayor                            1
Patrol officers                  21
Police and Fire Commission       3
Police women                     3
Radio operator                   2
Sergeant of Police               3
Superintendent of Public Works   1
 
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to have in his
or her possession an official badge of the city unless that person is holding
office at the time of possession of the official badge.
   (C)   Every office holder to whom an official badge of the city shall be
issued shall sign a bond in the amount conditioned upon the return to the City
Clerk of such badge upon the expiration of his or her term of office or upon
removal from the office.
(Prior Code, § 31.002) (Ord. 470, passed - -1962) Penalty, see §
31.999
MAYOR
§ 31.015 BOND.
   The Mayor of the city shall, before he or she enters upon the duties of his
or her office, execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of $1,000, with such
sureties as the City Council shall approve, conditioned for the faithful
performance of the duties of his or her office.
(Prior Code, § 31.015)
§ 31.016 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall exercise the powers and perform the duties expressly
conferred and enjoined upon mayors of cities by the Illinois Revised Statutes.
The Mayor shall also exercise the following powers and perform the following
duties:
   (A)   (1)   He or she shall appoint by and with the advice and consent of
the City Council, except as otherwise provided in the Illinois Revised
Statutes, all officers of the city. The City Council, by ordinance not
inconsistent with the statutes of the state, may prescribe the duties, define
the powers and fix the term of office of all such officers, but the term of
office of any appointed officer shall not exceed that of the Mayor.
      (2)   Any officer of the city may resign from his or her office. If such
officer resigns, he or she shall continue in office until his or her successor
has been chosen and has qualified. If there is a failure to appoint a city
officer, or the person appointed fails to qualify, the person filling the
office shall continue in office until his or her successor has been chosen and
has qualified. If such officer ceases to perform the duties of, or to hold his
or her office by reason of death, permanent physical or mental disability,
conviction of a disqualifying crime or dismissal from or abandonment of office,
the Mayor may appoint a temporary successor to the office.
   (B)   The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all city officials and
employees, to the end that they faithfully and efficiently discharge the duties
of their respective offices or employment.
   (C)   The Mayor shall inquire into all reasonable complaints made against
officials and employees, and cause them to be corrected.
   (D)   The Mayor shall sign all commissions, licenses, permits and warrants
issued or drawn by order of the Mayor and Council, or authorized by the
ordinances of the city and all contracts to which the city is a party.
   (E)   The Mayor shall inspect all ordinances passed by the City Council, and
affix his or her signature to such as he or she may approve, and return them to
the City Clerk; and such as he or she shall not approve, he or she shall return
to the City Council with his or her objections thereto in writing, at the next
regular meeting of the City Council, occurring not less than five days after
the passage thereof. Such veto may extend to any one or more items of any
appropriation ordinance, or to the entire ordinance; and in case the veto
extends to a part of such ordinance, the remainder shall take effect and be in
force, but in case the Mayor fails to return any ordinance with his or her
written objections thereto within the designated time, it shall become
effective without his or her signature.
   (F)   The Mayor shall have the power at all times, to examine and inspect
(or cause the same to be done) all books, records and papers of any official or
employee of the city.
   (G)   The Mayor shall devote to the duties of his or her office whatever
time the faithful discharge thereof may require.
(Prior Code, § 31.016)
§ 31.017 MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   During the temporary absence or disability of the Mayor, the City Council
shall elect one of its number to act as Mayor Pro Tempore, who during such
absence or disability shall possess the powers of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.017)
§ 31.018 VACANCY.
   During the temporary absence or disability of any official of the city, the
Mayor shall designate some competent person to perform the duties appertaining
to the office of such absent or disabled official, and perform the duties
appertaining to such office, during such period of absence or disability.
(Prior Code, § 31.018)
§ 31.019 SALARY.
   The salary of the mayor shall be fixed from time to time, in accordance with
the provisions of the Illinois Revised Statutes. Such salary must be
established 60 days prior to election of the Mayor and may not then be changed
during the term of office of that Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.019)
§ 31.020 APPOINTMENT OF ENGINEERS TO ADVISE.
   The Mayor shall appoint and employ, by and with the consent of the City
Council, duly qualified engineers to advise the Mayor and City Council and the
officers of the city on engineering questions. Whenever such engineers are
employed, they shall be paid the usual reasonable and customary fees paid to
engineers; provided, such engineers are regularly licensed engineers under the
law of the state.
(Prior Code, § 31.020)
CITY CLERK
§ 31.035 BOND.
   The City Clerk shall, before entering upon the duties of his or her office,
execute a bond to the city in the penal sum of $5,000, with such sureties as
the Mayor and City Council shall approve, conditioned for the faithful
performance of the duties of his or her office; which bond, after its approval,
shall be filed with the City Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 31.030) (Ord. 10-O-1980, passed 12-1-2010)
§ 31.036 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall exercise the powers and perform the duties
conferred and imposed upon him or her by the Illinois Revised Statutes.
   (B)   He or she shall, in addition, perform the following duties:
      (1)   Keep in his possession the corporate seal and affix it to all
papers which require the city seal;
      (2)   Keep all records and papers belonging to the city, attend all
meetings of the City Council and keep a full record of the proceedings of the
Mayor and Council in a journal;
      (3)   Execute all warrants for the payment of moneys, countersign and
deliver the same when called for;
      (4)   Publish, as required by law, all ordinances and reports,
particularly the City Treasurer’s and City Collector’s annual statements;
      (5)   Make copies of all papers duly filed in his or her office and
transcripts from the journals and other records filed in the Clerk’s office,
and certify to the same under the corporate seal, whenever required; provided,
when used by other than officials of the municipality, he or she shall charge a
fee of $1 for each certification, exclusive of the cost of the material
certified;
      (6)   Record all ordinances passed by the Mayor and Council in a book or
file to be kept for that purpose, before the next regular meeting after the
passage of such ordinance or ordinances, noting on each ordinance a memorandum
of the date of its passage, approval or veto, and if published, the date of its
publication and acceptance, if the same is of a character requiring its
acceptance. He or she shall maintain the municipal code in an up-to-date
manner;
      (7)   Issue notices of special meetings to all persons entitled thereto,
when properly directed to do so; also, to the members of committees and to all
persons whose attendance is required before any committee, when directed to do
so by the chairperson or any member of such committee. All notices of special
meetings of the Mayor and Council, shall be mailed three days in advance
thereof;
      (8)   Maintain a record of all licenses granted under the ordinances of
the city;
      (9)   Deliver to the officials of the city, and to all committees
resolutions and communications referred to such officials or committees by the
Mayor and Council, and deliver without delay to the Mayor all ordinances or
resolutions requiring the approval of the Mayor;
      (10)   Notify any person elected or appointed to any city office within
five days after the results of any election is declared, or appointments made;
      (11)   File with the County Clerk, on or before the second Tuesday in
September of each year, a certified copy of the tax levy ordinance for the
current year;
      (12)   Keep accurate and detailed accounts of all moneys and funds of the
city, as well as of all receipts, expenses, outlays, disbursements and
expenditures thereof; the same to be so systematized and arranged under their
proper titles and heading, so that each separate fund and account will plainly
and clearly show its own particular debit and credit, as well as from whom,
when and on what account, the same was received or paid out; and
      (13)   Keep correct books, showing all moneys by him or her collected,
and on what account, the exact condition of the particular funds or
appropriation of the city and all unexpended balances thereof, the indebtedness
of the city in detail, whether bonded or otherwise, and generally the exact
financial condition of the city, so far as practicable.
(Prior Code, § 31.031)
§ 31.037 PLATES, BADGES AND EMBLEMS TO BE FURNISHED BY CLERK.
   When any ordinance of the city requires a license to be obtained for the
purpose of engaging in or carrying on any business or occupation and the
ordinance requires the licensee to obtain and exhibit plates, badge or emblems,
and in all other cases where plates, badges or emblems furnished by the city
are required by ordinance to be exhibited, the City Clerk shall deliver such
plates, badges and emblems, or any of them, free of charge to the person paying
the license fee and such fee shall be considered as covering the cost of
issuance of the license, together with the plates, badges or emblems. If any
licensee, or any person, who has been furnished a plate, badge or emblem in
accordance with the ordinances of the city, loses the same, such person, upon
making an affidavit to that effect, and the payment of a fee of $0.50, shall be
furnished by the Clerk, upon presentation of the affidavit, another plate or
badge.
(Prior Code, § 31.032)
§ 31.038 EXECUTION OF CONTRACTS.
   The City Clerk shall have the power to award and execute contracts for
printing all the license forms, plates, badges and emblems as shall be
necessary for the issuance of licenses.
(Prior Code, § 31.033)
§ 31.039 RECORD OF ELECTIONS AND OFFICIALS APPOINTED SHALL BE KEPT.
   The City Clerk shall keep a record of the election and appointment and
confirmation of all officials of the city and the record shall be rules and
headed so that the same shall exhibit the name of the official, to what office
elected or appointed, the date of the confirmation and election, the date of
his or her commission and the date of death, resignation, removal or expiration
of term of office, with column for remarks.
(Prior Code, § 31.034)
§ 31.040 INVENTORY OF PROPERTY.
   The City Clerk shall, in a book for that purpose, keep an inventory of all
city property, and upon delivery of any property to any city official, shall
take his or her receipt thereof, and the inventory shall show such facts. When
a city official delivers property to his or her successor, he or she shall
immediately deliver such receipt to the Clerk, who shall preserve the same and
let the inventory show such transfer, giving such ex-officer a receipt for the
original receipt. He or she shall carefully preserve in his or her office, all
books, records, papers, maps and effects of every description belonging to the
city or appertaining to any office not in the actual use and possession of
other city officials.
(Prior Code, § 31.035)
§ 31.041 SEPARATE ACCOUNTS ON PROPERTY.
   The City Clerk shall keep a correct account between the city and the City
Collector of all special assessments and special taxes on all property within
the city between any person or officer authorized to collect any other money
due the city from any source, except general taxes. The accounts shall be kept
in such manner that they will show, as near as practicable, at all times, the
full amount or amounts due the city from such sources.
(Prior Code, § 31.036)
§ 31.042 EXECUTION OF TAX DEEDS.
   In all cases where the city acquires a tax deed by reason of sales for
delinquent special assessments, when the same can be disposed of for the amount
shown on the face thereof to have been paid for by the city, together with the
expense of obtaining the deed, plus not less than 6% interest from the date of
such sale, the Mayor and City Clerk shall execute a quit claim deed for the
property described in such deed, or such parts thereof as can be so disposed
of. Surplus property shall be disposed of in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-76 et
seq.
(Prior Code, § 31.037)
§ 31.043 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The City Clerk shall, at a regular meeting of the Mayor and Council
preceding the close of the fiscal year, report in writing to the Mayor and
Council a full statement of all receipts and expenditures of the city for the
previous year, the bonded indebtedness and other liabilities.
(Prior Code, § 31.038)
§ 31.044 CUSTODIAN OF CITY DOCUMENTS.
   The City Clerk shall exercise general supervision over all the officers of
the village charged in any manner with the receipt, collection or disbursement
of city revenues, and the collection and return of such revenues into the city
treasury. He or she shall be the fiscal agent of the city and as such shall
have charge of all deeds, mortgages, contracts, judgments, notes, bonds, debts
and choses in action belonging to the city, except such as are directed by law
or ordinance to be deposited elsewhere, and shall possess and carefully
preserve all leases of the property of the city.
(Prior Code, § 31.039)
§ 31.045 DUTY AS SECRETARY OF BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS AND WATER DEPARTMENT.
   The City Clerk shall be ex officio Clerk and Secretary of the Board of Local
Improvements and shall perform such services for that Board as may be required
of him or her. He or she shall also be ex officio Clerk of the Water
Department.
(Prior Code, § 31.040)
DEPUTY CLERK
§ 31.060 OFFICE CREATED.
   (A)   There is created the office of Deputy Clerk.
   (B)   The Deputy Clerk shall be appointed by the City Clerk under the
authority of the Illinois Revised Statutes and this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 31.050) (Ord. 06-O-1869, passed 7-5-2006)
§ 31.061 DUTIES.
   The Deputy Clerk shall have and perform such duties as may be required by
the City Clerk and shall be authorized to execute all documents required by law
to be executed by the City Clerk and shall affix the seal of the city thereto.
(Prior Code, § 31.051) (Ord. 06-O-1869, passed 7-5-2006)
§ 31.062 SIGNING DOCUMENTS.
   In executing all documents, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the City
Clerk followed by the word “by” and the Deputy Clerk’s own name and the words
“Deputy Clerk”.
(Prior Code, § 31.052) (Ord. 06-O-1869, passed 7-5-2006)
§ 31.063 COMPENSATION.
   The Deputy Clerk shall receive such compensation as the Mayor and City
Council determine from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 31.053) (Ord. 06-O-1869, passed 7-5-2006)
CITY TREASURER
§ 31.075 PERFORMANCE OF DUTIES; STATUTORY GUIDANCE.
   In the performance of his or her duties, the City Treasurer shall be
governed by the Illinois Municipal Code and the ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 31.065)
§ 31.076 WARRANTS AND BONDS.
   The City Treasurer shall keep a true and accurate account of all moneys paid
into the treasury, and from whom and on what account received. He or she shall
only pay out money as may be ordered by the Mayor and City Council, and only on
warrants therefor signed by the Mayor and City Clerk, and bonds and interest
coupons regularly and duly issued by the city.
(Prior Code, § 31.066)
§ 31.077 ACCOUNT OF EACH FUND TO BE KEPT.
   The City Treasurer’s books shall at all times show the exact condition of
the moneys under his or her control, of each account and appropriation and of
all receipts and disbursements. The books, together with all other belongings
of the city in his or her custody, shall be handed over by him or her to his or
her successor. The Treasurer shall, upon receipt of all moneys, enter and
apportion the same to the credit of the several accounts upon which such moneys
are paid stating from whom they are received. He or she shall keep a separate
account with each fund or appropriation, stating at the head of each account
the amount so appropriated and giving the several debits and credits belonging
thereto.
(Prior Code, § 31.067)
§ 31.078 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT ACCOUNTS.
   The City Treasurer shall keep an account of each special assessment, and
each installment thereof, under its general description and number and the
account shall show, at its head, the amount assessed for public benefits and
also that for special benefits. All moneys received on any special assessment
shall be held by the Treasurer as a special fund and placed to the credit of
the particular installment upon which it has been paid and shall be applied to
the payment of bonds or warrants payable out of the installment when collected,
according to the terms thereof, and the money shall not be used for other
purposes; however, when a particular installment of any assessment has been
fully paid and all warrants or bonds, payable out of the installment, have been
cancelled and paid according to the tenor thereof, then, any surplus remaining
in the installment, after the retirement of all bonds and warrants payable out
of the installment, shall be credited pro rata among the remaining installments
of such assessment; and, provided further that, when all warrants and bonds
payable out of the assessment, or any installment thereof, have been fully paid
and cancelled, any surplus remaining shall be rebated pro rata to the persons
assessed for the improvement for which the assessment has been levied, subject
to, and in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Revised Statutes. It
shall be the duty of the Treasurer to report the surplus, whenever any such
surplus may exist after retiring and paying all bonds and warrants payable out
of any assessment.
(Prior Code, § 31.068)
§ 31.079 TRANSFER OF ACCOUNTS AND FUNDS.
   No money shall be paid by the City Treasurer upon any warrant, bond or
coupon, except from the moneys belonging to the particular fund or
appropriation upon which warrant shall have been drawn. Money shall not be
transferred by the Treasurer from one fund to another after it has been
received by him or her; nor appropriated to any other purpose than that for
which it has been collected or paid, except by authority of the Mayor and City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.069)
§ 31.080 ACCOUNTS TO BE SUBMITTED MONTHLY.
   The City Treasurer shall, at the end of each and every month and more often,
if required, render an account to the Mayor and City Council under oath,
showing his or her receipts and disbursements in detail during the month and
the state and condition of every account not closed in his or her books, the
whole to be a balance sheet and a complete abstract of the financial affairs of
the city. The City Treasurer shall also annually, between May 1 and May 10,
make out and file with the City Clerk a full and detailed account of all such
receipts and expenditures, and of all his or her transactions as Treasurer
during the preceding fiscal year, and shall show in such account the state of
the treasury at the close of the fiscal year, and the account is to be
published, within ten days of the filing thereof, in one or more newspapers
published in the municipality, in accordance with the provisions of the
Illinois Revised Statutes.
(Prior Code, § 31.070)
§ 31.081 FILING CANCELLED WARRANTS.
   The City Treasurer shall cancel all warrants paid out and redeemed by him or
her and, upon the rendition of any monthly report, he or she shall, when
requested, cause the same to be accompanied by all warrants, duplicate receipts
in detail, for all money received, and such other vouchers will fully and
entirely cover his or her transactions during the period of such report.
(Prior Code, § 31.071)
§ 31.082 KEEPING BOOKS AT CITY HALL.
   The City Treasurer shall keep all books, papers, vouchers, warrants,
documents and other written instruments appertaining to his or her office, in
City Hall, all of which shall be open to inspection of the Mayor or City
Council at any time.
(Prior Code, § 31.072)
§ 31.083 BALANCING BOOKS MONTHLY.
   The books of account provided to be kept by the City Treasurer shall be by
him or her properly balanced at least once in each month, in such manner that
the same, when so balanced, shall show the true status and condition of each
and every account therein.
(Prior Code, § 31.073)
§ 31.084 CREDITING CITY WITH INTEREST RECEIVED.
   The City Treasurer shall credit the city with all interest received by him
to her or paid to him or her by any bank or banks, or persons, or persons
having any funds of the city on deposit, or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 31.074)
§ 31.085 DEPOSIT OF CITY FUNDS.
   The City Treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to the city, and
subject to the provisions of and in accordance with the requirements of 65 ILCS
5/31-35 and the state’s Investment of Public Funds Act, being 50 ILCS 340, the
Treasurer shall deposit them in such bank or banks as may be designated by the
Mayor and City Council, and shall render at the end of each month and more
often if required, a statement, under oath to the City Clerk, showing the state
of the treasury at the date of such account, and the balance of money in the
treasury. This statement shall set forth all the moneys received by him or her,
and from whom, and on what account they shall have been received; also, all
moneys paid out by him or her, and on what account they shall have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 31.075)
§ 31.086 KEEPING OF CLERK’S BOND.
   The City Treasurer shall safely keep the official bond of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 31.076)
Cross-reference:
   Bond for City Clerk, see §
31.035
§ 31.087 SALARY.
   The salary of the City Treasurer shall be fixed by ordinance, from time to
time, in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Revised Statutes.
(Prior Code, § 31.077)
§ 31.088 DELIVERY OF BOOKS AND MONEYS TO HIS SUCCESSOR.
   Whenever his or her term of office shall expire, whether caused by
resignation, removal from the city or by removal from office by the Mayor and
City Council, the appointment of a successor, or other cause, the City
Treasurer shall at once deliver to his or her successor in office, or such
other person as may be specially designated by resolution of the Mayor and
Council all moneys, property, books and effects of every description in his or
her possession, belonging to the city or appertaining to his or her office, and
shall also at once, account for any pay over to such successor or other person
so designated all moneys that he or she shall be accountable for and owe to the
city, in his or her capacity as Treasurer. Any person who, having acted as
Treasurer, on the expiration of his or her term of office, in any of the ways
mentioned in this section violates any provision of this chapter, shall be
liable for all damages caused thereby and shall further forfeit and pay to the
city a penalty of not less than $100, nor more than $500.
(Prior Code, § 31.078)
ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT TO TREASURER
§ 31.100 POSITION CREATED.
   (A)   There is created the office of Administrative Assistant to the City
Treasurer within the administrative staff of the city as a confidential and
executive office of the city.
   (B)   The Administrative Assistant to the city’s Treasurer shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Treasurer and the
advice and consent of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.080) (Ord. 97-O-1608, passed 6-4-1997)
§ 31.101 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Administrative Assistant to the Treasurer shall have supervisory
authority as may be from time to time designated or delegated by the Treasurer,
orally and in writing.
   (B)   The authority shall pertain to those administrative employees and
departments of the Treasurer’s office and shall be designated by the Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 31.081) (Ord. 97-O-1608, passed 6-4-1997)
§ 31.102 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The Administrative Assistant to the Treasurer shall be qualified by
training and experience to handle the requirements and duties of the office.
   (B)   Academic degrees may be considered, but no specific academic degree
shall be required as a minimum qualification.
(Prior Code, § 31.082) (Ord. 97-O-1608, passed 6-4-1997)
§ 31.103 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Administrative Assistant to the Treasurer shall provide financial audits
and evaluation of all city departments, including, but not limited to, payroll
and contract compliance activity from time to time as directed by the City
Treasurer for the purpose of determining whether the employees and/or
departments are in fact achieving the financial responsibility required by law
and by the office of the City Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 31.083) (Ord. 97-O-1608, passed 6-4-1997)
§ 31.104 SALARY.
   The salary or compensation of such officer shall be in the amount of $26,000
per annum and included as a line item in the Corporate Fund of the annual
budget.
(Prior Code, § 31.084) (Ord. 97-O-1608, passed 6-4-1997)
CITY COLLECTOR
§ 31.120 OFFICE CREATED.
   The office of City Collector for the city is hereby created.
(Prior Code, § 31.095) (Ord. 85-O-1170, passed 5-6-1985)
§ 31.121 DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Collector’s responsibilities include receiving municipal
revenue from sources other than taxes and those duties as prescribed by
Illinois State Statute.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall hold the office of City Collector, as provided in
65 ILCS 5/31-35.
(Prior Code, § 31.096) (Ord. 85-O-1170, passed 5-6-1985)
§ 31.122 COMPENSATION.
   The person appointed to the office of City Collector shall receive
compensation as provided by the municipal appropriations ordinance as duly
adopted by the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.097) (Ord. 85-O-1170, passed 5-6-1985)
CITY ATTORNEY
§ 31.135 ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby established the Department of Law, which shall include the
City Attorney, the Corporation Counsel, and any other additional legal counsel,
assistant attorneys, clerks and secretaries as the city may provide. All
members of the Law Department, except clerks and secretaries, shall be
attorneys at law duly licensed to practice in the State of Illinois.
(Ord. 19-O-2240, passed 10-2-2019)
§ 31.136 CORPORATION COUNSEL.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established the office of Corporation
Counsel.
   (B)   Appointment. The Corporation Counsel shall be appointed by the Mayor,
with the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (C)   Compensation. The Corporation Counsel shall receive compensation based
upon the fair, reasonable, and customary rates for such services, as approved
by the City Counsel.
   (D)   Duties. The Corporation Counsel shall be assigned legal work by the
Mayor or the City Attorney to be done on behalf of the city.
(Ord. 19-O-2240, passed 10-2-2019)
§ 31.137 ADDITIONAL LEGAL COUNSEL.
   The Corporate Authorities may from time to time employ additional lawyers to
perform specialized, consultant, or advisory services to the City Attorney, the
Corporation Counsel, or the city in general. The City Attorney may recommend
certain additional attorney appointments but said attorneys shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 19-O-2240, passed 10-2-2019)
BUDGET DIRECTOR
§ 31.155 OFFICE ESTABLISHED.
   The office of Budget Director is established in and for the city. The Mayor
shall appoint some qualified person to hold the office for an indefinite period
and he may be removed with or without cause at any time by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.140) (Ord. 601, passed - -1965)
§ 31.156 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Budget Director shall be a citizen of the United States and be a
certified public accountant or an accountant with a minimum of ten years of
experience.
(Prior Code, § 31.141) (Ord. 601, passed - -1965)
§ 31.157 DUTIES.
   The Budget Director shall be directly responsible to the Mayor. He or she
shall assist with the preparation and administration of the annual budget of
the municipality, shall aid in the preparation and review of budget estimates,
conduct management surveys and shall recommend control of appropriate funds,
and such other duties as may be assigned from time to time by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.142) (Ord. 601, passed - -1965)
§ 31.158 COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the Budget Director shall be as set by the Council, to be paid
at the same time and in the same manner as other city officials may be paid.
(Prior Code, § 31.143) (Ord. 601, passed - -1965)
ANIMAL-CONTROL OFFICER
§ 31.170 OFFICE CREATED.
   (A)   There is created the office of Animal-Control Officer.
   (B)   He or she shall be appointed by the Mayor.
   (C)   This person shall possess the qualifications fixed by law.
(Prior Code, § 31.155) (Ord. 74-O-847, passed - -1974)
§ 31.171 APPOINTMENT OF ASSISTANT.
   The Mayor shall appoint an Animal-Control Assistant, if needed.
(Prior Code, § 31.156) (Ord. 74-O-847, passed - -1974)
§ 31.172 OATH AND BOND.
   The Animal-Control Officer shall, before entering upon the duties of his or
her office, take and subscribe the oath of office and shall be bonded in the
same manner as the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 31.157) (Ord. 74-O-847, passed - -1974)
§ 31.173 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Animal-Control Officer, in addition to other duties prescribed to
him or her by ordinances and statute, shall enforce all ordinances and laws
relating to the stray animals in the city.
   (B)   The Officer shall patrol all areas of the city for stray animals,
answer all reasonable complaints of the residents related to animals, maintain
detailed and complete records of all animals captured and the disposition
thereof and care for or supervise the care of all animals held in the animal
housing unit.
(Prior Code, § 31.158) (Ord. 74-O-847, passed - -1974)
§ 31.174 QUALIFICATIONS.
   In addition to the qualifications set out in §
31.170 of this chapter, the Officer shall have knowledge of state, county and
city laws relating to stray animals and rabies control and shall be competent
in the handling of dogs and other animals.
(Prior Code, § 31.159) (Ord. 74-O-847, passed - -1974)
§ 31.175 COMPENSATION.
   The compensation for the Animal-Control Officer and Animal-Control Assistant
shall be determined by appropriation by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.160) (Ord. 74-O-847, passed - -1974)
HEALTH OFFICER
§ 31.190 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created the office of Health Officer. He or she shall be
appointed by the Mayor. His or her compensation shall be determined from time
to time by the appropriation of the City Council. Such person shall possess the
qualifications fixed by law. The Health Officer shall also serve as the
Ordinance Enforcement Officer if so designated and appointed by the Mayor. Such
a designation and appointment does not relieve the Police Department of
ordinance enforcement obligations and duties. The Ordinance Enforcement Officer
is charged with enforcing all valid health and sanitation ordinances of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 31.170) (Ord. 541, passed - -1964; Ord. 74-O-846, passed - -
1974; Ord. 87-O-1278, passed 7-1-1987)
§ 31.191 HEALTH INSPECTOR; APPOINTMENT.
   The city may appoint such full-time and/or part-time Health Inspectors as
may be necessary and compensation for such employment shall be determined from
time to time by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.171) (Ord. 74-O-846, passed - -1974)
§ 31.192 DUTIES AND POWERS OF HEALTH OFFICER.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to execute and enforce all
statutes of the state, ordinances of the city and regulations and rules of the
Board of Health, relating to health, and to take such other action as is
necessary for the promotion and improvement of the public health, not
inconsistent with the foregoing statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations.
   (B)   Subject to the approval of the City Council, the Health Officer shall
have the power to appoint and remove and to fix the duties of such employees as
may be required to carry out the duties of his or her office.
(Prior Code, § 31.172) (Ord. 541, passed - -1964)
§ 31.193 DUTY TO AID DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND HOUSING; DEPUTY DIRECTOR OF
BUILDING AND HOUSING.
   (A)   The Health Officer is made a Deputy Director of Building and Housing.
   (B)   It shall be his or her duty to aid the Director of Building and
Housing in administering and enforcing the provisions of building ordinances
pertaining to health and sanitation.
(Prior Code, § 31.173) (Ord. 541, passed - -1964)
§ 31.194 HEARINGS ON VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   When it appears that any health ordinance or regulation of the Board
of Health has been violated, the Health Officer shall cause notice of such fact
to be given to the individual, firm or corporation concerned, who shall be
given an opportunity to be heard concerning such alleged violation.
   (B)   The notice shall specify the date, hour and place of hearing and the
hearing shall be private.
   (C)   If, after such hearing, the Health Officer or other legally qualified
authority believes the ordinance or regulation has been violated, he or she
shall cause the party or parties to be prosecuted.
(Prior Code, § 31.174) (Ord. 541, passed - -1964)
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
§ 31.205 OFFICE ESTABLISHED.
   There is created and established the office of Director of Community
Development in and for the city.
(Prior Code, § 31.195) (Ord. 75-O-895, passed - -1975)
§ 31.206 APPOINTMENT.
   The Director of Community Development shall be an officer of the city and
shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.196) (Ord. 75-O-895, passed - -1975)
§ 31.207 TERM OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of the Director of Community Development shall be for a
period of one year and until a successor has been appointed and has qualified
as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 31.197) (Ord. 75-O-895, passed - -1975)
§ 31.208 QUALIFICATIONS.
   No person shall qualify for appointment to the office of Director of
Community Development unless he or she has done the following:
   (A)   Accumulated not less than 50 college credit hours from a duly
accredited college or university, or colleges and universities;
   (B)   Acquired a working knowledge of federal assistance programs such as,
but not limited to:
      (1)   Housing;
      (2)   Employment;
      (3)   Industrial development; or
      (4)   Education.
   (C)   Possesses general ability to organize and supervise general office
administration and staff.
(Prior Code, § 31.198) (Ord. 75-O-895, passed - -1975)
§ 31.209 DUTIES.
   Subject to the direction of the Mayor, the Director of Community Development
shall be engaged in such duties as may from time to time be found appropriate
in such areas as, but not limited to: employment programs; housing programs;
industrial and community development programs and educational program, whether
funded in whole or in part by the Federal Government, either directly or
indirectly, which duties shall include, by way of example and not limitation,
the establishment of local guidelines for such programs as set out in this
section, investigation for and procurement of funding for such programs and
maintenance of supervisory authority over and responsibility for any and all
reports and procedures which may be required under such programs. The duties of
the Director of Community Development shall specifically include cooperation
with other governmental agencies in the procurement of funding for and the
operation of such programs as set out in this section.
(Prior Code, § 31.199) (Ord. 75-O-895, passed - -1975)
§ 31.210 COMPENSATION.
   Compensation for the office of Director of Community Development shall be as
determined by the City Council in the annual appropriation ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 31.200) (Ord. 75-O-895, passed - -1975)
DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 31.225 OFFICE CREATED.
   (A)   There is created the office of Director of Building and Housing who
shall, head the Building and Housing Department. Every reference to “Building
Inspector” and “Director of the Department of Housing” in the ordinances of the
city shall be replaced with the new title of “Director of Building and
Housing”.
   (B)   The Director of Building and Housing shall be appointed by the Mayor.
The Building and Housing Department shall consist of a Plumbing Inspector,
Electrical Inspector, Heating and Ventilation Inspector, Board of Examiners and
Appeals, assistants, clerical employees and such other officers and employees,
as the City Council may provide by ordinance. All officers and employees of the
Building and Housing Department shall be under the direction of supervision of
the Director of Building and Housing and shall perform such duties as may be
required of them by the Director of Building and Housing, or as set forth by
ordinance.
(Ord. 08-O-1921, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 31.226 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Director of Building and Housing shall be a citizen of the United States
and shall have at least two years of previous experience in general
construction work. The Inspector shall have a working knowledge of blueprints
and plans and be able to read, interpret and understand same.
(Prior Code, § 31.211) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.227 OATH AND BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Director of
Building and Housing shall take and subscribe the oath of office and shall
execute, acknowledge and deliver to the city a good and sufficient bond with
two or more sureties conditioned for the faithful discharge of the duties of
his office in the penal sum of $5,000. The bond shall meet with the approval of
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.212) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.228 DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Building and Housing to see to
the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to building and zoning and
to inspect all buildings or structures being erected or altered as frequently
as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the city ordinances.
   (B)   The Director of Building and Housing shall devote such time to his or
her duties as shall be necessary for the efficient operation of the Building
and Housing Department. The position of Director of Building and Housing is
deemed a full-time position.
(Prior Code, § 31.213) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.229 REPORTS AND RECORDS.
   The Director of Building and Housing shall submit a report to the City
Council not less than once a month covering the work of the Building and
Housing Department during the preceding period. The Inspector shall incorporate
in said report a summary of his or her recommendations as to desirable
amendments to the law.
(Prior Code, § 31.214) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.230 POWERS.
   (A)   The Director of Building and Housing is authorized and empowered to
enforce all ordinance provisions relating to building and zoning and to inspect
the construction, equipment, alteration, repair, moving or demolition of all
buildings and other structures.
   (B)   The Director of Building and Housing shall have the power to make or
cause to be made, entry into any building or premise when necessary in the
performance of his or her duties at any reasonable hour. For such purpose he
shall have the powers of a police officer. The Inspector shall have authority
to call upon the Police Department for aid and assistance, and it shall be the
duty of the Police Department, when so called upon, to cooperate with the
Director of Building and Housing in order to enforce the provisions of
municipal ordinances.
   (C)   The Director of Building and Housing shall have the power to order all
work stopped on construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the city,
when such work is being done in violation of any provision of any ordinance
relating thereto, or in violation of the Zoning Code. Work shall not be resumed
after the issuance of such an order, except on the written permission of the
Inspector; provided that, if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be
followed by a written stop order within an hour. Such written stop order may be
served by any police officer.
   (D)   If a builder has built a number of homes in a subdivision contrary to
the provisions of the Building Code, the Director of Building and Housing may
order the work stopped on all homes in the same subdivision until such time as
the deficiencies are remedied. The stop order shall be delivered in writing to
any persons engaged in the construction of any of the homes in the subdivision,
and all such persons shall stop such work until permitted to proceed by action
of the Director of Building and Housing.
(Prior Code, § 31.215) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.231 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Whenever the Director of Building and Housing is acting for the city in the
discharge of his or her official duties under this subchapter and shall, by
reason of any official act or in the performance of such duty, be subjected to
any suit, such suit shall be defended by the City Attorney at the cost of the
city until the final determination of the proceedings thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 31.216) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.232 COMPENSATION.
   The Director of Building and Housing shall receive as compensation for
services rendered an amount as may be determined by the City Council by
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 31.217) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.233 NON-COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions of this
subchapter or any order of a duly appointed inspector.
(Prior Code, § 31.218) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
§ 31.245 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is created the office of Electrical Inspector who shall be appointed
by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.230) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.246 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The person certified to fill the position of Electrical Inspector shall be
an electrical engineer or an efficient electrician with at least two years’
experience in electrical installation.
(Prior Code, § 31.231) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.247 OATH AND BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Electrical
Inspector shall take and subscribe to the oath of office and shall execute,
acknowledge and deliver to the city a good and sufficient bond with two or more
sureties conditioned for the faithful discharge of his or her duties of his or
her office. The bond shall meet with the approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.232) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.248 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Electrical Inspector to see to the enforcement
of all provisions of the codes and ordinances of the city relating to
electrical installations; and to make such investigations and perform such
duties as may be necessary in the enforcement of such codes and ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 31.233) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.249 POWERS.
   (A)   The Electrical Inspector is authorized and empowered to enforce all
code and ordinance provisions relating to electrical installation and
equipment.
   (B)   No electrical installation shall be covered, enclosed or closed in
until approved by the Electrical Inspector.
   (C)   The Electrical Inspector shall have the power to order work stopped on
the construction, alteration or repair of electrical installations when such
work is being done in violation of any ordinance. Work shall not be resumed
after the issuance of such a stop order, except on written permission of the
Electrical Inspector; provided that, if the stop-work is an oral one it shall
be followed by a written stop order within one hour.
(Prior Code, § 31.234) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.250 COMPENSATION.
   The Electrical Inspector shall receive as compensation for services rendered
the sum of $100 per month or such other amount as may be determined by the City
Council by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 31.235) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.251 NON-COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions of this
subchapter or any order of a duly appointed inspector.
(Prior Code, § 31.236) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
PLUMBING INSPECTOR
§ 31.265 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is created the office of Plumbing Inspector who shall be appointed by
the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.245) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.266 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The person certified to fill the position of Plumbing Inspector shall be a
sanitary engineer or a licensed plumber with at least two years’ experience in
plumbing installation work.
(Prior Code, § 31.246) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.267 OATH AND BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Plumbing Inspector
shall take and subscribe the oath of office and shall execute, acknowledge and
deliver to the city a good and sufficient bond with two or more sureties
conditioned for the faithful discharge of his or her duties of his or her
office. The bond shall meet with the approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.247) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.268 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Plumbing Inspector to see to the enforcement of
all provisions of the codes and ordinances of the city relating to plumbing and
plumbing equipment; and to make such investigations and perform such duties as
may be necessary in the enforcement of such codes and ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 31.248) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.269 POWERS.
   (A)   The Plumbing Inspector is authorized and empowered to enforce all code
and ordinance provisions relating to plumbing and plumbing equipment.
   (B)   No plumbing installation shall be covered, enclosed or closed in until
an approval seal of inspection shall have been applied to the installation by
the Plumbing Inspector.
   (C)   The Plumbing Inspector shall have the power to order work stopped on
the construction, alteration or repair of plumbing equipment when such work is
being done in violation of any provision of this code or ordinance. Work shall
not be resumed after the issuance of such a stop order, except in written
permission of the Plumbing Inspector; provided that, if the stop order is an
oral one it shall be followed by a written stop order within one hour.
(Prior Code, § 31.249) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.270 COMPENSATION.
   The Plumbing Inspector shall receive as compensation for services rendered
in the sum as set by Council by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 31.250) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.271 NON-COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions of this
subchapter or any order of a duly appointed inspector.
(Prior Code, § 31.251) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
HEATING AND VENTILATION INSPECTOR
§ 31.285 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is created the office of Heating and Ventilation Inspector who shall
be appointed by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.260) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.286 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The person certified to fill the position of Heating and Ventilation
Inspector shall be a mechanical engineer or an efficient mechanic with at least
two years’ experience in the design or installation of warm-air heating, air-
conditioning and ventilating equipment.
(Prior Code, § 31.261) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.287 OATH AND BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of his or her office, the Heating and
Ventilation Inspector shall take and subscribe the oath of office and shall
execute, acknowledge and deliver to the city a good and sufficient bond with
two or more sureties conditioned for the faithful discharge of his or her
duties of his or her office. The bond shall meet with the approval of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.262) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.288 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Heating and Ventilation Inspector to see to the
enforcement of all provisions of this code and any ordinances of the city
relating to heating, air-conditioning and ventilating equipment; and to make
such investigations and perform such duties as may be necessary in the
enforcement of such provisions.
(Prior Code, § 31.263) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.289 POWERS.
   (A)   The Heating and Ventilation Inspector is authorized and empowered to
enforce all code and ordinance provisions relating to heating, air-conditioning
and ventilating equipment.
   (B)   No heating, air-conditioning or ventilating installation shall be
covered, enclosed or closed in until approved by the Heating and Ventilation
Inspector.
   (C)   (1)   The Heating and Ventilation Inspector shall have the power to
order work stopped on the construction, alteration or repair or heating, air-
conditioning and ventilating equipment when such work is being done in
violation of this code or any ordinance.
      (2)   Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such a stop order,
except on written permission of the Heating and Ventilation Inspector; provided
that, if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop
order within one hour.
(Prior Code, § 31.264) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.290 COMPENSATION.
   The Heating and Ventilation Inspector shall receive as compensation for
services rendered as may be determined by the City Council by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 31.265) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 31.291 NON-COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions of this
subchapter or any order of a duly appointed inspector.
(Prior Code, § 31.266) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
§ 31.305 POSITION CREATED.
   (A)   There is created the office of Superintendent of Public Works.
   (B)   He or she shall be appointed by and responsible to the Mayor. He or
she shall have the management and control of all matters and things pertaining
to public works.
   (C)   The Superintendent shall be paid a salary as appropriated and fixed by
the City Council.
   (D)   The Superintendent shall carry out such duties as are assigned to him
or her by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.275) (Ord. 73-O-829, passed - -1973)
§ 31.306 DUTIES.
   (A)   Additional duties of Superintendent. The Superintendent of Public
Works shall, subject to the provisions of this code and other ordinances of the
city, take special charge and superintendence of:
      (1)   All public grounds in the city;
      (2)   All public buildings in the city belonging to the city;
      (3)   Maintenance and repair, including inspections and permits and
licenses required, of all public streets, curbs, alleys and sidewalks in the
city, and surveys, studies and the preparation of plans and specifications for
the extending, constructing or reconstructing of streets or thoroughfares,
curbs, alleys and sidewalks in the city;
      (4)   The planning and construction of traffic facilities for existing
and proposed streets;
      (5)   Establishment of city benchmarks from city data and, after approval
by the Mayor and City Council, recording of these benchmark locations and
elevations. The Superintendent shall maintain a record of all streets, sewer,
drainage ditch elevations established by other agencies and approved by the
Mayor and City Council. The Superintendent shall be responsible for
establishment of additional elevations and grade for streets, sewers, drainage
ditches and the like, as may be required in the performance of his or her
duties as otherwise set forth in this division (A);
      (6)   All garbage and waste disposal and all equipment of the city owned
or used in connection with the final disposition of garbage, refuse and waste.
He or she shall submit reports, as required by the City Council, to the Mayor
and City Council of the operation of all activities of waste disposal;
      (7)   All local improvements including improvements paid for in whole or
in part by special assessments upon their completion, acceptance by the Board
of Local Improvements, or upon their completion, acceptance and approval by the
court confirming the assessment;
      (8)   The operation and maintenance of the waterworks and sewer systems
of the city, including inspections and permits and licenses required for the
extension, installation, repair or relocation of water and sewer facilities,
and keeping of records of all underground lines, taps and the like;
      (9)   The construction, operation and maintenance of all city parks,
public squares, triangles and other open spaces at street intersections,
playgrounds, swimming pools, public comfort stations, street parkways and of
all trees, plants and shrubs planted and to be planted in the public ways of
the city;
      (10)   Maps and plats of the city relating to geographical and
topographical data, watercourses, public ways or other public places, house
numbers, water and sewer systems and all other matters requiring maps or plats
including the vacation of public ways, the opening of new subdivisions and the
changing or altering of the physical characteristics of any parts of the
territory now or hereafter comprised within the limits of the city;
      (11)   The requisitioning, ordering, receiving and inventorying of the
necessary supplies and materials for the normal operations of the various
public works under his or her jurisdiction. Purchase orders for “Class E” items
costing $10 to $50 as described in the city purchase order procedure may be
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works if countersigned by the Mayor or
Chairperson of the Finance Committee. The Superintendent shall also check and
approve or disapprove all invoices for materials ordered for the Department of
Public Works;
      (12)   Submitting from time to time to the Mayor and Council, through the
appropriate chairperson, recommendations for stock or inventory levels of
normal or recurring maintenance or operating supplies and materials. Such
inventory levels, after Board approval, shall be maintained until revised at
the recommendation of the Superintendent of Public Works or the appropriate
committee chairperson;
      (13)   Making of recommendations to the City Council for appropriation of
funds for the operations of the public works under his or her jurisdiction
through the chairperson of the committee or organization concerned;
      (14)   Keeping a record of appropriations of moneys made for the public
works under his or her jurisdiction, and the expenditure of such moneys so that
the financial situation of all projects under his or her jurisdiction may be
readily determined. The records and all papers and files of the department
shall be at all times open to the examination of the Finance Committee, or any
member of the City Council; and
      (15)   Making a report at least monthly to the Mayor and Council through
the chairperson of the committee or organization concerned regarding progress
of work, planned work or any other matter that may be appropriate.
   (B)   Street improvements and cleaning.
      (1)   The Superintendent of Public Works shall have charge of and
supervision over and direction of construction and reconstruction and
maintenance of all street improvements, sidewalks, crosswalks, drains, ditches,
curbs and gutters, culverts, crossing bridges, viaducts, subways and other
improvements and repair thereof, except when such improvements or repairs are
paid for by special assessment. The Superintendent shall also have charge of
and the supervision over and direction of the cleaning and sprinkling of
streets, alleys and public places.
      (2)   All public improvements described in division (A) above shall be
made in conformity with specifications laid down from time to time by the Mayor
and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.276)
§ 31.307 PERSONNEL AND ADVISORY FUNCTIONS.
   The Superintendent of Public Works may engage day labor at established
hourly rates to perform any work required by and authorized for his or her
department, and may accept orders from any other department or branch of the
city government upon proper requisition and authority, for repair and
construction work. The Superintendent shall hire part-time help as required,
and shall make recommendations to the City Council for employment of salaries
personnel. The Superintendent discharge any employee of his or her Department,
the discharge to be subject to review by the Mayor and City Council. The
Superintendent shall, when requested by a member of the Council, render
technical advice and/or assistance regarding any city problem.
(Prior Code, § 31.277)
§ 31.308 ANNUAL ESTIMATE OF EXPENDITURES.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall on or before April 1 in each year
submit to the Mayor and City Council a statement, as nearly as can be
estimated, of the repairs and improvements of the Department of Public Works to
be paid for out of the funds of the city and necessary to be undertaken by the
city during the ensuing year. He or she shall also submit a statement as to any
desired improvements, with the probable costs thereof, and all contracts made
and unfinished, and the amount of any and all unexpended balances of
appropriations of the current and prior years. The report shall be in detail.
The Mayor and Council having revised, changed or altered the estimates as
submitted may provide revenue for the same in the annual appropriation
ordinance or in such other manner as may be provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 31.278)
§ 31.309 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   In all cases where provision is made in this code that the consent of the
Superintendent of Public Works shall be obtained to authorize any act to be
done, he or she may grant a permit therefor, subject to the restrictions of the
provisions of this code.
(Prior Code, § 31.279)
§ 31.310 APPOINTMENT OF FIELD SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   There is created the office of Field Superintendent of Public Works.
The Field Superintendent shall be appointed by the Mayor with the concurrence
of the City Council.
   (B)   The Field Superintendent is directly responsible to the Superintendent
of Public Works. He or she shall carry out such duties as are assigned to him
or her under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works. He or she
shall be paid a salary as appropriated and fixed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.280) (Ord. 85-O-1188, passed 7-20-1985)
§ 31.311 PUBLIC WORKS SECRETARY.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Public Works Secretary.
   (B)   The Secretary shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council. Appointment to this position created by ordinance
may be made from time to time.
   (C)   The person appointed to the position of Public Works Secretary shall
have a high school diploma or GED supplemented training in business and
secretarial work or a combination of training and experience which provided
equivalent knowledge, abilities and skills. In addition, the person shall have
a thorough knowledge of business, grammar, math, computers (word processing and
data spreadsheets), secretarial/office practice and procedures and the ability
to effectively communicate with the public and solve department related
problems.
   (D)   The Public Works Secretary shall type correspondence and reports,
utilize telephone system to make, receive and respond to telephone calls,
handle inquiries and complaints, prepare, maintain and submit required reports,
log information and documentation into ledgers, schedule water samplings, serve
as a Deputy Election Registrar and assist the window clerk when necessary.
   (E)   The Pubic Works Secretary shall perform such other duties as may be
assigned or delegated by the Superintendent of Public Works or Mayor.
   (F)   The Pubic Works Secretary shall receive as compensation for services
performed such sum as set from time to time by ordinance.
(Ord. 08-O-1918, passed 4-2-2008)
COMMUNITY SERVICES OFFICER
§ 31.325 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is created the office of Community Service Officer. Such officer shall
be appointed by the Mayor and shall possess the qualifications fixed by the
Illinois Revised Statutes for elected city officials.
(Prior Code, § 31.290) (Ord. 74-O-849, passed - -1974)
§ 31.326 OATH AND BOND.
   A Community Service Officer shall, before entering upon the duties of his or
er office, taken and subscribe the oath of office and shall be bonded in the
same manner as the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 31.291) (Ord. 74-O-849, passed - -1974)
§ 31.327 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   A Community Service Officer shall do the following:
   (A)   Assist citizens who are seeking public assistance to properly apply
for and quality for such assistance;
   (B)   Coordinate local government and private service organizations and seek
to provide beneficial working arrangements between them;
   (C)   Try to establish a Planned Parenthood program for the city;
   (D)   Work in cooperation with the Harvey Neighborhood-Youth Center, the
Bremen Youth Commission and all other youth organizations which deal with city
youth; and
   (E)   Establish youth and senior citizens’ programs and seek federal, state
and county assistance for such programs.
(Prior Code, § 31.292) (Ord. 74-O-849, passed - -1974)
PERSONNEL DIRECTOR
§ 31.340 POSITION CREATED.
   There is created the office of Personnel Director within the administrative
staff of the city as an executive office of the city. The Personnel Director
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 31.295) (Ord. 96-O-1583, passed 7-23-1996)
§ 31.341 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Personnel Director shall have supervisory authority as may be from
time to time designated by the Mayor in writing.
   (B)   The authority shall pertain to those administrative employees and
departments as shall be designated by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 31.296) (Ord. 96-O-1583, passed 7-23-1996)
§ 31.342 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Personnel Director shall be qualified by training, experience or both to
handle the requirements and duties of the office. Academic degrees may be
considered, but no specific academic degree shall be required as a minimum
qualification.
(Prior Code, § 31.297) (Ord. 96-O-1583, passed 7-23-1996)
§ 31.343 DUTIES.
   The Personnel Director shall provide performance audits from time to time of
both employees and city departments for the purpose of determining whether the
employee and/or department is, in fact, achieving the general objectives
established, including both appropriate beneficial relations with the public
and the delivery of services required and expected of the city.
(Prior Code, § 31.298) (Ord. 96-O-1583, passed 7-23-1996)
§ 31.344 SALARY.
   The salary or compensation of such officer shall be in the amount set by
Council and included as a line item in the Corporate Fund of the annual budget.
(Prior Code, § 31.299) (Ord. 96-O-1583, passed 7-23-1996)
OTHER MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES
§ 31.355 ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT.
   (A)   The Mayor may appoint an Administrative Assistant who shall serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor and perform the following duties:
      (1)   The Mayor’s Administrative Assistant, subject to the direction and
control of the Mayor, shall supervise the administrative management of all city
boards, commissions and other city agencies established by the ordinances of
the city and the laws of the state;
      (2)   In addition to such supervisory power, the Mayor’s administrative
assistant may, in respect to any or all agencies under this supervision,
establish reporting procedures, require the submission of progress reports and
provide for the coordination of the activities of such agencies;
      (3)   The Administrative Assistant shall make periodic reports with
recommendations to the Mayor concerning the administrative management of all
boards, commissions and agencies of the city;
      (4)   The Administrative Assistant shall preserve and keep in the Mayor’s
office all books and papers which are customarily filed or required by law to
be filed therein; shall deliver to the City Council and the respective
department of the city, all messages from the Mayor in writing and attend the
Mayor’s office during the usual office hours; and
      (5)   The Administrative Assistant shall perform such other
administrative and executive functions as may be delegated by the Mayor.
   (B)   The Mayor’s Administrative Assistant shall receive as compensation for
services performed such sum as shall be set from time to time by ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 31.305) (Ord. 71-O-783, passed - -1971)
§ 31.356 OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL PHOTOGRAPHER.
   (A)   There is created the position of Official Municipal Photographer for
the city. The Official Municipal Photographer shall be appointed by the Mayor
for a term not exceeding one year. He or she shall receive such compensation as
the City Council may provide by ordinance.
   (B)   Under the direction and supervision of the Mayor and Chief of Police,
the Official Municipal Photographer shall take all pictures and photographs
required by the city for official use. He or she shall perform his or her
duties only when directed by the Mayor or Chief of Police and shall submit a
monthly report of all his or her activities to that date.
   (C)   The Official Municipal Photographer shall receive an official
commission under the signature of the Mayor and be entitled to a municipal
badge. When authorized by the Mayor or Chief of Police, he or she shall be
authorized to go upon private property for the purpose of taking official
photographs and pictures.
   (D)   The Official Municipal Photographer shall continue in the performance
of his or her duties subject to the approval of the Mayor. He or she may be
removed from office at any time for failure to perform the duties assigned to
him or her or for misconduct.
(Prior Code, § 31.306) (Ord. 69-O-712, passed - -1969)
§ 31.357 WATER SUPPLY OPERATOR.
   (A)   There is established the position of Public Water Supply Operator for
the city.
   (B)   The position of Public Water Supply Operator shall be filled only by
an individual certified as a public water supply operator as by statute made
and provided.
   (C)   The public water supply operator shall be an employee of the city
entitled to the benefits and subject to the rules and regulations attendant
such status.
(Prior Code, § 31.307) (Ord. 74-O-861, passed - -1974)
§ 31.358 INSPECTOR GENERAL.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Inspector General.
   (B)   The Inspector General shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the City Council. Appointment to this position created by
ordinance may be made from time to time.
   (C)   The duties of the person appointed to the position of Inspector
General shall include, but not be limited to: reviewing and reporting on the
management and operation of each department; providing recommendations and
information on how to promote economy, efficiency and effectiveness within each
department; receiving complaints alleging wrongful acts or omissions by
employees and determine whether the information contained in those complaints
allege facts that give reasonable cause to investigate further; detecting,
investigating, deterring and preventing fraud, waste and abuse within each
department; providing periodic analyses, evaluations and appraisals of each
department; and providing information on issues and deficiencies relating to
compliance with each department’s rules, regulations, laws, policies and
procedures.
   (D)   The Inspector General shall perform such other duties as may be
assigned or delegated by the Mayor.
   (E)   The Inspector General shall receive as compensation for services
performed such sum as set from time to time by ordinance.
(Ord. 11-O-1989, passed 5-18-2011)
§ 31.359 ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE COORDINATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Accounts Receivable
Coordinator.
   (B)   The Accounts Receivable Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council. Appointment to this position
created by ordinance may be made from time to time.
   (C)   The duties of the person appointed to the position of Accounts
Receivable Coordinator shall include those set forth in “Exhibit A” attached to
the ordinance codified herein.
   (D)   The Accounts Receivable Coordinator shall perform such other duties as
may be assigned or delegated by the Treasurer or Mayor.
   (E)   The Accounts Receivable Coordinator shall be a full-time position and
receive as compensation for services performed such sum as set from time to
time by ordinance.
(Ord. 17-O-2179, passed 4-19-2017)
§ 31.360 ACCOUNTS PAYABLE COORDINATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Accounts Payable Coordinator.
   (B)   The Accounts Payable Coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the City Council. Appointment to this position
created by ordinance may be made from time to time.
   (C)   The duties of the person appointed to the position of Accounts Payable
Coordinator shall include those set forth in “Exhibit A” attached to the
ordinance codified herein.
   (D)   The Accounts Payable Coordinator shall perform such other duties as
may be assigned or delegated by the Treasurer or Mayor.
   (E)   The Accounts Payable Coordinator shall be a full-time position and
receive as compensation for services performed such sum as set from time to
time by ordinance.
(Ord. 17-O-2178, passed 4-19-2017)
§ 31.361 ASSISTANT CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Assistant Chief Financial
Officer.
   (B)   The Assistant Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council. Appointment to this position
created by ordinance may be made from time to time.
   (C)   The duties of the person appointed to the position of Assistant Chief
Financial Officer shall be as follows: oversee day-to-day operations, while
teaching and facilitating discussion surrounding business concept techniques
and practices covering city-related topics; accounting, bookkeeping, payroll,
revenue, budget and forecasting; work closely with department heads and
external auditors to complete year end audits, tax increment financing (TIF)
district audits, city audits, AFR reports and library, park district, police
and fire pension audits; develop accounting processes and procedures; assist in
preparing the city’s annual budget; analyze capital projects and debt service;
prepare a financial model for long-term financial planning (trend monitoring
and forecasting); prepare monthly financial statements; audit general ledger
accounts, payroll, employee benefits, water revenue accounts and make monthly
adjustments; attend staff and union negotiation meetings; assist and review all
union wage calculations prior to disbursement; and attend City Council meetings
as requested.
   (D)   The Assistant Chief Financial Officer shall perform such other duties
as may be assigned or delegated by the Treasurer or Mayor.
   (E)   The Assistant Chief Financial officer shall be a full-time position
and receive as compensation for services performed such sum as set from time to
time by ordinance.
(Ord. 15-O-2119A, passed 7-1-2015)
§ 31.362 HUMAN RESOURCES GENERALIST.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Human Resources Generalist.
   (B)   The Human Resources Generalist shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the City Council. Appointment to this position
created by ordinance may be made from time to time.
   (C)   The duties of the person appointed to the position of Human Resources
Generalist shall include, but not be limited to: maintaining all personnel
records for the city; assisting with employment recruitment; preparing and
submitting payroll to the Treasurer’s office; maintaining the city’s human
resources information systems; creating and maintaining electronic human
resources forms; maintaining employee benefits information; developing and
conducting employee training; processing worker’s compensation claims and
assisting with insurance and safety matters; drafting human resources policies
and procedures; completing compliance reports; attending seminars, conferences
and meetings relating to human resources issues; assisting with creating a
human resources department budget; attending City Council, department, safety
and training and other meetings, as needed; following safe practices; and
learning rules, regulations, laws, policies and procedures relating to
employees.
   (D)   The Human Resources Generalist shall perform such other duties as may
be assigned or delegated by the Human Resources Director or Mayor.
   (E)   The Human Resources Generalist shall be a full-time position and
receive as compensation for services performed such sum as set from time to
time by ordinance.
(Ord. 13-O-2071, passed 11-20-2013)
§ 31.363 CHIEF OF STAFF.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Chief of Staff.
   (B)   The Chief of Staff shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council. Appointment to this position created by ordinance
may be made from time to time.
   (C)   The duties of the person appointed to the position of Chief of Staff
shall include, but not be limited to: advising the Mayor and providing
extensive professional assistance and recommendations on city issues, municipal
operations and labor matters to the Mayor, department heads and/or appointed
officials. The Chief of Staff shall facilitate, coordinate and supervise the
work of all city departments and work to successfully implement the policies of
the administration. The Chief of Staff shall serve as liaison between the Mayor
and department heads, appointed officials and public and represent the Mayor
when necessary. The Chief of Staff shall assist the Mayor with management of
department heads and appointed officials. The Chief of Staff shall coordinate
projects and programs from conception to completion. The Chief of Staff shall
establish job descriptions and set goals for department heads and appointed
officials and implement strategies to meet those goals.
   (D)   The Chief of Staff shall perform such other duties as may be assigned
or delegated by the Mayor.
   (E)   The Chief of Staff shall receive as compensation for services
performed such sum as set from time to time by ordinance.
(Ord. 10-O-1966B, passed 4-7-2010)
§ 31.364 PUBLIC RELATIONS ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Public Relations Administrator shall receive a annual salary as an
independent contractor, payable without deductions commencing with passage and
approval of this section and payment issued on the first of each month.
   (B)   His or her duties shall be those assigned to him or her by the Mayor.
(Ord. 07-O-1884, passed 3-7-2007)
§ 31.365 CITY ADMINISTRATOR/DIRECTOR OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of City Administrator/Director of
Economic Development.
   (B)   The City Administrator/Director of Economic Development shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council.
Appointment to this position created by ordinance may be made from time to
time.
   (C)   The duties of the person appointed to the position of City
Administrator/Director of Economic Development shall include, but not be
limited to, advising the Mayor and City Council; defining goals and performance
objectives necessary for the proper and efficient operation of the city;
implementing strategies to attain goals and performance objectives; monitoring
and reporting progress of goals and performance objectives; designing,
implementing and monitoring economic development projects and programs; serving
as a liaison between property owners, businesses, city staff and others
regarding economic development projects and programs; preparing and submitting
applications and proposals for funding city economic development projects and
programs to county, state and federal government offices, departments and
agencies and non-government entities; monitoring funding received from county,
state and federal government offices, departments and agencies and non-
government entities for projects and programs; ensuring compliance with
guidelines of county, state and non-government entities relating to funds
received for projects and programs; completing and submitting reports required
by county, state and federal government offices, departments and agencies and
non-government entities; maintaining city economic development data; attending
Planning and Zoning Board meetings and any other meetings as directed;
performing research; working on municipal zoning map and census matters;
meeting goals established by the Mayor; becoming a member of position related
professional organizations; attending position related seminars and
conferences; and presenting a monthly report of all work performed to the
Mayor.
   (D)   The City Administrator/Director of Economic Development shall perform
such other duties as may be assigned or delegated by the Mayor.
   (E)   The City Administrator/Director of Economic Development shall receive
as compensation for services performed such sum as set from time to time by
ordinance.
(Ord. 20-O-2277, passed 8-5-2020)
§ 31.366 ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES COORDINATOR.
   (A)   That there is hereby created the position of Administrative Services
Coordinator.
   (B)   The Administrative Services Coordinator shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Appointment to this
position created by ordinance may be made from time to time.
   (C)   The duties of the person appointed to the position of Administrative
Services Coordinator shall include, but not be limited to, advising the Mayor;
planning, coordinating and implementing administrative services; managing
records and information; providing additional office support services;
developing and implementing comprehensive policies and procedures and a job
flow chart for the Building and Housing Department; overseeing and ensuring
compliance with fee collection process for business licenses, permits, tickets
and other related fees; organizing and assisting with maintenance of Building
Department files and documents; inputting and posting checks, cash and other
revenues into city accounting system; processing bi-weekly payroll; monitoring
employee timecard reporting; preparing and filing monthly IMRF returns;
assisting with tracking of daily accounts receivable deposits and balances due;
recommending process and procedure improvements; participating in cross
training and additional job training; assisting with FOIA research and
compliance; assisting with city project implementation; cross training for
accounts payable functions; attending monthly safety committee meetings;
helping ensure city compliance with Union contracts; implementing strategies to
attain goals and objectives established by the city; reporting on matters
related to the position of Administrative Services Coordinator; and presenting
a monthly report of all work performed to the Mayor.
   (D)   The Administrative Services Coordinator shall perform such other
duties as may be assigned or delegated by the Mayor.
   (E)   That the Administrative Services Coordinator shall receive as
compensation for services performed such sum as set from time to time by
ordinance.
(Ord. 20-O-2278, passed 8-5-2020)
§ 31.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms of §
31.002 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than
$25, not more than $200, and each day upon which such violation shall occur is
deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §§
31.233,
31.251,
31.271 and
31.291 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $5, nor
more than $50, for each offense. A separate offense is deemed committed each
day on which any work in violation of such order is done.
(Prior Code, § 31.999) (Ord. 470, passed - -1962; Ord. 69-O-697, passed - -
1968)
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Department of Public Works
   
32.001   Establishment
   
32.002   Divisions of Department of Public Works
   
32.003   Establishment of other departments under the supervision of Public
Works Department
Department of Urban Development
   
32.015   Department created
   
32.016   Duties
   
32.017   Powers
Building and Housing Department
   
32.030   Establishment
   
32.031   Purpose
   
32.032   Qualifications
   
32.033   Oath and bond
   
32.034   Duties
   
32.035   Reports and records
   
32.036   Powers
   
32.037   Indemnification
   
32.038   Compensation
   
32.039   Non-compliance with orders
Board of Health
   
32.055   Creation of Board
   
32.056   Meetings
   
32.057   Attendance of Health Officer
   
32.058   Rules and regulations
   
32.059   Police Department to aid Board of Health
Board of Local Improvements
   
32.070   Creation of Board
   
32.071   Appointment
   
32.072   Duties and powers
Board of Examiners and Appeals
   
32.085   Creation of Board
   
32.086   Qualifications
   
32.087   Duties
   
32.088   Power to request tests as proof of compliance
   
32.089   Approval of submitted plans and specifications for building permit
   
32.090   Non-compliance with orders
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
   
32.105   Appointment; duties
Human Relations Commission
   
32.120   Establishment
   
32.121   Membership; organization
   
32.122   Appointment; term
   
32.123   Officials; rules of order
   
32.124   Duties and functions
   
32.125   Compensation and expenses
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals
   
32.140   Establishment
   
32.141   Membership; term of office
   
32.142   Powers and duties
Electrical Commission
   
32.155   Establishment; organization
Industrial Commission
   
32.170   Establishment
   
32.171   Purpose
   
32.172   Composition
   
32.173   Terms of office
License Commission
   
32.185   Establishment of Commission
   
32.186   Duties
   
32.187   Information to be kept confidential
Employment Committee for Community Assistance
   
32.200   Committee established
   
32.201   Appointment; membership
   
32.202   Duties
   
32.203   Recommendations
Department of Human Resources
   
32.215   Purpose
   
32.216   Establishment
   
32.217   Qualifications of Director
   
32.218   Scope of supervision
   
32.219   Responsibilities
Department of Community Resource Services
   
32.230   Creation
   
32.231   Appointment
   
32.232   Duties
   
32.233   Compensation
Ordinance Enforcement Department
   
32.245   Purpose
   
32.246   Definitions
   
32.247   Administrative composition
   
32.248   Code hearing procedures
   
32.249   Defenses to code violations
   
32.250   Findings, decision and order
   
32.251   Eviction rights of occupants
   
32.252   Review under Administrative Review Act
   
32.253   Judgment on findings, decision and order
   
32.254   Sanctions applicable to owner and property
   
32.255   Federal government contracts; maintenance of property
 
   
32.999   Penalty
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
§ 32.001 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is created an executive department of the municipal government which
shall be known as the “Department of Public Works”. The Department shall
embrace the Superintendent of Public Works and such other officers and
employees as are designated in this code and such as the City Council may
provide by the annual appropriation ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 32.001)
§ 32.002 DIVISIONS OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   The Department of Pubic Works shall hereafter consist of two departments,
the Water and Sewer Department and the Street Department.
(Prior Code, § 32.002) (Ord. 03-O-1752, passed 4-2-2003)
§ 32.003 ESTABLISHMENT OF OTHER DEPARTMENTS UNDER THE SUPERVISION OF PUBLIC
WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   There is established a Department of Streets and Public Improvements, which
shall be under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 32.003)
DEPARTMENT OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
§ 32.015 DEPARTMENT CREATED.
   There is established a Department of Urban Development of the city, which
shall consist of three members. One member shall be the Director of the
Department of Urban Development who shall be appointed by the Mayor. The
remaining two members of the Department shall be members of the City Council
and shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval and consent of the City
Council. Each of the appointments shall be for a period of one year. The
Director of the Department of Urban Development shall receive such compensation
as may be approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.015) (Ord. 68-O-699, passed - -1968; Ord. 72-O-798, passed -
-1972)
§ 32.016 DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the Department of Urban Development to institute,
formulate, recommend and process programs in cooperation with state and federal
agencies consistent with the orderly development of the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.016) (Ord. 68-O-699, passed - -1968)
§ 32.017 POWERS.
   The Department of Urban Development shall have authority to institute
programs for the following purposes:
   (A)   The elimination and prevention of slums and blight whether residential
or non-residential, and the removal of the factors that create slums and
blighting conditions;
   (B)   Provide neighborhood facilities for programs of health, recreation,
social or similar necessary community services;
   (C)   Acquisition and development of land for open space uses in carrying
out urban beautification programs;
   (D)   Provide and improve urban mass transportation facilities and
equipment;
   (E)   Participation in Model Cities Program; and
   (F)   Any other program consistent with the proposed urban development of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.017) (Ord. 68-O-699, passed - -1968)
BUILDING AND HOUSING DEPARTMENT
§ 32.030 ESTABLISHMENT.
   This subchapter combines the Building Department and the Department of
Housing.
(Ord. 08-O-1921, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 32.031 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of the Building and Housing Department shall be to concern
itself with all aspects of housing management within the city. It shall track
building inspections, the results of such inspections. It shall maintain an
inventory of the housing stock within the city, which includes, but is not
limited to, the identification of structures, their owners and their state of
repair. It shall keep track of proceedings when a house is to be sold or
ownership transferred, lit shall make sure that all necessary inspections are
carried out, with the results filed, that all necessary documents are issued
and all fees due the city are paid.
   (B)   It shall review applications for build permits in order to determine
whether or not the proposed structure is compatible with the neighborhood and
with the comprehensive plan of the city. It shall conduct studies to identify
housing problems existing within the city and to undertake to conduct meetings,
institute and conduct educational and other programs with groups dedicated to
promoting and improving the standards of living in this community.
(Ord. 08-O-1921, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 32.032 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Director of Building and Housing shall have: certifications in home
inspections, commercial inspections, new construction, blueprint reading and
food and sanitation inspections; two to five years of knowledge of construction
and plan review or educational equivalent; familiarity with computer
applications (Word, Excel and the like) and possess excellent written and
verbal communication ability. The Director of Building and Housing must also
have good supervisory and customer service skills. Can understand and apply
various process, procedures and ordinances. Capable of preparing and tracking
budgets and must be able to enforce city codes with firmness and tact.
(Ord. 08-O-1921, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 32.033 OATH AND BOND.
   Before entering upon the duties of this office, the Director of Building and
Housing shall take and subscribe the oath of office and shall execute,
acknowledge and deliver to the city a good and sufficient bond with two or more
sureties conditioned for the faithful discharge of the duties of his or her
office in the penal sum of $5,000. The bond shall meet with the approval of the
City Council.
(Ord. 08-O-1921, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 32.034 DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Building and Housing to see to
the enforcement of all ordinance provisions relating to building and zoning and
to inspect all buildings or structures being erected or altered as frequently
as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the ordinances of the city.
   (B)   The Director of Building and Housing shall devote such time to their
duties as shall be necessary for the efficient operation of the Building and
Housing Department. The office of Director of Building and Housing is a full-
time position.
(Ord. 08-O-1921, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 32.035 REPORTS AND RECORDS.
   The Director of Building and Housing shall submit a report to the City
Council not less than once a month covering the work of the Building and
Housing Department during the preceding period. The Director of Building and
Housing shall incorporate in said report a summary of his or her
recommendations as to desirable amendments to the law.
(Ord. 08-O-1921, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 32.036 POWERS.
   (A)   The Director of Building and Housing is authorized and empowered to
enforce all ordinance provisions relating to building and zoning and to inspect
construction, equipment, alteration, repair, moving or demolition of all
buildings and other structures.
   (B)   (1)   The Director of Building and Housing shall have the power to
make or cause to be made, entry to any building or premises, when necessary in
the performance of his or her duties at any reasonable hour; for such purpose,
they shall have the powers of a police officer.
      (2)   The Director of Building and Housing shall have authority to call
upon the Police Department for aid and assistance, and it shall be the duty of
the Police Department, when so called upon, to cooperate with the Director of
Building and Housing in order to enforce the provisions of the ordinances of
the city.
   (C)   The Director of Building and Housing shall have the power to order all
work stopped on construction or alteration or repair of buildings in the city,
when such work is being done in violation of any provision of any ordinance
relating thereto or in violation of the Zoning Code. Work shall not be resumed
after the issuance of such an order, except on the written permission of the
Director of Building and Housing; provided that, if the stop order is an oral
one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within an hour. Such written
stop order may be served by any police officer.
   (D)   (1)   If a builder has built a number of homes in a subdivision,
contrary to the provisions of the Building Code, the Director of Building and
Housing may order the work stopped on all homes in the same subdivision until
such time as the deficiencies are remedied.
      (2)   The stop order shall be delivered in writing to any persons engaged
in the construction of any of the homes in the subdivision, and all such
persons shall stop work until permitted to proceed by action of the Director of
Building and Housing.
(Ord. 08-O-1921, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 32.037 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Whenever the Director of Building and Housing is acting for the city in the
discharge of his or her official duties under this subchapter and shall, by
reason of any official, act or in the performance of such duty, be subjected to
any suit such suit shall be defended by the City Attorney at the cost of the
city until the final determination of the proceedings thereunder.
(Ord. 08-O-1921, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 32.038 COMPENSATION.
   The Director of Building and Housing shall receive as compensation for the
services rendered an amount as may be determined by the City Council by
ordinance.
(Ord. 08-O-1921, passed 4-16-2008)
§ 32.039 NON-COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions of the
ordinances of the city or any order of a duly appointed Director of Building
and Housing.
(Ord. 08-O-1921, passed 4-16-2008)
BOARD OF HEALTH
§ 32.055 CREATION OF BOARD.
   (A)   There is created and established a Board of Health for the city.
   (B)   The Board shall consist of the Mayor, who shall be ex officio
president of the Board of Health, and the Council members.
(Prior Code, § 32.060) (Ord. 541, passed - -1964)
§ 32.056 MEETINGS.
   The Board of Health shall meet at such times and places as it may determine.
(Prior Code, § 32.061) (Ord. 541, passed - -1964)
§ 32.057 ATTENDANCE OF HEALTH OFFICER.
   The Board of Health may require the Health Officer to attend any of its
meetings, and to give to the Board such information or advice as it may desire.
(Prior Code, § 32.062) (Ord. 541, passed - -1964)
§ 32.058 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Health shall have the power to make reasonable
rules and regulations for the protection and betterment of the health of the
residents of the city for the abatement of nuisances to health, and for the
prevention and suppression of disease.
      (2)   Such rules and regulations shall take effect and be in force ten
days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city,
except in cases of emergency as provided for in this chapter.
   (B)   In case of contagious or epidemic disease, or of danger from
anticipated or impending contagious or epidemic disease, or in case the
sanitary condition of the city is so dangerous as to warrant it, it shall be
the duty of the Board of Health to make such rules and regulations, to take
such measures, and to do and order to be done and cause to be done such acts
for the preservation of the public health (though not herein or elsewhere or
otherwise specifically authorized) as it may in good faith believe to be
necessary and may declare such rules and regulations to be emergency rules and
regulations that shall take effect immediately, or as soon as may be, after the
promulgation of the same by the Board.
   (C)   The emergency rules and regulations shall also be published in such
manner as the Board determines, with notice that they are in force in the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.063) (Ord. 541, passed - -1964)
§ 32.059 POLICE DEPARTMENT TO AID BOARD OF HEALTH.
   It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to aid in the
enforcement of any order issued by the authority of the Board of Health.
(Prior Code, § 32.064) (Ord. 541, passed - -1964)
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
§ 32.070 CREATION OF BOARD.
   There is created a Board of Local Improvements for the city consisting of
five members.
(Prior Code, § 32.075) (Ord. 74-O-848, passed - -1974)
§ 32.071 APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The five members of the Board of Local Improvements shall be appointed
by the Mayor and shall be confirmed by the City Council.
   (B)   The members of the Board of Local Improvements shall consist of:
      (1)   The Mayor, who shall be President of the Board;
      (2)   The City Engineer;
      (3)   The Superintendent of Public Works; and
      (4)   Two members of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.076) (Ord. 74-O-848, passed - -1974)
§ 32.072 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The Board of Local Improvements of the city shall have the powers and duties
and perform the duties assigned to it by the statutes of the state and by the
code and ordinances of the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.077) (Ord. 74-O-848, passed - -1974)
BOARD OF EXAMINERS AND APPEALS
§ 32.085 CREATION OF BOARD.
   There is created a Board of Examiners and Appeals consisting of three
members to be appointed by the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.090) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 32.086 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The members of the Board of Examiners and Appeals shall be persons who
are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to
building construction.
   (B)   In addition to the three appointed members, the Director of Building
and Housing shall be an ex officio member and shall act as Secretary to the
Board, but shall not have a right to vote.
(Prior Code, § 32.091) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 32.087 DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Board of Examiners and Appeals to
determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and
to provide for reasonable interpretation of the provisions of the Building Code
of the city.
   (B)   The Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting
its investigations and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to
the Building Department.
(Prior Code, § 32.092) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 32.088 POWER TO REQUEST TESTS AS PROOF OF COMPLIANCE.
   Whenever there is evidence that any material or construction does not
conform with the requirements of this subchapter or in order to substantiate
claims for alternate materials or methods of construction, the Board of
Examiners and Appeals may require tests as proof of compliance to be made at
the expense of the owner or his or her agent by an approved agency.
(Prior Code, § 32.093) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 32.089 APPROVAL OF SUBMITTED PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   Before application may be made for a building permit for any
work covered by this code, two copies of the working drawings and
specifications shall be submitted to the Board of Examiners and Appeals by
filing same with the City Clerk.
      (2)   The Board of Examiners will either approve the design thus
presented, or if the approval is withheld, will confer with the owner of the
proposed structure, or his or her duly authorized representative, in a helpful
and advisory conference.
   (B)   After the return to the owner of one copy of the drawings and
specifications, application may be made for a building permit.
(Prior Code, § 32.094) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
§ 32.090 NON-COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall violate any of the provisions of this
subchapter or any order of a duly appointed inspector.
(Prior Code, § 32.095) (Ord. 68-O-697, passed - -1968)
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
§ 32.105 APPOINTMENT; DUTIES.
   The city adopts by reference, as though fully set forth in this subchapter
the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq., provided for the appointment and
duties of a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, except that the Board shall
consist of five members.
(Prior Code, § 32.105) (Ord. 19-O-2214, passed 1-2-2019)
HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
§ 32.120 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established and created a Commission on Human Relations for the
city.
(Prior Code, § 32.115) (Ord. 584, passed - -1965)
§ 32.121 MEMBERSHIP; ORGANIZATION.
   The Commission on Human Relations shall consist of 18 members, all of whom
shall be legal residents of the city and they shall be representative of all
segments of the community: religious, racial, educational, labor, civic and
management. The Mayor, City Attorney, head of the Police Department ad the
Chairperson of Public Safety Committee shall be ex officio members.
(Prior Code, § 32.116) (Ord. 584, passed - -1965; Ord. 19-O-2240, passed 10-2-
2019)
§ 32.122 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   Annually, the Mayor and City Council, voting jointly, shall appoint six
members who shall hold their office for the term of three years, or until their
successors are appointed, unless sooner removed for cause.
(Prior Code, § 32.117) (Ord. 584, passed - -1965)
§ 32.123 OFFICIALS; RULES OF ORDER.
   (A)   The Human Relations Commission may elect from its members a
Chairperson, a Secretary and such officers as may be necessary and shall adopt
rules of order concerning meetings, committees, quorums, rules of procedure as
to them shall seem advisable.
   (B)   The meetings may be called by the Chairperson or any three members of
the Commission.
   (C)   The facilities of the municipal building shall be available to the
Commission for such meetings.
(Prior Code, § 32.118) (Ord. 584, passed - -1965)
§ 32.124 DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   (A)   The duties of the Human Relations Commission are to work as an
investigative, consultative, cooperative, educational and promotional and
advisory agency in the promotion of harmonious human rights under law.
   (B)   (1)   The functions of the Commission shall be to investigate
intergroup tensions and specific cases of racial or religious or other serious
discrimination in this community.
      (2)   It shall seek to use its availability as consultant to bring about
better understanding and justice between disputant ethnic or religious factions
within our community. It shall cooperate with local agencies and other
authorities in lawful preservation of human rights. It may initiate or conduct
any educational or information programs it believes will further the purposes
for which it has been established. It may recommend executive and/or
legislative action to the Mayor and City Council. It shall be available as an
advisory board to the Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   Results of the investigations and resulting recommendations for
progressively improving human relations in the entire city shall be made in
report form to the Mayor and City Council. A copy of the minutes of all
meetings of the Commission shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 32.119) (Ord. 584, passed - -1965)
§ 32.125 COMPENSATION AND EXPENSES.
   The members of the Human Relations Commission shall serve without
compensation, but shall be given such expenses for operation and conduct of the
affairs as may be necessary by funds provided in the annual city appropriation
ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 32.120) (Ord. 584, passed - -1965)
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 32.140 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby established in the
city.
(Ord. 09-O-1950, passed 6-3-2009)
§ 32.141 MEMBERSHIP; TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals shall consist of five
members, which include the Chairperson who are residents of the city, appointed
by the Mayor with approval of the City Council.
   (B)   All members appointed to the Plan Commission and Zoning Board of
Appeals shall hold their office until their successor is appointed.
(Ord. 09-O-1950, passed 6-3-2009; Ord. 22-O-2324, passed 1-19-2022)
§ 32.142 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the same powers
and duties as set forth in the city’s code of ordinances as the Plan Commission
and the Zoning Board of Appeals held separately.
(Ord. 09-O-1950, passed 6-3-2009)
ELECTRICAL COMMISSION
§ 32.155 ESTABLISHMENT; ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   There is established a commission which shall be known as the
Electrical Commission of the city which shall be composed of five members as
follows.
      (1)   The Chief Electrical Inspector of the city shall be a members and
ex officio Chairperson of the Commission.
      (2)   One member shall be an electrical contractor.
      (3)   One member shall be a journeyman electrician.
      (4)   One member shall be a representative of an inspection bureau
maintained by the fire underwriters if such member resides in the municipality;
if no such member resides in the municipality, then the Chief of the Fire
Department.
      (5)   One member shall be a representative of an electrical supply
company.
   (B)   If there is no person residing in the city who is qualified under any
of the descriptions set forth in division (A) above, the Mayor may appoint some
other person to fill that position by and with the advice and consent of the
corporate authorities.
   (C)   All members of the Electrical Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor by and with the consent of the corporate authorities.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Commission to formulate and
recommend safe and practical standards and specifications for the installation,
alteration and use of electrical equipment designed to meet the necessities and
conditions that prevail in the city, to recommend reasonable rules and
regulations governing the issuance of permits by the Electrical Inspection
Division and to recommend reasonable fees to be paid for inspections made by
the Electrical Inspection Division.
      (2)   The standards and specifications, rules and regulations governing
the issuance of permits and fees so recommended, shall become effective upon
the passage of an ordinance adopting the same by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.150) (Ord. 580, passed - -)
INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION
§ 32.170 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A commission to be known as the “City Industrial Commission” is established.
(Prior Code, § 32.160)
§ 32.171 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the city’s Industrial Commission shall be as follows:
   (A)   To adopt bylaws and rules of procedure for the conduct of the business
of the Industrial Commission;
   (B)   To survey all available property in the city suitable for industrial
purposes;
   (C)   To make studies of potential tax revenue and potential revenue to the
city resulting from the establishment of industry;
   (D)   To study the Zoning Code of the city to determine whether its
provisions are such as to attract industry;
   (E)   To report to the Mayor and City Council the progress of the Commission
and recommendations for zoning and other ordinance changes;
   (F)   To cooperate with the Plan Commission and Zoning Board of Appeals in
recommending industrial sites to the Mayor and Council; and
   (G)   To collect information relating to land ownership and other
information required to interest industrial prospects.
(Prior Code, § 32.161)
§ 32.172 COMPOSITION.
   The city’s Industrial Commission is composed of five members who shall be
selected by the Mayor and City Council voting jointly.
(Prior Code, § 32.162)
§ 32.173 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   Terms of office of the members of the city’s Industrial Commission shall be
as follows:
   (A)   One chairperson to be designated by the Mayor and City Council voting
jointly to be appointed for a period of one year; and
   (B)   Four members to be appointed for a period of one year each.
(Prior Code, § 32.163)
LICENSE COMMISSION
§ 32.185 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is established a City License Commission which shall consist of
three members to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City
Council. At the time of making the original appointments, one appointment shall
be for a term of one year, one for two years and one for three years and the
successors to each member so appointed shall serve for a term of three years.
The Mayor shall annually designate one of the members to act as Chairperson and
it shall be the duty of the Chairperson to call and conduct the meetings of the
License Commission.
   (B)   Subject to the supervision and direction of the corporate authorities,
it shall be the duty of the License Commission to administer and enforce the
provisions of Title XI of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Payment of all expenses incurred by the License Commission must be
approved by the corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 32.175) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 70-O-757, passed -
-1970)
§ 32.186 DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the city’s License Commission to do the
following:
      (1)   Promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations
necessary to the operation and enforcement of Title XI of this code;
      (2)   Adopt all forms and prescribe the information to be given therein
as to character and other relevant matter or all necessary papers;
      (3)   Require applicants to submit all affidavits and oaths necessary to
the administration of this title;
      (4)   Submit all applications, in a proper case, to interest city
officials for their endorsements thereon as to compliance by the applicant with
all city regulations which they have the duty of enforcing;
      (5)   Investigate, or cause to be investigated, and determine the
eligibility of any applicant for a license as prescribed in Title XI;
      (6)   Examine the books and records, or cause to be examined the books
and records, of any applicant or licensee when reasonably necessary to the
administration and enforcement of Title XI;
      (7)   Inspect, or cause to be inspected, and determine the eligibility
and compliance to the city code and any applicable ordinances of any premises
used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or
occupation; and
      (8)   To conduct hearings in accordance with recognized parliamentary
procedure whenever it be necessary to determine the eligibility of an applicant
to receive a license or to determine the justification for a suspension or
revocation of a license for violation of the city code or any city ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of conciliating complaints of discrimination,
the city’s License Commission or other administrative agencies may hold closed
meetings and shall not be subject to the provisions of “An Act In Relation To
Meetings” approved 7-11-1957, being 5 ILCS 120, as amended.
      (2)   No final action for the imposition or recommendation of a penalty
shall be taken, except at a meeting open to the public.
   (C)   To make recommendations to the Mayor concerning the issuance,
suspension and revocation of all business licenses subject to the provisions of
§§
32.001 through
32.003 of this code of ordinances, upon request of the Mayor to furnish written
reports concerning these recommendations.
   (D)   The city’s License Commission shall keep a register of all licenses
issued, entering therein the name of the person or persons licensed, the date
of the license, the business or purpose for which it is granted, the number and
kinds of vehicles, if any, and the number of bowling alleys and billiard or
pool tables covered by it, if any, the amount of the license fee paid and, if
transferred, the date of the transfer and the name of the person to whom it is
transferred.
(Prior Code, § 32.176) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 70-O-757, passed -
-1970)
§ 32.187 INFORMATION TO BE KEPT CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   The License Commission shall keep all information furnished or secured
under the authority of Title XI of this code in strict confidence.
   (B)   Such information shall not be subject to public inspection and shall
be kept so that the contents thereof shall not become known, except to the
persons charged with the administration of Title XI.
(Prior Code, § 32.177) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967)
EMPLOYMENT COMMITTEE FOR COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE
§ 32.200 COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED.
   A city committee is hereby established to be called the “Markham Employment
Committee for Community Assistance” or “MECCA”.
(Prior Code, § 32.190) (Ord. 86-O-1246, passed 9-17-1986)
§ 32.201 APPOINTMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   The Committee Chairperson and members shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of the City Council. The membership shall consist of the
Chairperson, one Council member as a liaison member and five community
representatives.
(Prior Code, § 32.191) (Ord. 86-O-1246, passed 9-17-1986)
§ 32.202 DUTIES.
   Duties of the Employment Committee for Community Assistance shall be as
follows:
   (A)   Identify unemployed city residents;
   (B)   Assist employed with job applications;
   (C)   Record job skills with job banks;
   (D)   Help find job opportunities in the public and private sector; and
   (E)   Review city contracts with regard to compliance with affirmative
action employment guidelines.
(Prior Code, § 32.192) (Ord. 86-O-1246, passed 9-17-1986)
§ 32.203 RECOMMENDATIONS.
   The Employment Committee for Community Assistance may make recommendations
to the Mayor with regard to the hiring, the funding and control of employees.
(Prior Code, § 32.193) (Ord. 86-O-1246, passed 9-17-1986)
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
§ 32.215 PURPOSE.
   It has been established by social and scientific evidence that the proper
and most efficient utilization of the resources, talents and abilities of those
persons employed by the city will result in the most efficient delivery of city
services to the residents and persons and firms which interact with the city;
thus, the purpose of this Department is to substantially contribute to the
efficient management of the city workforce and the delivery of city services by
the employees of the city.
(Prior Code, § 32.200) (Ord. 05-O-1841, passed 11-16-2005)
§ 32.216 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established an executive department of the city which shall
be known as the “Department of Human Resources”. The Department shall consist
of a Director and such other assistants, clerks and other employees as may be
necessary, all appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 32.201) (Ord. 05-O-1841, passed 11-16-2005)
§ 32.217 QUALIFICATIONS OF DIRECTOR.
   The Director shall possess the following qualifications for appointment to
the office:
   (A)   The appointee must have at least two years’ experience working in
human resources;
   (B)   Must possess strong customer service skills and team commitment;
   (C)   Excellent computer knowledge of Windows, MS Word, Excel and the like;
   (D)   Knowledge of HR policies and procedures;
   (E)   Excellent communications, interacting and writing skills; and
   (F)   Ability to handle multiple projects and deadlines on a regular basis.
(Prior Code, § 32.202) (Ord. 05-O-1841, passed 11-16-2005)
§ 32.218 SCOPE OF SUPERVISION.
   All non-appointed officers and employees of the city shall be under the
direct supervision and oversight of the Director and shall perform such duties
as may be required of them by the terms and conditions of their employment.
Heads of other executive departments shall not be under the direct supervision
of the Director of the Department of Human Resources.
(Prior Code, § 32.203) (Ord. 05-O-1841, passed 11-16-2005)
§ 32.219 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Director of the Department of Human Resources shall be responsible for
the following aspects of the city workforce:
   (A)   Supports the day-to-day clerical requirements of Human Resources;
   (B)   Maintain complete and accurate filing system for all HR documents;
   (C)   Able to assist with recruiting functions, screening resumes;
   (D)   Providing administrative support working with employees to resolve
benefit issues;
   (E)   Assist with the revisions and communication of current and newly
developed policies and procedures;
   (F)   Assist with documentation process for accidents or incidents;
   (G)   Works with managers to improve corporate culture, motivation
strategies and encourages good will to all employees;
   (H)   Should work with administrative staff to ensure a productive work
environment;
   (I)   Handling all compensation and benefits distributed by the city;
   (J)   Conducting new hires orientation where required;
   (K)   Processing benefit claim information and following up on discrepancies
with third party providers;
   (L)   Verifying employee healthcare benefits eligibility;
   (M)   Inputting new employee data and updating current employees’ data
directly into software system; and
   (N)   Answering employee questions regarding benefits, eligibility and
explanation of benefits.
(Prior Code, § 32.204) (Ord. 05-O-1841, passed 11-16-2005)
DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY RESOURCE SERVICES
§ 32.230 CREATION.
   There is hereby created the Department of Community Resource Services which
will serve as a community resource information and referral center. The Link &
Option Center, Inc., a community based social service organization, through its
Community Resource Liaison, shall handle day-to-day operations of the
Department and provide grant writing assistance.
(Ord. 14-O-2079, passed 1-2-2014)
§ 32.231 APPOINTMENT.
   The Link & Option Center, Inc., shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council. Appointment to this position may be
made from time to time.
(Ord. 14-O-2079, passed 1-2-2014)
§ 32.232 DUTIES.
   (A)   The duties of The Link & Option Center, Inc., shall include, but not
be limited to: facilitating community outreach and development; identifying
funding sources; tracking the progress of projects; developing and
administering programs; providing information about human services in the
community and referring residents to agencies to best serve their needs.
   (B)   The Link & Option Center, Inc., shall perform such other duties as may
be assigned or delegated by the Mayor or his or her designee.
(Ord. 14-O-2079, passed 1-2-2014)
§ 32.233 COMPENSATION.
   The Link & Option Center, Inc., shall receive no compensation for services
performed, except those generated through grants obtained on behalf of the
city.
(Ord. 14-O-2079, passed 1-2-2014)
ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT DEPARTMENT
§ 32.245 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a Code Violation Hearing
Court. This subchapter also makes provisions for the administrative composition
of this Court and establishes rules of procedure and other rules and
regulations in order to maintain a system to expedite the prosecution and
correction of code violations within the city.
(Prior Code, § 40.01) (Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002)
§ 32.246 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE. Any municipal ordinance, law, housing or building code or zoning code
that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention,
sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable to
structures or property in the municipality.
   FAMILY UNIT. A room or group of rooms used or intended to be used as a
housekeeping unit of living sleeping, cooking and eating.
   HEARING OFFICER. An individual appointed by the Mayor of the city, whose
qualifications and duties are defined by state law and this chapter.
   INSPECTOR. Any employee of the city designated by the city to enforce codes
or similar laws, or his or her duly authorized representative.
   PROPERTY OWNER. One or more persons, a corporation, a partnership or any
other legal entity, jointly or severally in whom is vested all or part of the
legal title to the premises or all or part of the beneficial ownership and
right to present use and enjoyment of the premises, including a mortgage holder
in possession.
(Prior Code, § 40.02) (Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002)
§ 32.247 ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.
   The system of administrative adjudication of code violations shall provide
for a hearing system Code Compliance Administrator, Hearing Officer, Computer
Operator/System Coordinator and hearing room personnel with the power,
authority and limitations as are hereinafter set forth.
   (A)   The Code Compliance Administrator shall be empowered and is hereby
authorized and directed to:
      (1)   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
code violations;
      (2)   Adopt, distribute and process code violation notices and other
notices as may be required under this subchapter as may be reasonably required
to carry out the purposes of this subchapter;
      (3)   Collect money paid as fines or penalties and costs assessed after a
final determination of violations liability;
      (4)   Conduct hearings as a Hearing Officer; provided, he or she is
properly certified with the same power and authority as is hereinafter set
forth, during the absence of the appointed Hearing Officer;
      (5)   Certify copies of final determination(s) of Building Code violation
(s) liability and factual reports verifying that the final determination of
code violation liability was issued in accordance with this chapter;
      (6)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication of code violation system hereby
created; and
      (7)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the
Circuit Court or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on
behalf of the city in filing complaints seeking judgments for unpaid fines or
penalties and pursuits of all post-judgment remedies available by current law.
   (B)   A Hearing Officer is a municipal employee or an officer or agent of a
municipality, other than a Director of Building and Housing or law enforcement
officer, whose duty it is to:
      (1)   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a code violation exists;
      (2)   Hear testimony and accept evidence from the Code Inspector, the
building owner and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code
violation;
      (3)   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing
and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      (4)   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating
whether a code violation exists;
      (5)   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and
production of relevant papers or documentation;
      (6)   Assess fines, penalties and costs; and
      (7)   Make a final determination of code violation liability.
   (C)   The Computer Data Operator/System Coordinator is hereby authorized and
directed to operate and maintain the computer program(s) for the administrative
adjudication system hereby created, on a day-to-day basis, including, but not
limited to:
      (1)   Input of violation notice information;
      (2)   Hearing date(s) and notice dates;
      (3)   Fine and penalty assessments and payment(s);
      (4)   Issue payment receipts;
      (5)   Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates, final determination of
liability as directed by the hearing system Compliance Administrator in
accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth; and
      (6)   Keep accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
   (D)   (1)   Hearing room personnel are hereby authorized and directed to:
         (a)   Maintain hearing room decorum;
         (b)   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies
of the Circuit Court; and
         (c)   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required
and as directed by the Hearing Officer or hearing system Code Compliance
Administrator.
      (2)   The position is limited to off-duty, full-time, part-time or
auxiliary police officers.
   (E)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint persons to hold the
positions above set forth. One person may hold and fulfill the requirements of
one or more of the above stated positions.
   (F)   The pay for each of the above stated positions shall be as recommended
by the Mayor, determined by the City Council and as contained in the annual
appropriation ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 40.03) (Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002)
§ 32.248 CODE HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Citation issuance. At the end of the time, the Code Inspector has
allowed for correction of any code violations previously cited and the property
re-inspected and it is determined by the Code Inspector or his or her
authorized representative that such violation has not been corrected, he or she
may issue a code violation citation. This citation will inform the owner of the
following:
      (1)   Name and address of the structure owner;
      (2)    Address of structure where the violation was observed;
      (3)   Type and nature of violation;
      (4)   Time and date violation was observed;
      (5)   Name of witnesses of the violation;
      (6)   Signature of Code Department representative; and
      (7)   Date, time and place of code violation hearing.
   (B)   One copy of the violation shall be retained by the Code Department for
its files, one copy given to the Code Compliance Administrator for processing
and one copy shall be served on the building owner at the time of issuance. If
the building owner is unavailable to receive a copy of the citation, it will be
served by first class mail. A summons from the Administrator stating the
citation number, date, time and place of the code violation hearing shall also
be served on the owner by the first class mail. If the building owner cannot be
ascertained or service on the owner cannot be made by nailing a copy of the
citation on the front door of the structure where the violation is found not
less than 20 days before the hearing is scheduled, service may also be made by
police in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/12-11, or in any manner provided by law.
   (C)   Hearing date. The hearing date shall not be less than 30 days nor more
than 40 days after the violation is reported by the Code Department.
   (D)   Subpoenas and defaults. At anytime prior to the hearing date, the
Hearing Officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of the Director
of Building and Housing or the attorney for the city, or the owner or his or
her attorney, issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony
at the hearing. If on the date set for the hearing the owner or his or her
attorney shall fail to appear, the Hearing Officer may find the owner in
default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the
existence of a code violation.
   (E)   Continuances and representation at Building Code hearing. 
      (1)   Continuances shall be granted at the discretion of the Hearing
Officer for good cause shown. This division (E) does not encourage continuances
in the interest of a speedy determination of the existence of the alleged
violation and the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the public.
Any continuance granted shall not be in excess of 28 days.
      (2)   The appearance of the representative of the Code Department is not
required unless there is a contest as to the existence of the alleged
violation. No employee of the Code Hearing Department may present a case for
the city. The case for the owner may be presented by the owner, or his or her
designated representative, who need not be an attorney. The case for the city
may be presented by any designated employee of the Code Department.
      (3)   The Code Hearing Administrator shall promulgate a form designated
“Appearance” to be executed by all participants in the hearing other than the
city and filed with the Hearing Officer.
   (F)   Hearing evidence.  
      (1)   At the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall preside and hear
testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or non-existence of
a code violation, and steps taken or being taken to correct the violations. The
strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to
hearings authorized by this subchapter.
      (2)   The properly executed citation shall be prima facie evidence of the
existence of the alleged building violation and shall suffice for the entry of
a finding on behalf of the city by the Hearing Officer.
   (G)   Correction of violation before hearing. If the building owner corrects
the code violation and the Code Department re-inspects and approves the
corrections not less than seven days before the hearing date, the
representative may request that the Code Administrator cancel the hearing and
dismiss the citation.
(Prior Code, § 40.04) (Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002)
§ 32.249 DEFENSES TO CODE VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a defense to a code violation under this chapter if the owner or
his or her representative proves to the satisfaction of the Hearing Officer
that:
   (A)   The Building Code violation alleged in the citation does not in fact
exist or at the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed;
   (B)   The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants
and in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling free
of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the violations;
and/or
   (C)   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or his or her agent to all or part of the dwelling for the purpose of
correcting the code violation.
(Prior Code, § 40.05) (Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002)
§ 32.250 FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER.
   (A)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a building violation exists. The determination shall be in
writing and shall be designated as findings, decision and order, the decision
to be rendered within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The findings,
decision and order shall include the Hearing Officer’s findings of fact, a
decision whether or not the violation alleged exists based on the finding of
fact, and an order, ordering the owner to correct the violation or dismissing
the case, in the event a violation is not proved. If a Building Code violation
is proved, the order may also impose sanctions, including, but not limited to,
fines that are provided in the maintenance code adopted by the city for the
violation(s) proved.
   (B)   A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be served on the
owner within five days after they are issued. Service shall be in the same
manner as the citation and summons are served pursuant to this subchapter.
   (C)   Payment of any fine, penalty or administrative costs imposed shall be
made to the city through the office of the City Clerk. When collected the
fines, penalties and administrative costs shall be paid into the General Fund
of the city.
   (D)   Payment of a fine does not relieve the owner of the obligation to
correct the violation, if not already accomplished.
(Prior Code, § 40.06) (Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002)
§ 32.251 EVICTION RIGHTS OF OCCUPANTS.
   No action of eviction, abatement of nuisance, forcible entry or detainer or
other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against the occupant
of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to or does testify at a code
violation hearing on behalf of the city.
(Prior Code, § 40.07) (Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002)
§ 32.252 REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW ACT.
   The findings, decision and order of the Hearing Officer shall be subject to
judicial review in the Circuit Court of the county pursuant to the provisions
of the Administrative Review Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 40.08) (Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002)
§ 32.253 JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER.
   (A)   Any fine, sanction or costs imposed or part of any fine, sanction or
costs imposed remaining unpaid after the exhaustion or failure to exhaust
judicial review procedures under the Administrative Review Act shall be a debt
due and owing to the city and as such may be collected in accordance with
applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period within which judicial review may be
sought, the city may commence a proceeding by petition in the Circuit Court of
the county for the purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision
and order. The city may consolidate multiple findings, decisions and orders
against any owner in those proceedings. Upon commencement of the action, the
city shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order which
shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to show
that the findings, decision and order were issued in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/
11-31.1-1 et seq. and this chapter. Service of summons and a copy of the
petition so filed may be made by any method provided for by § 2-203 of the
state’s Code of Civil Procedure, 735 ILCS 5/2-203 or by certified mail, return
receipt requested; provided that, the total amount of the fines, or other
sanctions and costs imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed
$ 2,500. If the Court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order were
entered in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq. and this chapter and
that the property owner had an opportunity to appear and for a hearing in
accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq. and for judicial review as provided
in 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.
      (1)   The Court shall render judgment in favor of the city and against
the property owner for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs. The judgment shall have the same force and effect and may be
enforced in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and
      (2)   The Court may also issue such other orders and injunctions as are
requested by the city to enforce the order of the Hearing Officer or correct a
Building Code violation.
(Prior Code, § 40.09) (Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002)
§ 32.254 SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER AND PROPERTY.
   (A)   The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the
city as a result of a finding of a code violation under this subchapter shall
attach to the property, as well as to the owner of the property, so that a
finding of code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or
transferring the property to another person. Any subsequent transferee or owner
of the property takes subject to the findings, decision and order of the
Hearing Officer.
   (B)   All decisions, orders and findings not complied with in terms of
correction of the violation cited or where a fine, penalty or cost is not paid
within 30 days of the entry of the decision shall be filed with the Recorder of
Deeds of the county as a lien in favor of the city.
(Prior Code, § 40.10) (Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002)
§ 32.255 FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS; MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY.
   A person who contracts with the Federal Government or any agency thereof,
including, but not limited to, the Department of Housing and Urban Development,
to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible for maintaining
the property in accordance with the applicable provisions of the city’s code of
ordinances, including, but not limited to, ordinances dealing with health and
safety code violations.
(Prior Code, § 40.11) (Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002)
§ 32.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation that does not obey the Director of
Building and Housing as he or she performs his or her duties and exercise his
or her power as stated in §§
32.030 through
32.039 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $25, nor
more than $100, for each offense. A separate offense is deemed committed each
day on which any work in violation of such order is done.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of §
32.090 of this chapter, upon conviction, be fined not less than $5, nor more
than $50, for each offense. A separate offense is deemed committed each day on
which any work in violation of such order is done.
   (D)   (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
32.140 through
32.142 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $750 for each
offense with each and every day that a violation of §§
32.140 through
32.142 of this chapter has been allowed to remain in effect being deemed a
separate and distinct offense. In addition, the appropriate authorities of the
city may take such other actions they deem proper to enforce the terms and
conditions of §§
32.140 through
32.142 of this chapter, including without limitation, an action in the Circuit
Court of the county.
      (2)   Any person violating the terms of §§
32.140 through
32.142 of this chapter shall be subject, in addition to the foregoing
penalties, to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorney fees to the
city.
(Prior Code, § 32.999)
   (E)   (1)   The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation
of §§
32.245 through
32.255 of this chapter shall be not less than $100, nor more than $500, for
each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during which a violation occurs or continues.
      (2)   A person who intentionally violates §
32.255 of this chapter shall be guilty of a business offense and shall be fined
not less than $100, nor more than $500.
      (3)   The Hearing Officer shall have authority to impose an
administrative cost against the property owner in the decision based upon the
administrative costs of prosecuting the matter, the expense to be not less than
$25, nor more than $200.
      (4)   In addition to the penalty provided for in this division (E), the
city may file suit in the appropriate court seeking demolition, repair, board-
up, enclosure or such other relief as might be provided for by the laws,
statutes and rules and regulations of the state.
(Prior Code, § 40.99)
(Ord. 69-O-697, passed - -1968; Ord. 02-O-1737, passed 9-4-2002; Ord. 08-O-
1921, passed 4-16-2008; Ord. 09-O-1950, passed 6-3-2009)
CHAPTER 33: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Creation of Department; organization
   
33.02   Rank of officers
   
33.03   Chief of Police; duties
   
33.04   Assistant Chief of Police
   
33.05   Departmental duties
   
33.06   Rules and regulations
   
33.07   Residency requirement
   
33.08   Deputy Chiefs of Police
   
33.08.01   Police Commander
   
33.09   Conduct of members
   
33.10   Cause for dismissal
   
33.11   Serving process
   
33.12   Fees
   
33.13   Custody of stolen property
   
33.14   Rewards
   
33.15   Police Community Relations Officer
   
33.16   Records and Information Officer
   
33.17   Police Department Chaplain
   
33.18   Special police
   
33.19   Part-time police officers
   
33.20   Hiring of lateral transfer police patrol officers
Other Divisions of Department
   
33.30   Juvenile Division
   
33.31   Other divisions
Police Department Examinations
   
33.45   Definition
   
33.46   Residency requirement for examination
   
33.47   Admittance to examinations
   
33.48   Proof of elector status
   
33.49   Establishment of proof
Police Pension Fund
   
33.60   Establishment of Fund
   
33.61   Board of Trustees established
   
33.62   Organization, duties and authority
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 CREATION OF DEPARTMENT; ORGANIZATION.
   There is created a Police Department of the city which shall consist of the
following permanent positions:
   (A)   One Chief of Police;
   (B)   One Deputy Chief of Police;
   (C)   One Police Commander;
   (D)   One lieutenant;
   (E)   Four sergeants;
   (F)   Twenty-two patrol officers.
(Prior Code, § 33.01) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971; Ord. 72-O-796, passed - -
1972; Ord. 03-O-1749, passed 1-2-2003; Ord. 22-O-2329, passed 5-4-2022)
§ 33.02 RANK OF OFFICERS.
   The Chief of Police shall be the head of the Department and have supervision
over all officers and members thereof. Following him or her in rank shall be
the Deputy Chiefs, the Police Commander, the lieutenants, the sergeants and
patrol officers in order of seniority in each group.
(Prior Code, § 33.02) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971; Ord. 03-O-1750, passed 1-
2-2003; Ord. 22-O-2329, passed 5-4-2022)
§ 33.03 CHIEF OF POLICE; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall keep such records and make such reports
concerning the activities of his or her Police Department as may be required by
statute or by the Mayor.
   (B)   The Chief shall be responsible for the performance by the Police
Department of its functions, and all persons who are members of the Police
Department shall serve subject to the orders of the Chief.
   (C)   The Chief of Police is exempt from the age of retirement for police
officers set forth in 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17.
(Prior Code, § 33.04) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971; Ord. 23-O-2364, passed 6-
21-2023)
§ 33.04 ASSISTANT CHIEF OF POLICE.
   There is created the position of Assistant Chief of Police. One or more
Assistant Chiefs of Police may be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council. Anyone appointed to the position of Assistant
Chief of Police shall work with and assist the Chief of Police in his or her
duties and shall serve in such capacities as directed by the Chief. While
appointed Assistant Chief of Police, a person shall maintain his or her rank or
position, and pay, attained under the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 33.05) (Ord. 73-O-835, passed - -1973)
§ 33.05 DEPARTMENTAL DUTIES.
   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the
enforcement of the ordinances of the city and all statutes applicable therein;
and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators
thereof.
(Prior Code, § 33.06) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971)
§ 33.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of the Police Department may make or prescribe such rules and
regulations as he or she shall deem advisable; such rules, when approved by the
City Council, shall be binding on such members. Such rules and regulations may
cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be worn or
carried, hours of service, vacations and all other similar matters necessary or
desirable for the better efficiency of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 33.07) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971)
§ 33.07 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Sworn personnel of the Police Department of the city, whose original
or promotional appointments are subject to the authority of the Board of Police
and Fire Commissioners are required to be residents of the city.
   (B)   New personnel shall be allowed a period of one year following their
appointment to the Police Department to establish their residence in fact
within the geographical confines of the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.08) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971; Ord. 74-O-862, passed - -
1974)
§ 33.08 DEPUTY CHIEFS OF POLICE.
   (A)   There are hereby created two positions of Deputy Chief of Police.
   (B)   The Deputy Chiefs of Police shall be chosen by the Police Chief. The
positions shall be non-Board of Fire and Police Commissioners tested/appointed
ranks. Appointment to this position may be made from time to time. While
appointed, a Deputy Chief shall be on leave from his or her Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners rank.
   (C)   A Deputy Chief of Police shall be a sworn police officer and shall
have all powers and authority as specified by the Police Chief and shall serve
in such capacity as directed by the Police Chief. A Deputy Chief may be removed
by the Police Chief without cause at which time he or she shall return to his
or her Board of Fire and Police Commissioners rank.
(Prior Code, § 33.09) (Ord. 03-O-1748, passed 1-2-2003)
§ 33.08.01 POLICE COMMANDER.
   (A)   There is hereby created one position of Police Commander.
   (B)   The Police Commander shall be chosen by the Mayor. The position shall
be a non-Board of Fire and Police Commissioners tested/appointed rank. While
appointed, a Police Commander shall be on leave from his or her Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners rank.
   (C)   A Police Commander shall be a sworn police officer and shall have all
powers and authority as specified by the Mayor and the Police Chief and shall
serve in such capacity as directed by the Mayor and the Police Chief. A Police
Commander may be removed by the Mayor without cause, at which time he or she
shall return to his or her Board of Fire and Police Commissioners rank.
(Ord. 22-O-2329, passed 5-4-2022)
§ 33.09 CONDUCT OF MEMBERS.
   It shall be the duty of every member of the Police Department to conduct
himself or herself, in a proper and law-abiding manner, at all times, and to
avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the Department shall obey
the orders and directions of his or her superior.
(Prior Code, § 33.10) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971)
§ 33.10 CAUSE FOR DISMISSAL.
   The failure of such personnel of the city to comply with such residency
requirement as set forth in this chapter shall be cause for dismissal of such
personnel from the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 33.11) (Ord. 74-O-862, passed - -1974)
§ 33.11 SERVING PROCESS.
   No member of the Police Department, except the Chief of Police, shall serve
any process, except on command of the Chief.
(Prior Code, § 33.12) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971)
§ 33.12 FEES.
   (A)   Witness fees.
      (1)   Every member of the Police Department shall appear as a witness
whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or
of any state or federal law.
      (2)   No such member shall retain any witness fee for service as witness
in any action or suit to which the city is a party; any fees paid for such
services shall be turned over to the Chief of Police, who shall deposit the
same with the City Treasurer.
   (B)   Criminal history record. Upon payment of a $25 fee, completion of
application and a state drivers’ license or state identification card, the
city’s Police Department shall issue a criminal history record to the
requesting person.
   (C)   Expunging or sealing criminal record. Upon payment of a $60 fee,
completion of application and presentation of a signed and dated court order,
criminal history information from the State Police Department and a state
drivers’ license or state identification card, the city’s Police Department
shall expunge and/or seal the criminal record of the requesting person.
(Prior Code, § 33.13) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971; Ord. 09-O-1945, passed 5-
6-2009; Ord. 09-O-1946, passed 5-6-2009)
§ 33.13 CUSTODY OF STOLEN PROPERTY.
   The Chief of Police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen
property recovered in the city.
(Prior Code, § 33.14) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971)
§ 33.14 REWARDS.
   The Chief of Police, for meritorious service rendered by any member of the
Police Force in the due discharge of his or her duty, may permit such member to
retain for his or her benefit, so far as he or she may be permitted by law, any
reward or present tendered him or her therefor, and it shall be cause of
removal for any member of the force to receive any such reward or present
without notice thereof to the Chief and without his or her permission.
(Prior Code, § 33.15) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971)
§ 33.15 POLICE COMMUNITY RELATIONS OFFICER.
   (A)   There is created the office of Police Community Relations Officer. The
Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor. The compensation of the Officer shall
be as determined from time to time by appropriation by the City Council.
   (B)   The Officer shall have the qualifications for a municipal officer
provided by the laws of the state and shall have a rapport with and working
knowledge of the Police Department of the city and the community of the city.
   (C)   The Officer shall promote good relations between the Police Department
and the community and shall work in close cooperation with the Chief of Police
and the Mayor in promoting this goal.
(Prior Code, § 33.16) (Ord. 73-O-825, passed - -1973)
§ 33.16 RECORDS AND INFORMATION OFFICER.
   (A)   There is created the position of Records and Information Officer.
   (B)   The Officer shall meet the requirements of an officer as established
by the law of the state.
   (C)   The Officer shall be appointed by the City Manager.
   (D)   The Officer shall manage and control the records of the Police
Department and shall operate under the direction of the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 33.17) (Ord. 74-O-853, passed - -1974)
§ 33.17 POLICE DEPARTMENT CHAPLAIN.
   (A)   There is created and established the honorary position of Chaplain of
the Police Department of the city.
   (B)   The position shall be an honorary position only, qualifying neither as
an office, nor as a position of employment in the city.
   (C)   The position shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor of the city
annually, at the commencement of the fiscal year or as soon as practicable
thereafter.
   (D)   Appointments to the position created in this chapter shall be limited
to persons duly ordained as religious of a generally recognized religious sect.
   (E)   This section is not deemed to constitute an endorsement or
establishment by the city of any religious belief, persuasion or sect.
(Prior Code, § 33.18)
§ 33.18 SPECIAL POLICE.
   Any person of good character having duties which require it may be appointed
a special police officer by the Mayor; provided that, except upon authorization
by the City Council, no such special police officer shall be entitled to any
compensation from the city, nor shall such special police officer be considered
an employee of the city by reason of such appointment. Special police officer
shall obey all rules of the Police Department applicable to them, and may be
deprived of their appointment by the Chief of Police at any time.
(Prior Code, § 33.19) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971)
§ 33.19 PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   Part-time police officers shall be appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council in such numbers as the Mayor and City
Council may from time to time determine to be necessary.
   (B)   Part-time police officers shall serve when called upon by the Mayor or
Chief of Police under the supervision of the regular Police Department. They
shall be conservators of the peace with the power to make arrests as provided
by statute.
   (C)   All applicants for the position of part-time police officer must be
certified State Police officers, comply with all state laws requiring
certification standards and meet the following hiring standards of the city:
      (1)   Must be at least 21 years old;
      (2)   Must be a high school graduate or equivalent;
      (3)   Must possess a valid Illinois driver’s license and have a good
driving record;
      (4)   Must be in good physical condition and pass any physical
examination and drug test required by the city;
      (5)   Must successfully complete all training required by statute,
ordinance or departmental regulation;
      (6)   Must submit to an oral interview with the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners;
      (7)   Must be of good character without a conviction for a felony or
crime involving moral turpitude and pass a thorough background examination;
      (8)   Must pass any written, polygraph and/or psychological tests
required by the city;
      (9)   Must have fingerprints submitted to the state and FBI for purposes
of checking criminal history;
         (10)   Part-time officers shall be compensated at a rate set from time
to time by the Mayor and City Council. These officers shall be compensated only
for actual hours worked;
         (11)   Part-time officers shall report to the full-time officer in
charge of the shift when they begin and end their tour of duty;
         (12)   Any part-time police officer who is terminated or leaves the
position within two years of appointment shall reimburse the city for all
training costs and expenses incurred by the city during said time. If any funds
are due the officer, they may be used by the city to pay a portion or all of
the training costs and expenses;
         (13)   A part-time police officer has no vested interest in the
position. Said officers acquire no rights and benefits not conferred by
statute. A city may discipline or discharge a part-time officer at any time. A
part-time officer shall be a member of the regular police department except for
pension purposes. They shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full-time
police officers and they shall not be used as permanent replacements for
permanent full-time police officers; and
         (14)   Part-time police officers shall work no more than 30 hours per
week or as may be regulated by statute.
(Prior Code, § 33.20) (Ord. 06-O-1851, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 33.20 HIRING OF LATERAL TRANSFER POLICE PATROL OFFICERS.
   (A)   That the Markham Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is hereby
authorized to hire police patrol officers for employment with the City of
Markham Police Department who have not been originally selected by the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners, provided such officers have been employed,
whether currently or in the past, for at least two years as a full time sworn
law enforcement officer in any state, county, university or municipal law
enforcement agency (part-time certification as a law enforcement officer does
not meet this requirement); are in good standing with the agency in which they
currently serve or previously served; have successfully completed the Illinois
Basic Law Enforcement Academy and possess certification from the Illinois Law
Enforcement Standards and Training Board or are qualified to take the Illinois
Law Enforcement Standards and Training Board examination (part-time
certification as a law enforcement officer does not meet this requirement); are
United States citizens; are at least 21 years old at the time of application;
have a high school diploma or equivalent thereof; have a valid driver's
license; have no felony convictions and have good moral character as described
in 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-6; have not had any administrative charges filed by any
employer nor any charges of violence filed by any civilians in criminal or
civil courts or administratively; and have not had any disciplinary cases or
complaints filed by any employer.
   (B)   Applicants must agree to comply with all requirements, procedures,
qualifications and standards of the position of police patrol officer set forth
in the Board of Fire and Police Commission Rules and Regulations and have the
ability to pass all examination and training requirements, including but not
limited to, background investigation, psychological examination, medical
examination, drug screening and oral interview.
   (C)   Applicants shall furnish upon request a copy of the following, to the
extent applicable: a resume; professional licenses; training certificates;
documents confirming work experience; birth certificate; high school diploma or
GED certificate; transcripts of higher learning; and naval or military service
board and discharge papers (DD-214/Copy 40).
   (D)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is hereby directed to
certify all applicants who satisfy all requirements set forth in this section
and Board of Fire and Police Commission Rules and Regulations to the Chief of
the City of Markham Police Department as being eligible for appointment as
full-time police patrol officers.
   (E)   Applicants are allowed to bring with them no more than four years of
police service from their prior employer for pension purposes. Applicants will
be on probation for one year from the date of hire. Applicants must
successfully complete their probationary period.
   (F)   Questions regarding participation in the City of Markham Police
Department Pension Fund shall be directed to and answered by that fund.
   (G)   Any lateral transfer of any police patrol officer hired after May 1,
2020 and the effective date of this Ord. 22-O-2325 shall be entitled to the
same rights and benefits of current full-time non-lateral police patrol
officers as set forth under Illinois law, this code, and Markham Board of Fire
and Police Commission Rules and Regulations.
(Ord. 21-O-2295, passed 3-17-2021; Ord. 21-O-2305, passed 7-21-2021; Ord. 22-O-
2325, passed 2-16-2022)
OTHER DIVISIONS OF DEPARTMENT
§ 33.30 JUVENILE DIVISION.
   (A)   There is created a division of the Police Department to be known as
the “Juvenile Division”, which shall be composed of such officers and employees
as the City Council may provide for from time to time.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall assign to such Juvenile Division such
members of the Department as are considered qualified by experience and
training to properly perform the functions of the office.
   (C)   The members of the Division shall be under the general supervision and
direction of the Chief and be subject to the same rules and regulations as
other members of the Department.
(Prior Code, § 33.30) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971)
§ 33.31 OTHER DIVISIONS.
   The Chief of Police may establish a Plainclothes Division or other special
division within the Police Department, assigning such police officers to such
Division and designating such duties therefor as may be deemed necessary.
(Prior Code, § 33.31) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971)
POLICE DEPARTMENT EXAMINATIONS
§ 33.45 DEFINITION.
   ELECTOR shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Illinois Municipal
Code.
(Prior Code, § 33.40) (Ord. 76-O-908, passed - -1976; Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-
4-1987)
§ 33.46 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT FOR EXAMINATION.
   No person shall be eligible to take part in any competitive examination or
portion thereof conducted by or pursuant to the authority of the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners of the city, for the purpose of establishing a list of
eligibles for appointment to positions on the Police Department of the city,
unless such person is an elector of the city, and shall have been an actual
resident of the city for a period of not less than 180 days prior to the date
of the commencement of such examination.
(Prior Code, § 33.41) (Ord. 76-O-908, passed - -1976; Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-
4-1987)
§ 33.47 ADMITTANCE TO EXAMINATIONS.
   No person shall be admitted to or be allowed to participate as an examinee
in any competitive examination, or any portion thereof, conducted by or under
the authority of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the city, for
the purpose of establishing a list of eligibles for appointment to positions in
the Police Department, unless such person is an elector of the city and shall
have been an actual resident of the city for a period of not less than 180 days
prior to the date of the commencement of such examination.
(Prior Code, § 33.42) (Ord. 76-O-908, passed - -1976; Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-
4-1987)
§ 33.48 PROOF OF ELECTOR STATUS.
   No person shall be admitted to nor allowed to participate as an examinee in
any competitive examination, or any portion thereof, conducted by or under the
authority of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the city, for the
purpose of establishing a list of eligibles for appointment to positions on the
Police Department, unless such person shall have first submitted to the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners satisfactory proof of his or her status as an
elector of the city, and proof of actual residence within the city as required
in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 33.43) (Ord. 76-O-908, passed - -1976; Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-
4-1987)
§ 33.49 ESTABLISHMENT OF PROOF.
   Proof of elector status and residence may be established by reference to
records of public or private persons, firms, corporations, organizations and
political subdivisions of the state, which records contain material competent
to establish the status of a person as an elector of the city. Proof of such
status may also be established by affidavit of not less than two persons who
themselves are duly qualified electors of the city, and who shall have been
residents of the city for a period sufficient to prima facie establish such
person’s ability to affirm the contents of such affidavit.
(Prior Code, § 33.44) (Ord. 76-O-908, passed - -1976; Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-
4-1987)
POLICE PENSION FUND
§ 33.60 ESTABLISHMENT OF FUND.
   There shall be a Police Pension Fund established for the city as provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 33.55)
§ 33.61 BOARD OF TRUSTEES ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund, which
shall be known as the “Board of Trustees of the Police Pension Fund” of the
city. The Pension Board shall consist of five members who are residents of the
city, two appointed by the Mayor and two elected by the members of the Police
Department, and one elected by the beneficiaries of the Pension Fund. The
elections shall be held on the third Monday in April and the term of each
member shall be two years. The Pension Board shall hold at least quarterly
meetings as provided by law, on the second Tuesday of July, October, January
and April of each year, and shall hold such additional meetings as may be
called by the President of the Pension Board.
(Prior Code, § 33.56)
§ 33.62 ORGANIZATION, DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
   The Police Pension Board shall, on the second Tuesday of July of each year,
select its president and its secretary from its membership, each of whom shall
act for the period of one year or until such time as their successors are
elected and qualified. The Pension Board shall have such additional officers
and such duties and authority as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 33.57)
CHAPTER 34: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Definition
   
34.02   Permanent Department created
   
34.03   Appointments
   
34.04   Chain of command
   
34.05   Fire Chief; duties
   
34.06   Deputy Fire Chief; duties
   
34.07   Departmental duties
   
34.08   Rules and regulations
   
34.09   Residency requirement
   
34.10   Fees and charges
Ambulance and Emergency Services
   
34.25   Fees for emergency and medical ambulance and related services
   
34.26   [Reserved]
   
34.27   Mitigation rates for emergency and non-emergency services
Fire Pension Fund
   
34.40   Fund established
   
34.41   Board of Trustees established
   
34.42   Organization; duties and authority
Fire Department Examinations
   
34.55   Definition
   
34.56   Residency requirement for examination
   
34.57   Admittance to examinations
   
34.58   Proof of elector status
   
34.59   Establishment of proof
Foreign Fire Insurance Companies
   
34.70   Tax imposed
   
34.71   Report by agent to be made to City Clerk
   
34.72   Recovery of money by city
Cross-reference:
   Alarm Systems, see
Ch. 91
   Civil Emergencies, see
Ch. 38
   Fire Prevention; Fireworks, see
Ch. 94
   Police Department, see
Ch. 33
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 DEFINITION.
   ELECTOR shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Illinois Municipal
Code.
(Prior Code, § 34.01) (Ord. 76-O-908, passed - -1976; Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-
4-1987)
§ 34.02 PERMANENT DEPARTMENT CREATED.
   (A)   In addition to the Volunteer Fire Department, there is created a Fire
Department of the city which shall consist of the following permanent
positions:
      (1)   One Fire Chief;
      (2)   Deputy Chiefs;
      (3)   Lieutenants;
      (4)   Engineers; and
      (5)   Firefighters.
   (B)   The number of each rank between firefighters and Deputy Chief will be
as determined by the corporate authorities.
(Prior Code, § 34.02) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987; Ord. 96-O-1573, passed
3- -1995)
§ 34.03 APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   All appointments to or promotions within the Fire Department shall be
made by the Fire and Police Commissioners as provided by law; except that, the
Fire Chief and the Deputy Chiefs shall not be appointed by the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners. The Mayor shall appoint and discharge the Fire Chief
and the Deputy Chiefs.
   (B)   (1)   The city’s Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is hereby
authorized to hire firefighters for duty with the city’s Fire Department who
have not been originally selected by the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners; provided, such proposed employee has been employed as a
firefighter with another Illinois fire department; that the proposed applicant
has taken and successfully passed all preliminary testing for their initial
appointment as firefighter and he or she is certified by the state as a
firefighter; that there are no pending administrative charges against the
applicant by their current employer, nor have they been charged with acts of
violence by civilians in either the civil courts or administratively; further
that, the applicant has not had disciplinary problems with the city.
      (2)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners is hereby directed to
certify all such proposed employees to the Chief of the city’s Fire Department
as being eligible for appointment as firefighters.
      (3)   Such firefighters are allowed to bring with them their seniority
rank for pension purposes from their prior employer; the applicant will be on
probation for one year and not achieving the pay scale for his or her seniority
level until he or she has successfully completed the probationary period.
      (4)   The applicant must undergo the standard physical evaluation and
testing, be tested for drug use and the applicant must execute a statement
agreeing to stay with the city’s Fire Department for a period of at least one
year and that, should he or she depart prior to the expiration of such one-year
period, then the applicant shall reimburse the city for the cost of such
initial testing as he or she has undergone.
      (5)   Any questions regarding participation in the city’s Fire Department
Pension Fund shall be resolved by that Fund.
(Prior Code, § 34.03) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987; Ord. 08-O-1923, passed
5-21-2008)
§ 34.04 CHAIN OF COMMAND.
   The Fire Chief shall be the head of the Fire Department and have supervision
over all officers and members thereof. Following him or her in the chain of
command shall be the Deputy Chiefs, the lieutenants, the engineers and the
firefighters in order of seniority in each group.
(Prior Code, § 34.04) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987; Ord. 96-O-1573, passed
3- -1995)
§ 34.05 FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the performance and operation
of the full-time and volunteer firefighters.
   (B)   All persons who are members or employees of the full-time and
volunteer Fire Department shall serve subject to the order of the Fire Chief.
(Prior Code, § 34.05) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987)
§ 34.06 DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES.
   (A)   The organizational structure of the city’s Fire Department should be
revised to eliminate the position of captain and to create an administrative,
non-bargaining unit, position to be known as the Deputy Chief of the City Fire
Department.
   (B)   The duties and job description of the position of Deputy Chief of the
Fire Department shall be as promulgated from time to time by the Chief
Administrative officer of the city’s Fire Department in consultation with the
Mayor.
   (C)   The salary and benefits appertaining to the position of the Deputy
Chief of the Fire Department shall be as designated by an appropriate ordinance
passed by the City Council and approved by the Mayor, according to law.
(Prior Code, § 34.06) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987; Ord. 96-O-1573, passed
3- -1995)
§ 34.07 DEPARTMENTAL DUTIES.
   Members of the Fire Department shall perform all the duties delegated to
them by state law, and the code and all applicable ordinances, rules and
procedures of the city. Firefighters shall acquire the knowledge of operation
of all apparatus, tools and equipment in use in the Department, and maintain
such apparatus, tools and equipment in a clean condition and in readiness for
operation at all times. Firefighters shall observe and study the principles of
modern firefighting, fire prevention, rescue work, resuscitation, first aid,
ventilation and salvage operations. Members shall constantly promote their
physical and mental welfare. It shall be the duty of all members thereof to
extinguish accidental or destructive fires and to prevent the occurrence or
spread of such fires. It shall be the duty of all members thereof to provide
rescue emergency medical services and to promote fire prevention within the
community.
(Prior Code, § 34.07) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987)
§ 34.08 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he
or she shall deem advisable. Such rules and regulations, when approved by the
City Council, shall be binding on the members of the Department.
   (B)   The rules attached to Ord. 88-O-1313 as “Exhibit A” are adopted as the
rules for the Fire Department and are made a part hereof by reference as if set
out in full herein.
(Prior Code, § 34.08) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987; Ord. 88-O-1313, passed
5-18-1988)
§ 34.09 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT.
   Sworn personnel of the Fire Department whose original or promotional
appointments are subject to the Board of Fire and Police are required to be
residents of the city. New personnel shall have resided in the city at least
six months prior to examination. Failure to remain a city resident shall be the
basis for dismissal of sworn personnel.
(Prior Code, § 34.09) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987)
§ 34.10 FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ALARM SYSTEM. Any automatic, manual or electronic system which generates
a telephonic or electronic call to the Fire Department for the dispatch of
equipment and personnel to a particular location.
      FALSE ALARM. The giving of an automatic telephone or electronic signal to
the Fire Department that services are needed at a particular location together
with a response by the Fire Department involving the dispatch of fire equipment
and personnel where there was no fire or life threatening situation.
      INSPECTION AND TESTING FOR MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS. Inspection and testing of
premises and/or equipment by the Fire Department based on a request by the
owner or lessee of the premises or equipment.
      INSPECTION FOR PAST DUE VIOLATIONS. Those inspections called for in order
to determine compliance with the Fire Prevention Code where a citation has
previously been issued for a violation of that code.
      OPENING INSPECTION. That inspection called for based upon an application
for the issuance of a business license by the city.
   (B)   Assessment of fees. The person, firm or corporation against whom the
fee is to be assessed shall be notified, in writing, within 30 days of the date
of rendering of the service in question of the amount of fees due and a demand
for payment within 30 days. This notification shall be mailed to the owner or
lessee at the address to which the Fire Department equipment and personnel
responded.
   (C)   Delinquent fees. All fees assessed shall become delinquent in the
event the fee is not paid within 30 days of the date of mailing of the
notification to the address as indicated above. Fees not paid within 30 days of
notification will be assessed a penalty of 50% as so much additional charge for
non-payment.
   (D)   Collection of delinquent fees. The city is hereby authorized to take
whatever action necessary to collect delinquent fees and penalties including,
but not limited to, reference to a collection agency or the institution of
legal action. The owner and/or lessee of the premises in question shall be
liable, as an additional charge, for such reasonable attorneys fees and cost of
collection as the court may assess.
   (E)   Fees and charges. There shall be charged to all persons, firms,
corporations or such other entities as shall request and received services from
the Fire Department of the city a fee for such services as set forth below:
Service Provided Fee
Service Provided                          Fee
Fire Department plan review               $1 per square foot
Fire investigations with insurance        $125 per hour
companies
For providing copies of fire, ambulance and miscellaneous reports
   For current and 2 years past
   Past 2 through 4 years              $25
   Fifth year and past
Initial fire inspection for business      $50
license issuance
Inspection and testing for miscellaneous  $40 per hour
items
Inspection for past due violations        $50
Morgue runs to County Medical Examiners   $150 flat rate
Office
Public programs: CPR classes; fire
extinguisher training; fire brigade       At the established local college rate
training; and other miscellaneous
training
Response to false alarm from business and $150
public building alarm system
Response to false alarm from residential  $35
alarm systems
Stand by for fire watch and rescue        $125 per hour
Third time resident ambulance charging
   Basic service                       $50
   Intermediate service                $75
 
(Prior Code, § 34.10) (Ord. 92-O-1421, passed 1-8-1992; Ord. 92-O-1423, passed
2-5-1992; Ord. 04-O-1792, passed 3-17-2004)
AMBULANCE AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
§ 34.25 SCHEDULE OF FEES FOR EMERGENCY AND MEDICAL AMBULANCE AND RELATED
SERVICES.
   There is hereby established the following schedule of fees for such
services:
Service Provided Fee
Service Provided                                      Fee
For residents:
   Basic life support                              $1,640.19
   Advanced life support Level 1                   $1,640.19
   Advanced life support Level 2                   $1,640.19
   Mileage                                         $18.00 per mile
   Refusal of transportation services after treatme$300.00
   Citizen assist (annual)                          
      0-8 assists per year                      $0.00
      9 or more assists per year                $300.00 per assist
For non-residents:
   Basic life support                              $1,640.19
   Advanced life support Level 1                   $1,640.19
   Advanced life support Level 2                   $1,640.19
   Mileage                                         $18.00 per mile
   Refusal of transportation services after treatme$300.00
   Citizen assist                                  $350.00
 
   (B)   Charges for ambulance services as set in the fee schedule shall be
billed as follows:
      (1)   When ambulance or emergency services are rendered by the city to
residents, such persons shall not be billed for the remaining charges which may
exist once final payment has been received from all insurance providers of the
resident.
      (2)   When ambulance or emergency services are rendered by the city to
non-residents, such persons shall be billed for the remaining charges which may
exist once final payment has been received from all insurance providers of the
non-resident.
(Prior Code, § 34.45) (Ord. 81-O-1045, passed - -1981; Ord. 23-O-2370, passed
8-16-2023)
§ 34.26 [RESERVED.]
§ 34.27 MITIGATION RATES FOR EMERGENCY AND NON-EMERGENCY SERVICES.
   (A)   The city shall initiate mitigation rates for the delivery of emergency
and non-emergency services by the fire department for personnel, supplies and
equipment to the scene of emergency and non-emergency incidents as listed in
“Exhibit A”. The mitigation rates shall be based on actual costs of the
services and that which is usual, customary and reasonable (UCR) as shown in
“Exhibit A”, which may include any services, personnel, supplies and equipment
and with baselines established by addendum to the ordinance codified herein.
   (B)   A claim shall be filed to the responsible party through their
insurance carrier. In some circumstances, the responsible party will be billed
directly.
   (C)   The City Council may make rules or regulations and from time to time
may amend, revoke or add rules and regulations, not consistent with this
section, as it may deem necessary or expedient in respect to billing for these
mitigation rated or the collection thereof.
(Ord. 14-O-2088, passed 3-5-2014; Ord. 22-O-2341, passed 10-19-2022)
FIRE PENSION FUND
§ 34.40 FUND ESTABLISHED.
   There shall be a fire pension fund established for the city as provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 34.55) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987)
§ 34.41 BOARD OF TRUSTEES ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a Board of Trustees of the Firefighters Pension Fund
which shall be known as the Board of Trustees of the Fire Pension Fund of the
city. The Board of Trustees shall consist of the City Treasurer, City Clerk,
Fire Chief, Mayor, three active firefighters and one retired firefighter.
(Prior Code, § 34.56) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987)
§ 34.42 ORGANIZATION; DUTIES AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The members chosen from the active and retired firefighters shall be
elected by ballot at elections to be held on the third Monday in April of the
applicable years under the Australian ballot system, at such place or places,
in the municipality, and under such regulations as shall be prescribed by the
Pension Board.
   (B)   No person shall cast more than one vote for each candidate from whom
he or she is eligible to vote. In the elections for Board members to be chosen
from the active firefighters, all active firefighters and no others may vote.
In the elections for Board members to be chosen from retired firefighters, the
retired firefighters and no others may vote.
   (C)   Each member of the Board so elected shall hold office for a term of
three years and until his or her successor has been duly elected and qualified.
   (D)   The Board shall canvass the ballots and declare which persons have
been elected and for what term or terms respectively. In the case of a tie vote
between two more candidates, the Board shall determine by lot which candidate
or candidates have been elected and for what term or terms respectively. In the
event of the failure, resignation or inability to act of any Board member, a
successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special election called
by the Board and conducted in the same manner as a regular election.
   (E)   The Board shall elect annually from its members a President and
Secretary.
   (F)   Board members shall not receive or have any right to receive any
salary from a pension fund for services performed as Board members.
(Prior Code, § 34.57) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987)
FIRE DEPARTMENT EXAMINATIONS
§ 34.55 DEFINITION.
   ELECTOR shall have the same meaning as set forth in the Illinois Municipal
Code.
(Prior Code, § 34.65) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987)
§ 34.56 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT FOR EXAMINATION.
   No person shall be eligible to take part in any competitive examination or
portion thereof conducted by or pursuant to the authority of the Board of Fire
and Police Commissioners of the city, for the purpose of establishing a list of
eligibles for appointment to positions on the Fire Department of the city,
unless such person is an elector of the city, and shall have been an actual
resident of the city for a period of not less than 180 days prior to the date
of the commencement of such examination.
(Prior Code, § 34.66) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987)
§ 34.57 ADMITTANCE TO EXAMINATIONS.
   No person shall be admitted to or be allowed to participate as an examinee
in any competitive examination, or any portion thereof, conducted by or under
the authority of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the city, for
the purpose of establishing a list of eligibles for appointment to positions in
the Fire Department, unless such person is an elector of the city and shall
have been an actual resident of the city for a period of not less than 180 days
prior to the date of the commencement of such examination.
(Prior Code, § 34.67) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987)
§ 34.58 PROOF OF ELECTOR STATUS.
   No person shall be admitted to nor allowed to participate as an examinee in
any competitive examination, or any portion thereof, conducted by or under the
authority of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the city, for the
purpose of establishing a list of eligibles for appointment to positions on the
Fire Department, unless such person shall have first submitted to the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners satisfactory proof of his status as an elector of
the city, and proof of actual residence within the city as required in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 34.68) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987)
§ 34.59 ESTABLISHMENT OF PROOF.
   Proof of elector status and residence may be established by reference to
records of public or private persons, firms, corporations, organizations and
political subdivisions of the state, which records contain material competent
to establish the status of a person as an elector of the city. Proof of such
status may also be established by affidavit of not less than two persons who
themselves are duly qualified electors of the city, and who shall have been
residents of the city for a period sufficient to prima facie establish such
person’s ability to affirm the contents of such affidavit.
(Prior Code, § 34.69) (Ord. 87-O-1261, passed 2-4-1987)
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES
§ 34.70 TAX IMPOSED.
   Any corporation, company or association not incorporated under the laws of
the state which is engaged in the city in effecting fire insurance shall pay
the City Treasurer, for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department
of the city, a sum of money equal in amount to 2% per year of the gross
receipts received as premiums upon fire insurance policies by any and all
agents of the corporation, company or association, during the year ending on
July 1 in each year, for any insurance effected, or agreed to be effected on
property located in the city, by or with such corporation, company or
association during such year.
(Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 34.71 REPORT BY AGENT TO BE MADE TO CITY CLERK.
   (A)   Every person acting in the city as agent, for or on behalf of any such
fire insurance corporation, company or association, shall, on or before July 15
of each year, render the City Clerk a full, true and just account verified by
his or her oath, of all premiums upon fire insurance policies which, during the
year ending the July 1 preceding such report, shall have been received by him
or her, or by some other person for him or her, in his or her behalf of any
such corporation, company or association on property located in the city.
   (B)   Such agent shall also at the time of rendering the report, pay to the
City Treasurer the sum of money for which the company, corporation or
association represented by him or her is chargeable by virtue of the provisions
of this chapter.
(Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 34.72 RECOVERY OF MONEY BY CITY.
   The sum of money for which such company, corporation or association is so
chargeable may be recovered of it, or its agents or agent, by an action in the
name of and for the use of the city as for money had and received. Nothing in
this section shall be held to exempt any person, corporation, company or
association from indictment and conviction under the provisions of an act
entitled "An Act to Enable Cities, Towns and Villages, Organized under Any
General or Special Law, to Levy and Collect a Tax or License Fee from Foreign
Insurance Companies for the Benefit of Organized Fire Departments", in force 7-
1-1895.
(Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
CHAPTER 35: EMPLOYEE REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
35.001   Requirements for employment
   
35.002   Classified city service
   
35.003   Official listing
   
35.004   Classified members of civil service
   
35.005   Certification of employees of civil service or Fire and Police Board
   
35.006   Equal Opportunity Policy
   
35.007   Anti-nepotism
Salary Provisions
   
35.020   Compensation plan
   
35.021   Increase in salary upon advancement within grade
   
35.022   Salary following promotion
   
35.023   Salary following demotion
   
35.024   Salary following authorized leave of absence
   
35.025   Hours of work; overtime
   
35.026   Reimbursement to members of Volunteer Fire Department
   
35.027   Wage and sick leave laws
Employee Benefits
   
35.040   Holidays
   
35.041   Vacation
   
35.042   Sick leave
   
35.043   Leaves of absence
   
35.044   Longevity pay
   
35.045   Automobile allowance
   
35.046   Non-union employees’ benefits
   
35.047   Union employees’ carryover of sick leave and vacation
   
35.048   Health insurance
Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance
   
35.060   Policy; purpose
   
35.061   Agreement with state
   
35.062   Employee withholding
   
35.063   Contacts with state agency
   
35.064   Treasurer’s records
Civil Service Employees
   
35.075   Hiring of civil service employees
Ethics Provisions
   
35.090   Definitions
   
35.091   Prohibited political activity
   
35.092   Gift ban
   
35.093   Exceptions
   
35.094   Disposition of gifts
   
35.095   Ethics Advisor
   
35.096   Ethics Commission
   
35.097   Complaints
Family and Medical Leave Policy
   
35.110   Eligibility
   
35.111   Leave entitlement
   
35.112   Leave availability calculation
   
35.113   Substitution of paid leave
   
35.114   Medical insurance benefits while on FMLA leave
   
35.115   Procedure for requesting FMLA leave
   
35.116   Consequences of taking FMLA leave
   
35.117   Reference to FMLA notice poster
Sexual Harassment
   
35.130   Prohibition
   
35.131   Definition
   
35.132   Procedure for reporting allegation
   
35.133   Prohibition of retaliation
 
   
35.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.001 REQUIREMENTS FOR EMPLOYMENT.
   (A)   All persons employed by the city shall first by subject to a physical
examination from a physician designated by the City Council, at city expense.
Such physician shall be furnished job requirements and employment will be
conditioned upon recommendation of the physician. Part-time employees for a
period of 30 workdays or less shall not be subject to this section.
   (B)   Each employee shall be a resident of the city prior to and during his
or her term of employment. Any variation of this condition shall be approved by
the majority of the Council.
   (C)   No person shall be hired under the age of 18.
   (D)   All persons must possess the necessary qualifications to perform the
duties of the position as established. No person shall be denied employment
because of race, color or creed.
(Prior Code, § 35.01)
§ 35.002 CLASSIFIED CITY SERVICE.
   (A)   All full-time officers and employees of the city, except the Mayor,
City Attorney, City Clerk, Comptroller and City Treasurer, shall be classified
and graded as follows:
Class Title Class Grade
Class Title                   Class Grade
Clerical and Administrative Group
   Bookkeeper-Cashier Class6A
   Bookkeeper-Cashier Class2B
   Clerk-Secretary Class A 2
   Clerk-Secretary Class B 1
   Librarian Class A       9
   Librarian Class B       5
   Water Clerk Class A     4
   Water Clerk Class B     1
Maintenance Group
   Foreman                 18
   Janitor                 3
   Maintenance Man Class A 15
   Maintenance Man Class B 9
   Maintenance Man Class C 6
   Mechanic Class A        15
   Mechanic Class B        9
   Mechanic Class C        6
   Meter Man Class A       15
   Meter Man Class B       9
   Meter Man Class C       3
   Casual Laborer (TemporarUngraded
   Office Clerk (Temporary)Ungraded
 
   (B)   The above positions set out in this section shall constitute the
classified city service of the city.
(Prior Code, § 35.02) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971; Ord. 19-O-2240, passed
10-2-2019)
§ 35.003 OFFICIAL LISTING.
   The class title of each position as classified in §
35.002 of this chapter shall be used to designate such position in all budget
estimates, payrolls, and other official records, documents, vouchers and
communications and in all personnel processes.
(Prior Code, § 35.03) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971)
§ 35.004 CLASSIFIED MEMBERS OF CIVIL SERVICE.
   All persons who were employees of the city on 5-1-1969, and who had held
such employment since 5-1-1967, shall become members of the classified civil
service of the city without examination.
(Prior Code, § 35.04) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971)
§ 35.005 CERTIFICATION OF EMPLOYEES OF CIVIL SERVICE OR FIRE AND POLICE
COMMISSION.
   No paycheck shall be issued to any new employee hired subsequent to the
effective date of this section without the City Treasurer having first obtained
certification from the Civil Service Commission or the Fire and Police
Commission that said employee is occupying an office or place of employment
according to the provisions of law and is entitled to payment therefor. This
section is not applicable to officers subject to appointment by the Mayor and
is not applicable to employees who enter a different city position pursuant to
contract between the city and the union or pursuant to promotional rules of the
Board of Fire and Police.
(Prior Code, § 35.05) (Ord. 87-O-1288, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 35.006 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY.
   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of this section, the term MINORITY will refer to
American Indians, Asians, Blacks or Hispanics, or to such protected classes as
youth, elderly, women or persons with disabilities.
      (2)   The city hereby declares to uphold, defend, enforce and advocate
for all laws related to equal employment opportunity including, but not limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits
discrimination in the participation in or benefits of programs or activities
receiving federal financial assistance on the basis of race, color or national
origin;
         (b)   Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits
discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin in all
employment practices including hiring, firing, promotions, compensation and
other terms, privileges and conditions of employment;
         (c)   Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, which prohibits
discrimination in federally assisted education programs;
         (d)   The Equal Pay Act of 1963, which covers all employees who are
covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act. The Act forbids pay differentials on
the basis of sex;
         (e)   The Age Discrimination Act of 1967, which prohibits
discrimination because of age against anyone between the ages of 40 and 65;
         (f)   Federal Executive Order 11246, which requires every contract
with federal financial assistance to contain a clause against discrimination
because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin;
         (g)   Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and POL
Implementing Regulations at 29 C.F.R. part 32, which prohibits any
discrimination based on disability;
         (h)   Section 188 of WIA and the U.S. POL Regulations at 29 C.F.R.
parts 31 and 32, which provides that no person in the United States shall be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of or be subject to
discrimination on the basis of race, color or national origin, under any
program or activity receiving federal financial assistance from the Department
of Labor;
         (i)   Ch. 68, Art. I, §§ 17 through 19, of the state’s Constitution,
which prohibits discrimination based on race, color, creed, national ancestry,
disability and sex in the hiring and promotion practices of any employer;
         (j)   The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, which with
disabilities on the basis of their disability; and
         (k)   The state’s Human Rights Act, 775 ILCS 5, which prohibits
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry,
age, order of protection status, marital status, physical or mental disability,
military status, sexual orientation or unfavorable discharge from military
service in connection with employment, real estate transactions, access to
financial credit and the availability of public accommodations.
   (B)   The city will assure non-discriminatory employment practices in
recruitment, recruitment advertising, employment, placement, layoff or
termination, promotion, demotion or transfer, rate of pay or other forms of
compensation and use of facilities.
   (C)   The city will not contract with other agencies, banks, businesses,
vendors and the like, who practice or establish a pattern of discrimination
based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, order of
protection status, marital status, physical or mental disability, military
status, sexual orientation or unfavorable discharge from military.
   (D)   The city will incorporate into any contract for construction work, or
modification thereof, subject to the relevant rules, regulations and orders of
the Secretary of Labor or of any prior authority that remains in effect, which
is paid in whole or in part with the aid of such financial assistance, the
following “Equal Opportunity Clause”:
   In the event of the contractor’s non-compliance with the provisions of this
Equal Employment Opportunity Clause, the Act or the Rules and Regulations of
the Department, the contractor may be declared ineligible for future contracts
or subcontracts with the State of Illinois or any of its political subdivisions
or municipal corporations, and the contract may be cancelled or voided in whole
or in part, and other sanctions or penalties may be imposed or remedies invoked
as provided by statute or regulation. During the performance of this contract,
the contractor agrees as follows:
   (a) That he or she will not discriminate against any employee or applicant
for employment because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation,
marital status, national origin or ancestry, citizenship status, age, physical
or mental disability unrelated to ability, sexual orientation, military status
or an unfavorable discharge from military service; and, further, that he or she
will examine all job classifications to determine if minority persons or women
are underutilized and will take appropriate affirmative action to rectify any
underutilization.
   (b) That, if he or she hires additional employees in order to perform this
contract or any portion of this contract, he or she will determine the
availability (in accordance with the Department’s Rules and Regulations) of
minorities and women in the areas from which he or she may reasonably recruit
and he or she will hire for each job classification for which employees are
hired in a way that minorities and women are not underutilized.
   (c) That, in all solicitations or advertisements for employees placed by him
or her or on his or her behalf, he or she will state that all applicants will
be afforded equal opportunity without discrimination because of race, color,
religion, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, national origin or ancestry,
citizenship status, age, physical or mental disability unrelated to ability,
sexual orientation, military status or an unfavorable discharge from military
service.
   (d) That he or she will send to each labor organization or representative of
workers with which he or she has or is bound by a collective bargaining or
other agreement or understanding, a notice advising the labor organization or
representative of the contractor’s obligations under the Act and the
Department’s Rules and Regulations. If any labor organization or representative
fails or refuses to cooperate with the contractor in his or her efforts to
comply with the Act and Rules and Regulations, the contractor will promptly
notify the Department and the contracting agency and will recruit employees
from other sources when necessary to fulfill its obligations under the
contract.
   (e) That he or she will submit reports as required by the Department’s Rules
and Regulations, furnish all relevant information as may from time to time, be
requested by the Department or the contracting agency, and in all respects
comply with the Act and the Department’s Rules and Regulations.
   (f) That he or she will permit access to all relevant books, records,
accounts and work sites by personnel of the contracting agency and the
Department for purposes of investigation to ascertain compliance with the Act
and the Department’s Rules and Regulations.
   (g) That he or she will include verbatim or by reference the provisions of
this clause in every subcontract awarded under which any portion of the
contract obligations are undertaken or assumed, so that the provisions will be
binding upon the subcontractor. In the same manner as with other provisions of
this contract, the contractor will be liable for compliance with applicable
provisions of this clause by subcontractors; and further it will promptly
notify the contracting agency and the Department in the event any subcontractor
fails or refuses to comply with the provisions. In addition, the contractor
will not utilize any subcontractor declared by the Illinois Human Rights
Commission to be ineligible for contracts or subcontracts with the State of
Illinois or any of its political subdivisions or municipal corporations.
   (E)   The city assures that it will actively provide non-discriminatory
outreach, selection and service to all individuals.
   (F)   Efforts will be made to hire minority individuals for all job
categories so that minority employment in all categories of the work force will
represent a proportionate share of minority populations in the city of as well
as surrounding areas.
   (G)   The city will provide accommodations to the best of its ability for
employees with disabilities, contingent on budget and structural limitations.
   (H)   All city employees are expected to adhere to adhere to the above
policy and to work actively for its implementation both internally and in
carrying out the city program activities.
   (I)   The city designates the Mayor and City Council to carry out the EEO/AA
plan.
(Ord. 13-O-2053, passed 2-20-2013)
§ 35.007 ANTI-NEPOTISM.
   (A)   The employment of immediate family can cause various problems,
including charges of favoritism, conflicts of interest, family discord, and
scheduling conflicts that work to the disadvantage of the city, its employees
and elected officials. Therefore, it is policy of the city to not hire
immediate family members, as defined by this section, within the same city
departments and/or in supervisory position over one another. The practice where
an employee is hired through competitive examinations such as a police or fire
recruitment, administered by the independent Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners, will remain until such time legislation changes their authority.
   (B)   No individual shall be hired by the city for any position that would
result in the prospective employee from being supervised by a member of the
prospective employee’s immediate family as defined by this section.
   (C)   If two employees in the same department or an employee and an elected
official become immediate family, regardless if there is a supervisory/
subordinate relationship, one of the two must transfer departments, if a
position for which he or she is qualified is available. If no position is
available, one employee must either voluntarily quit or terminate his or her
employment within 90 days of the date in which the two became immediate family.
The choice regarding which employee shall leave shall be made by the employees.
If there is an unwillingness to make a decision, the employee with the least
seniority shall be terminated, unless the City Council determines that the
needs of the city demand otherwise. In the event an employment position that
will not create any prohibited family employment relationship described above
becomes available within one year of the employee’s termination, said position
shall be offered to the terminated employee to the extent he or she is
qualified and able for such position.
   (D)   If, prior to the effective date of this section, two or more immediate
family members are employed within the same city department and no supervisory/
subordinate relationship exists situation exists, those individuals affected
will be allowed to remain in their current positions until such time that a
supervisory/subordinate relationship arises at which time the above-referenced
90-day period shall commence for any employee transfers or resignations.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the term “immediate family member” is
defined as the employee’s spouse, civil union spouse/partner, dependent child
(biological, foster or step), father, mother, son, daughter (including step and
in-law), sister, brother, grandparent or grandchild.
(Ord. 19-O-2217, passed 2-6-2019)
SALARY PROVISIONS
§ 35.020 COMPENSATION PLAN.
   (A)   The annual salary ranges for the respective positions, as set forth in
§
35.002 of this chapter, shall constitute the plan of compensation for all
persons in the classified city service. The current pay schedule is hereby
adopted by reference and made a part of this code as if set out at length
herein.
   (B)   Appointments and reappointments to positions in the classified city
service shall normally be made at the salary fixed in Range A for the
applicable class grade.
   (C)   All rates of pay for positions in the classified city service shall be
computed on the basis of 26 pay periods per year. Hourly rates for such
positions shall be calculated by dividing the applicable annual salary of the
position by the total number of hours normally scheduled for that position in
one year.
(Prior Code, § 35.15) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971)
§ 35.021 INCREASE IN SALARY UPON ADVANCEMENT WITHIN GRADE.
   All increases in salary for persons in the classified city service shall be
granted by the Mayor on the basis of exceptional merit. Such increases shall be
granted in sequence by advancing the individual’s salary to the salary
indicated in the next salary range within the same class grade as set forth in
§
35.020 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 35.16) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971)
§ 35.022 SALARY FOLLOWING PROMOTION.
   Whenever an individual in the classified city service is promoted to a new
position, his or her new salary shall be fixed by the Mayor but, in no case,
shall his or her new salary be fixed at less than the amount received in his or
her former position.
(Prior Code, § 35.17) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971)
§ 35.023 SALARY FOLLOWING DEMOTION.
   Whenever an individual in the classified city service is demoted, his or her
salary shall be reduced and fixed within his or her new class grade by the
Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 35.18) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971)
§ 35.024 SALARY FOLLOWING AUTHORIZED LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
   Whenever an individual is reinstated to his or her former position after an
authorized leave of absence, his or her salary shall be fixed by the Mayor, but
shall not be fixed in a range below that held by him or her prior to the leave.
(Prior Code, § 35.19) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971)
§ 35.025 HOURS OF WORK; OVERTIME.
   (A)   The workweek for all graded positions in the city classified service
shall be a 42-hour week.
   (B)   (1)   Overtime work may be authorized by the department heads when
necessary and such authorized overtime shall be reported to the City Manager.
      (2)   Overtime work may be paid for on a weekly basis, but hours of
overtime work shall not be carried over into another week for the purpose of
cumulating such hours.
      (3)   Each additional hour of overtime work in the same week may be paid
for at one and one-half times the normal hourly rate of pay. All work performed
on a Sunday or holiday may be paid for at one and one-half the normal hourly
rate, but such work shall not be included in any further computation of
overtime pay.
(Prior Code, § 35.20) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971)
§ 35.026 REIMBURSEMENT TO MEMBERS OF VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   Any member of the Volunteer Fire Department of the city may secure
reimbursement for loss of wages actually incurred by reason of being on city
business in accordance with the following requirements.
   (A)   The maximum reimbursement for loss of wages shall be limited to the
actual daily wage scale paid by the firefighter’s employer, but in no event
shall the sum exceed $35 per day unless prior approval is secured from the
Mayor.
   (B)   Approval to engage in business on behalf of the city, wherein
reimbursement will subsequently be requested, must be secured from the Mayor.
   (C)   The person securing reimbursement for loss of wages must file with the
City Clerk a certificate setting forth the nature of the business involved, the
date, times and places, and with whom the business was transacted, the hourly
rate of pay of such person and attach to such certificate a letter from the
employer of the individual seeking reimbursement stating the hourly rate of pay
of such person and the fact that such person was absent from his or her
regularly schedule employment at the times claimed.
(Prior Code, § 35.21) (Ord. 590, passed - -1965)
§ 35.027 WAGE AND SICK LEAVE LAWS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMPLOYEE. Any individual person permitted and/or hired to work by an
employer regardless of the number of hours worked and of the number of persons
the employer employs.
      EMPLOYER. Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation,
limited liability company, business trust or any person or group of persons
employing or seeking to employ one ox more employees in, or having its
principal place of business in, the city. The term EMPLOYER does not mean or
include:
         (a)   The Government of the United States or a corporation wholly
owned by the Government of the United States;
         (b)   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian
tribe;
         (c)   The government of the state or any agency or department thereof;
or
         (d)   Units of local government.
      FEDERAL AND STATE LAW. Any and all applicable statutes and/or regulations
of the United States and State of Illinois, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   Wage and sick leave laws.
      (1)   Employers shall comply with all federal and state laws governing
the rate, eligibility, applicability, accrual, use or payment of/for sick leave
and minimum wage.
      (2)   No employers shall have, or be obligated to adhere to, any
additional or greater obligations with respect to sick leave or minimum wage
than as required or established by federal and state law.
      (3)   Any additional obligation with respect to sick leave or minimum
wages imposed by law (including county ordinances), other than federal and
state law, upon any employer is hereby declared to be, and shall be deemed to
be, in conflict with this section, and superseded and preempted hereby, and
shall have no force, effect or applicability to such employer.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed or interpreted as affecting
or preventing an employer from imposing upon itself any additional or greater
obligation with respect to sick leave or minimum wage voluntarily or by
contract.
(Ord. 17-O-2181, passed 6-21-2017)
EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
§ 35.040 HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   Employees shall be entitled to 11 paid holidays per year, or the
Monday following each such holiday when said holiday falls on a Sunday or the
previous Friday off if the holiday falls on a Saturday; except that, the city
shall follow the federal holiday schedule if it is conflicting with these
provisions:
      (1)   New Year’s Eve;
      (2)   New Year’s Day;
      (3)   Good Friday;
      (4)   Memorial Day;
      (5)   Fourth of July;
      (6)   Labor Day;
      (7)   Thanksgiving;
      (8)   Friday following Thanksgiving;
      (9)   Christmas Eve;
      (10)   Christmas Day; and
      (11)   Martin Luther King, Jr. Day.
   (B)   In the event that an employee shall be required to work on one or more
such holidays, he or she may, subject to the approval of the Mayor, schedule an
alternate day off at any time prior to the end of the then current fiscal year.
In the event that no such alternate day off has been scheduled and taken prior
to the end of the then current fiscal year, the employee shall be compensated
on the basis of the union contract or the rules governing the particular
department. Any other employee not covered by a union contract shall be
compensated one eight- hour day’s pay when no alternate day off has been
scheduled to compensate for working on a holiday.
   (C)   Head of departments and officers appointed by the Mayor are not
entitled to holiday compensation beyond the amounts budgeted and appropriated
in the annual appropriations ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 35.30) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971; Ord. 74-O-870, passed - -
1974; Ord. 76-O-909, passed - -1976; Ord. 85-O-1198, passed 11-20-1985; Ord.
87-O-1258, passed 1-21-1987; Ord. 88-O-1300, passed 2-3-1988)
§ 35.041 VACATION.
   (A)   Vacations shall be accrued at the following rate:
 
Years of Service Amount of Vacation (Weeks)
                 Managerial Non-Managerial
1 to 4           3          2
5 to 9           4          3
10 to 14         5          4
15+              5          5
 
   (B)   (1)   All vacation days shall be used within the fiscal year (May 1
through April 30). All vacation days shall be used in increments of four hours
or eight hours. Appointed personnel who have never been employed with the city
shall have no vacation days during their first year of employment with the
city.
      (2)   Department heads, managers, supervisors and non-managerial
appointed personnel must obtain written permission from their department head
and/or Mayor in order to carry over any vacation days (up to ten days) into the
next fiscal year (May 1). All carried over vacation days shall be used by
August 1 or forfeited. All vacation time must be scheduled in accordance with
the operational needs of the city. Any unused vacation shall be paid to the
employee upon separation from an appointed position.
(Prior Code, § 35.31) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971; Ord. 74-O-879, passed - -
1974; Ord. 14-O-2091, passed 4-16-2014)
§ 35.042 SICK LEAVE.
 
Managerial Non-Managerial
12 days    10 days
 
   (A)   Sick days shall be used for illness, injury or disability and not as
additional time off from employment. Sick days shall be used for the necessary
care and attendance for the employee and/or member of an employee’s immediate
family and doctor’s appointments. All sick days shall be used in increments of
four hours or eight hours.
   (B)   An employee may accumulate up to 90 sick days. Sick days shall not be
paid to an employee upon separation from the city.
(Prior Code, § 35.32) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971; Ord. 74-O-780, passed - -
1974; Ord. 82-O-1090, passed 7-19-1982; Ord. 86-O-1209, passed 2-5-1986; Ord.
14-O-2091, passed 4-16-2014)
§ 35.043 LEAVES OF ABSENCE.
   (A)   Temporary leaves. Temporary leaves of absence, with or without pay,
may be granted and renewed by the Mayor (or department head) for such periods
as he may consider justifiable. Such leaves may be revoked by him at any time
after reasonable notice has been sent to the last known address of the
individual concerned. Leaves of absence for military service shall be granted
for the length of such service and shall not be revoked during such time.
Unauthorized leaves of absence shall constitute grounds for discharge.
   (B)   Personal days.
 
Years of Service Managerial Non-Managerial
1 to 4 years     1 day      1 day
5 to 9 years     2 days     2 days
10 to 14 years   3 days     3 days
15+ years        4 days     4 days
 
      (1)   A personal day may used at an employee’s discretion for any reason
other than illness or vacation. All personal days shall be shall be used in
increments of four hours or eight hours.
      (2)   All personal days shall be used within the fiscal year (May 1
through April 30) or forfeited. Personal days shall not be paid to an employee
upon separation from the city.
(Prior Code, § 35.33) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971; Ord. 14-O-2091, passed 4-
16-2014)
§ 35.044 LONGEVITY PAY.
   Employees shall receive longevity benefits according to the following
schedule:
   (A)   Following three years of service: 2.5% of base pay;
   (B)   Following six years of service: 5% of base pay;
   (C)   Following nine years of service: 7.5% of base pay; and
   (D)   Following 12 years of service: 10% of base pay.
(Prior Code, § 35.34) (Ord. 74-O-870, passed - -1974)
§ 35.045 AUTOMOBILE ALLOWANCE.
   Whenever a person in the classified city service uses his or her private
automobile in the conduct of official city business, he or she shall be
compensated for such use at the rate of $0.07 per mile; provided that, such use
is authorized by the department head and approved by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 35.35) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971)
§ 35.046 NON-UNION EMPLOYEES’ BENEFITS.
   (A)   Effective 1-1-2004, appointed non-union employees of the city are not
eligible for benefits other than salary, vacation at the rate of two weeks per
year and sick leave at the rate of two weeks per year, based upon a certificate
as to the employee’s inability to work signed by a physician. There shall be no
carryover of unused sick or vacation time from year to year.
   (B)   The city will afford the non-union employee, at his or her own
expense, an opportunity to participate in the hospitalization insurance program
provided to AFSCME union employees on the same terms, with the exception that
there will be no contribution toward the cost of such insurance made by the
city, provided application is made within the probationary employment period,
to become effective upon the successful completion of the probationary period.
   (C)   All vacation, sick leave and other benefits heretofore acquired or
accumulated by a currently employed non-union employee under prior rules,
regulations and practices shall remain viable and available for use according
to the need and requests of the employee.
(Prior Code, § 35.36) (Ord. 03-O-1773, passed 11-19-2003)
§ 35.047 UNION EMPLOYEES’ CARRYOVER OF SICK LEAVE AND VACATION.
   Each employee of the city who is covered by the collective bargaining
agreement of the city and the American Federation of State, County and
Municipal Employees shall, in addition, be governed by the following rules
concerning the use of unused and unpaid vacation and sick days at the time of
retirement:
   (A)   The employee shall be allowed to receive pay at retirement for no more
than 60 days of vacation or sick leave.
   (B)   All accumulated sick and vacation days over 60 shall be used to
convert such days to service credit as provided for by the state’s Municipal
Retirement Fund.
(Prior Code, § 35.37) (Ord. 03-O-1771, passed 11-5-2003)
§ 35.048 HEALTH INSURANCE.
   (A)   The city shall make available to personnel appointed directly from a
union and their dependents health insurance coverage in accordance with the
employee contribution schedule in the most current agreement between the city
and their respective union.
   (B)   The city shall make available to all other appointed personnel and
their dependents health insurance coverage available in accordance with the
employee contribution schedule in the most current agreement between the city
and American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME), AFL-
CIO Council 31, Local 1473.
(Ord. 14-O-2091, passed 4-16-2014)
FEDERAL OLD AGE AND SURVIVORS INSURANCE
§ 35.060 POLICY; PURPOSE.
   It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend to the
eligible employees thereof, effective as of 1-1-1958, the benefits of the
Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance System as authorized by the Federal
Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 401 et seq. and amendments thereto. In
pursuance of the policy and for that purpose, the City Treasurer shall take
such action as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or
regulations.
(Prior Code, § 35.45) (Ord. 71-O-777, passed - -1971)
§ 35.061 AGREEMENT WITH STATE.
   The Mayor and City Clerk are authorized and directed to execute an agreement
with the State Employee’s Retirement System of the state (Social Security Unit)
to secure coverage of eligible employees as provided in §
35.060 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 35.46)
§ 35.062 EMPLOYEE WITHHOLDING.
   Withholding from salaries or wages of employees for the purpose provided in
§
35.060 of this chapter are authorized to be made in the amounts and at such
times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations,
and shall be paid over to the state agency in such amounts and at such times as
are designated by state laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 35.47)
§ 35.063 CONTACTS WITH STATE AGENCY.
   Employer contributions and administrative expense shall be paid to the state
agency in accordance with applicable state law and regulations from amounts
appropriated for such purposes.
(Prior Code, § 35.48)
§ 35.064 TREASURER’S RECORDS.
   The City Treasurer shall maintain such records and submit such reports as
may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations.
(Prior Code, § 35.49)
CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES
§ 35.075 HIRING OF CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the city’s Service Commission to approve all
applicants for civil service positions or classifications prior to employment
with the city.
   (B)   (1)   When a full-time civil service position is available in any
department in the city, the department head shall notify the Civil Service
Commission of such vacancy in writing.
      (2)   The department head shall specify what position is available and
the qualifications required to fill such a vacancy.
   (C)   Whenever a part-time or temporary full-time civil service position
needs filling, the department head shall notify the Civil Service Commission in
writing of the need for a part-time or temporary full-time employee and the
position or classification which needs to be filled.
   (D)   Each department head shall provide the Civil Service Commission with a
list of full-time, part-time and temporary employees, along with their
classifications, on May 1 and November 1 of each year.
   (E)   Personnel hereinafter employed by the city must be a bona fide
resident of the city at the time of application for employment.
   (F)   (1)   All employees of the city hired as a result of a competitive
civil service examination after the passage of this chapter are required, as a
condition of their continued employment, to have their place of residence in
the city and to be bona fide residents therein.
      (2)   A BONA FIDE RESIDENT, for the purposes of this section, is a person
having a permanent domicile in the city.
(Prior Code, § 35.075) (Ord. 96-O-1583, passed 7-23-1996)
ETHICS PROVISIONS
§ 35.090 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE. Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the election, nomination or appointment of any individual to any
federal, state or local public office or office in a political organization, or
the selection, nomination or election of presidential or vice presidential
electors, but does not include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative
or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   CANDIDATE. A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for
nomination or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill
a vacancy in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot
at a regular election, as defined in § 1-3 of the Election Code, being 10 ILCS
315/1-3.
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in § 3
of the state’s Public Labor Relations Act, being 5 ILCS 315/3.
   COMPENSATED TIME. With respect to an employee, any time worked by or
credited to the employee that counts towards any minimum work time requirement
imposed as a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this
subchapter, does not include any designated holidays, vacation periods,
personal time, compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a
leave of absence. With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not
fixed, COMPENSATED TIME includes any period of time when the officer is on
premises under the control of the employer and any other time when the officer
or employee is executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
   COMPENSATORY TIME OFF. Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an
employee to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the
minimum work time required of that employee as a condition of his or her
employment.
   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as that term is defined in § 9-1.4 of the
Election Code, being 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
   EMPLOYEE. A person employed by the city, whether on a full-time or part-time
basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and
control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is
to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
   EMPLOYER. The City of Markham.
   GIFT. Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance
or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including but not
limited to cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements related
to or attributable to government employment or the official position of an
officer or employee.
   LEAVE OF ABSENCE. Any period during which an employee does not receive:
      (1)   Compensation for employment;
      (2)   Service credit towards pension benefits; and
      (3)   Health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
   OFFICER. A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created
by statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
   POLITICAL ACTIVITY. Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities:
      (1)   Relating to the support or opposition of any executive, legislative
or administrative action;
      (2)   Relating to collective bargaining; or
      (3)   That are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
   POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A party, committee, association, fund or other
organization, whether or not incorporated, that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state’s Board of Election or a county clerk under § 9-
3 of the Election Code, being 10 ILCS 5/9-3, but only with regard to those
activities that require filing with the state’s Board of Elections or a county
clerk.
   PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
      (1)   Preparing for, organizing or participating in any political
meeting, political rally, political demonstration or other political event;
      (2)   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the
purchase of, selling, distributing or receiving payment for tickets for any
political fundraiser, political meeting or other political event;
      (3)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of or preparing any document
or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution;
      (4)   Planning, conducting or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes for or against any referendum question;
      (5)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters
in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question;
      (6)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question;
      (7)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls;
      (8)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question;
      (9)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office
in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office;
         (10)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires;
         (11)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature , campaign signs or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question;
         (12)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question;
         (13)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question;
         (14)   Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party
convention; and
         (15)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
   PROHIBITED SOURCE. Any person or entity who:
      (1)   Is seeking official action:
         (a)   By an officer; or
         (b)   By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee.
      (2)   Does business or seeks to do business:
         (a)   With the officer; or
         (b)   With an employee, or with the officer or another employee
directing that employee.
      (3)   Conducts activities regulated:
         (a)   By the officer; or
         (b)   By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee.
      (4)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance
or non-performance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
(Prior Code, § 35.70) (Ord. 04-O-1804, passed 7-7-2004)
§ 35.091 PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time, as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the city in
connection with any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity:
      (1)   As part of that officer or employee’s duties;
      (2)   As a condition of employment; or
      (3)   During any compensated time off, such as holidays, vacation or
personal time off.
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this subchapter.
   (E)   No person either in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment, or in a position the salary for which is paid
in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to federal standards
for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant-in-aid
programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely because he
or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a political party
or of a political organization or club.
(Prior Code, § 35.71) (Ord. 04-O-1804, passed 7-7-2004)
§ 35.092 GIFT BAN.
   Except as permitted by this subchapter, no officer or employee and no spouse
of or immediate family member living with any officer or employee, collectively
referred to herein as “recipients”, shall intentionally solicit or accept any
gift from any prohibited source, as defined herein, or which is otherwise
prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer
or make a gift that violates this section.
(Prior Code, § 35.72) (Ord. 04-O-1804, passed 7-7-2004)
§ 35.093 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Section
35.092 of this chapter is not applicable to the following:
      (1)   Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public;
      (2)   Anything for which the officer or employee or his or her spouse or
immediate family members pays the fair market value;
      (3)   Any contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code, or
activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate;
      (4)   Educational materials and missions;
      (5)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business;
      (6)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the
individual as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt,
great aunt, great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife,
grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-
law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather,
stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half
sister and including the father, mother, grandfather or grandmother of the
individual’s spouse and the individual’s fiancé or fiancee;
      (7)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship, unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
         (a)   The history of the relationship between the individual giving
the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of
gifts between those individuals;
         (b)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual
who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or
business reimbursement for the gift; and
         (c)   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual
who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other
officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members.
      (8)   Food or refreshments not exceeding $75 per person in value on a
single calendar day; provided that, the food or refreshments are consumed on
the premises from which they were purchased or prepared, or catered. For the
purpose of this section, CATERED means food or refreshments that are purchased
ready to consume which are delivered by any means;
      (9)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities, or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee, if the
benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position or
employment of the officer or employee and are customarily provided to others in
similar circumstances;
         (10)   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts. For the
purposes of this section, INTRA- GOVERNMENTAL GIFT means any gift given to an
officer or employee from another officer or employee and INTER-GOVERNMENTAL
GIFT means any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee
of another governmental entity;
         (11)   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death; and/or
         (12)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than $100.
   (B)   Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive
and independent of every other.
(Prior Code, § 35.73) (Ord. 04-O-1804, passed 7-7-2004)
§ 35.094 DISPOSITION OF GIFTS.
   An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member
living with the officer or employee, does not violate this subchapter if the
recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited
source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an
appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under I.R.C. § 501(c)
(3), as now or hereafter amended, renumbered or succeeded.
(Prior Code, § 35.74) (Ord. 04-O-1804, passed 7-7-2004)
§ 35.095 ETHICS ADVISOR.
   (A)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council members
shall designate an Ethics Advisor for the city. The duties of the Ethics
Advisor may be delegated to an officer or employee of the city unless the
position has been created as an office by the city.
   (B)   The Ethics Advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and
employees of the city concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the
provisions of this subchapter and state ethics laws. The Ethics Advisor shall
perform such other duties as may be delegated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 35.75) (Ord. 04-O-1804, passed 7-7-2004)
§ 35.096 ETHICS COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Ethics
Commission appointed by the Mayor. The Commission shall be comprised of three
members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council
members. No person shall be appointed as a member of the Commission who is
related, either by blood or by marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to
any elected officer of the city.
   (B)   At the first meeting of the Commission, the initial appointees shall
draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two Commissioners shall serve two-
year terms and the third Commissioner shall serve a one-year term. Thereafter,
all Commissioners shall be appointed to two-year terms. Commissioners may be
re-appointed to serve subsequent terms.
   (C)   At the first meeting of the Commission, the Commissioners shall choose
a Chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson or any two Commissioners. A quorum shall consist of two
Commissioners and official action by the Commission shall require the
affirmative vote of two members.
   (D)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council members,
may remove a Commissioner in case of incompetency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office after service on the Commissioner by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a copy of the written charges against the
Commissioner and after providing an opportunity to be heard in person or by
counsel upon not less than ten days’ notice. Vacancies shall be filled in the
same manner as original appointments.
   (E)   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its
duties and the exercise of its powers;
      (2)   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to
investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for
disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with §
35.999 of this chapter and refer violations of §§
35.091 or
35.092 of this chapter to the appropriate attorney for prosecution. The
Commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a written complaint
alleging a violation of this subchapter and not upon its own prerogative;
      (3)   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigation and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated the provisions of this subchapter;
      (4)   To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production
of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all
officers and employees of the city to cooperate with the Commission during the
course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with requests by
the Commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge; and
      (5)   The powers and duties of the Commission are limited to matters
clearly within the purview of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 35.76) (Ord. 04-O-1804, passed 7-7-2004)
§ 35.097 COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Complaints alleging a violation of this subchapter shall be filed with
the Ethics Commission.
   (B)   Within three business days after the receipt of a complaint, the
Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy of
the complaint. The Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within three business days after receipt by the Commission. The notices to the
respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time and
place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to
establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
   (C)   (1)   Upon not less than 48 hours’ public notice, the Commission shall
meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the complaint is deemed
sufficient to allege a violation of this subchapter, to determine whether there
is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by the complainant, to
proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the extent authorized by
the Open Meetings Act, being 5 ILCS 120. The Commission shall issue notice to
the complainant and the respondent of the Commission’s ruling on the
sufficiency of the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed
within seven business days after receiving the complaint.
      (2)   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of §
35.092 of this chapter and there is a determination of probable cause, then the
Commission’s notice to the parties shall include a hearing date scheduled
within four weeks after the complaint’s receipt. Alternatively, the Commission
may elect to notify in writing the attorney designated by the corporate
authorities to prosecute such actions and request that the complaint be
adjudicated judicially. If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a
violation or if there is no determination of probable cause, then the
Commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the parties of the decision to dismiss the complaint, and that notice shall be
made public.
      (3)   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of §
35.091 of this chapter, then the Commission shall notify in writing the
attorney designated by the corporate authorities to prosecute such actions and
shall transmit to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in
the custody of the Commission concerning the alleged violation.
   (D)   On the scheduled date and upon at least 48 hours’ public notice of the
meeting, the Commission shall conduct a hearing on the complaint and shall
allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and evidence. The
hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the Open Meetings
Act, being 5 ILCS 120.
   (E)   Within 30 days after the date the hearing or any recessed hearing is
concluded, the Commission shall either dismiss the complaint or issue a
recommendation for discipline to the alleged violator and to the Mayor, or
impose a fine upon the violator, or both. The particular findings in the case,
any recommendation for discipline, and any fine imposed shall be a matter of
public information.
   (F)   (1)   If the hearing was closed to the public, the respondent may file
a written demand for a public hearing on the complaint within seven business
days after issuance of the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a
fine, or both. The filing of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the
recommendation or fine.
      (2)   Within 14 days after receiving the demand, the Commission shall
conduct a public hearing on the complaint upon at least 48 hours’ public notice
of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony and
evidence. Within seven days thereafter, the Commission shall publicly issue a
final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the Mayor or impose a fine
upon the violator, or both.
   (G)   If a complaint is filed during the 60 days preceding the date of any
election at which the respondent is a candidate, the Commission shall render
its decision as required under division (E) within seven days after the
complaint is filed, and during the seven days preceding that election, the
Commission shall render such decision before the date of that election, if
possible.
   (H)   A complaint alleging the violation of this subchapter must be filed
within one year after the alleged violation.
(Prior Code, § 35.77) (Ord. 04-O-1804, passed 7-7-2004)
FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY
§ 35.110 ELIGIBILITY.
   To be eligible for the city’s Family and Medical Leave Policy, hereinafter
called “FMLA” benefits, an employee must:
   (A)   Have worked for the city for a total of 12 months; and
   (B)   Have worked at least 1,250 hours in the 12-month period preceding the
FMLA leave.
(Prior Code, § 39.25) (Ord. 04-O-1798, passed 4-21-2004)
§ 35.111 LEAVE ENTITLEMENT.
   (A)   A covered employee is entitled to up to a total of 12 weeks of unpaid
leave in a 12-month period for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   For the birth of a son or daughter, and to care for the newborn
child;
      (2)   For the placement with the employee of a child for adoption or
foster care, and to care for the newly-placed child;
      (3)   To care for an immediate family member, spouse, child or parent
(biological or one who stood in loco parentis, but not a parent-in law) with a
serious health condition; and
      (4)   When the employee is unable to work because of a serious health
condition;
   (B)   Leave to care for a newborn child or for a newly-placed child must
conclude within 12 weeks after the birth or placement.
   (C)   Spouses employed by the same employer may be limited to a combined
total of 12 work weeks of family leave for the following reasons:
      (1)   Birth or care of a child;
      (2)   For the placement of a child for adoption or foster care and to
care for the newly-placed child; and
      (3)   To care for an employee’s parent who has a serious health
condition.
   (D)   Under some circumstances, employees may take FMLA leave intermittently
which means taking leave in blocks of time, or by reducing their normal weekly
or daily work schedule.
   (E)   If FMLA leave is for birth and care or placement for adoption or
foster care, use of intermittent leave is subject to the employer’s approval.
   (F)   FMLA leave may be taken intermittently whenever medically necessary to
care for a seriously ill family member or because the employee is seriously ill
and unable to work.
(Prior Code, § 39.26) (Ord. 04-O-1798, passed 4-21-2004)
§ 35.112 LEAVE AVAILABILITY CALCULATION.
   The city has adopted the “rolling 12-month period” method of calculating
available FMLA leave. In order to determine the amount of available FMLA leave,
the calculation is made each time an employee commences any FMLA leave from
that date, the preceding 12-month period is examined. Any FMLA leave used
during that preceding 12-month period is examined. Any FMLA leave used during
that preceding 12 months is deducted from the 12 weeks annual leave granted by
the FMLA. The employee is entitled to take no more than the remaining balance
of the FMLA leave.
(Prior Code, § 39.27) (Ord. 04-O-1798, passed 4-21-2004)
§ 35.113 SUBSTITUTION OF PAID LEAVE.
   (A)   Any employee taking FMLA leave is required to substitute and use any
remaining paid leave benefits which are available or become available during
the FMLA leave.
   (B)   This includes vacation, personal and sick days. This paid leave will
run concurrently with and not in addition to FMLA leave.
(Prior Code, § 39.28) (Ord. 04-O-1798, passed 4-21-2004)
§ 35.114 MEDICAL INSURANCE BENEFITS WHILE ON FMLA LEAVE.
   (A)   The city will maintain in force the medical insurance benefits
provided to the employee prior to taking FMLA leave, under the same terms and
conditions as existed prior to leave. If the employee was required to pay a
portion of the premiums for coverage, that obligation continues while on leave.
   (B)   Payment is expected to be made in the same amounts, and at the same
time (i.e., each payroll date) as was made while working. If any payment is
more than 30 days late, medical coverage will be canceled without further
notice.
   (C)   An employee can elect not to continue medical coverage while on leave.
If this election is made, the city will immediately offer COBRA coverage.
   (D)   If the coverage is continued while on FMLA leave, and the employee
does not return to work at the end of the FMLA leave period, the city will bill
the employee for the amount of premiums paid by the city during the leave
period.
   (E)   No other employment benefits provided by the city are continued during
FMLA leave. All such benefits are instead held in abeyance until the employee
returns to work.
(Prior Code, § 39.29) (Ord. 04-O-1798, passed 4-21-2004)
§ 35.115 PROCEDURE FOR REQUESTING FMLA LEAVE.
   (A)   Any employee desiring to take FMLA leave should contact his or her
supervisor as soon as possible.
   (B)    A request for FMLA leave for the birth of a child or placement of a
foster or adopted child should be made at least before the leave can commence,
or in emergency cases as soon as possible. Leave for any other reason allowed
by the FMLA should be requested as soon as the employee knows the need for FMLA
leave.
   (C)   Any employee taking leave for his or her own serious health condition
or that of a statutory family member must submit a written medical certificate
issued by the attending health care provider on the form which may be obtained
from the employee’s supervisor or the Human Resource Department. Failure to
provide such a certification within 15 days of making the leave request or
commencing leave, whichever is sooner, will result in termination of the leave
and a requirement that the employee immediately return to work, or face
discipline under the city’s attendance policy.
(Prior Code, § 39.30) (Ord. 04-O-1798, passed 4-21-2004)
§ 35.116 CONSEQUENCES OF TAKING FMLA LEAVE.
   (A)   Any FMLA leave taken will be counted against the 12 weeks’ leave per
FMLA leave period allowed by statute. Any employee seeking to return to work
after leave taken because of the employee’s own serious health condition must
submit to a medical certification of fitness to return to duty signed by the
attending health care provider before the employee will be allowed to return to
work. Failure to comply with this requirement does not extend the leave.
   (B)   On return from FMLA leave, the employee will be returned to the same
position the employee held when leave commenced, or to an equivalent position
with equivalent benefits, pay and other terms and conditions of employment.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to deny restoration to key employees, as
defined by the FMLA regulations, where restoration will cause substantial and
grievous economic injury to the operation of the city.
   (D)   If the employee is unable to perform an essential function of the
position because of a physical or mental condition, including the continuation
of a serious health condition, the employee has no right to restoration to
another position under the FMLA. The employee may, however, fall under the
Americans with Disability Act (ADA).
(Prior Code, § 39.31) (Ord. 04-O-1798, passed 4-21-2004)
§ 35.117 REFERENCE TO FMLA NOTICE POSTER.
   The city has posted in each department a poster setting forth the relevant
provisions of the FMLA. The terms of that poster are incorporated in this
subchapter as if they were specifically set forth. Each employee is charged
with familiarizing himself or herself with the contents of that poster
concerning all applicable employee rights and obligations under the FMLA.
(Prior Code, § 39.32) (Ord. 04-O-1798, passed 4-21-2004)
SEXUAL HARASSMENT
§ 35.130 PROHIBITION.
   It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person’s sex. The courts
have determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title
VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have
a right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual
harassment is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders
and sexual orientations, it is a policy of the city to prohibit harassment of
any person by any municipal official, municipal agent, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All municipal
officials, municipal agents, municipal employees and municipal agencies or
offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person, regardless of any
employment relationship or lack thereof.
(Ord. 18-O-2191, passed 1-12-2018) Penalty, see §
35.999
§ 35.131 DEFINITION.
   (A)   This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in
the state’s Human Rights Act, which currently defines SEXUAL HARASSMENT as any
unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a
sexual nature when:
      (1)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly
a term or condition of an individual’s employment;
      (2)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual; or
      (3)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual’s work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
   (B)   Conduct which may constitute SEXUAL HARASSMENT includes:
      (1)   Verbal. Sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor and
jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature;
      (2)   Non-verbal. Suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, “catcalls”, “smacking”
or “kissing” noises;
      (3)   Visual. Posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites;
      (4)   Physical. Touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault; and
      (5)   Textual/electronic. “Sexting” (electronically sending messages with
sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit
language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
   (C)   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a “reasonable person”.
(Ord. 18-O-2191, passed 1-12-2018)
§ 35.132 PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING ALLEGATION.
   (A)   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself
or himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident
(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her or his
position to the offending employee, and her or his immediate supervisor. It is
not necessary for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the
report.
   (B)   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
      (1)   Electronic/direct communication. If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her or his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
      (2)   Contact with supervisory personnel. At the same time direct
communication is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or
intimidated by the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the
immediate supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a
director of human resources, an ethics officer, the city manager or
administrator, or the chief executive officer of the municipality. The employee
experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual harassment must not assume
that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there are no witnesses and the
victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible officer, the
municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the harassment.
      (3)   Resolution outside municipality. The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
state’s Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within 180 days of the alleged
incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must
be filed within 300 days.
   (C)   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what
was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not limited
to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
   (D)   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant’s willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
(Ord. 18-O-2191, passed 1-12-2018)
§ 35.133 PROHIBITION OF RETALIATION.
   (A)   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee’s:
      (1)   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
policy;
      (2)   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy; or
      (3)   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
   (B)   For the purposes of this policy, RETALIATORY ACTION means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee’s involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this policy.
   (C)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
   (D)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the
state’s Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/15-10) provides
whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge,
suspension, demotion or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in
retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
      (1)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public
body an activity, policy or practice of any officer, member, state agency or
other state employee that the state employee reasonably believes is in
violation of a law, rule or regulation;
      (2)   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule or regulation by any officer, member, state agency or other state
employee; or
      (3)   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions
of the state’s Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
   (E)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer
may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a state or federal law, rule or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a state or federal law, rule or regulation (740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
   (F)   According to the state’s Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is a
civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire, to
retaliate against a person because he or she has opposed that which he or she
reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment,
because he or she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or
participated in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under the state’s Human
Rights Act.
   (G)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may
file a retaliation charge, due within 150 days (IDHR) or 300 days (EEOC) of the
alleged retaliation.
(Ord. 18-O-2191, passed 1-12-2018)
§ 35.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of §
35.091 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (2)   Any person who intentionally violates any provision of §
35.092 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than
$1,001, and not more than $5,000.
      (3)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a
violation of any provision of this subchapter to the local enforcement
authorities, the state’s attorney or any other law enforcement official may be
punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than 364 days, and may be fined in an
amount not to exceed $2,500.
      (4)   (a)   A violation of §
35.091 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney
for the city by filing in the Circuit Court an information, or sworn complaint,
charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules
of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt
of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
         (b)   A violation of §
35.092 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an
attorney for the city, or, if an Ethics Commission has been created, by the
Commission through the designated administrative procedure.
      (5)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of §§
35.091 and
35.092 of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge.
      (6)   The Commission may fine any person who intentionally violates any
provision of §
35.092 of this chapter in an amount of not less than $1,001, and not more than
$5,000. The Commission may fine any person who knowingly files a frivolous
complaint alleging a violation of this subchapter in an amount of not less than
$1,001, and not more than $5,000. The Commission may recommend any appropriate
discipline up to and including discharge.
(Prior Code, § 35.78)
   (C)   (1)   Consequences of a violation of the prohibition on sexual
harassment. In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable
pursuant to municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee
handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this
policy or the prohibition on sexual harassment contained in 5 ILCS 430/5-65,
may be subject to a fine of up to $5,000 per offense, applicable discipline or
discharge by the municipality and any applicable fines and penalties
established pursuant to local ordinance, state law or federal law. Each
violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the
municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty Imposed by an
ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a
state or federal agency.
      (2)   Consequences for knowingly making a false report.
         (a)   A FALSE REPORT is a report of sexual harassment made by an
accuser using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than
stopping sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A
false report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given
the seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous
report is a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any
person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any
provision of this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant
to applicable municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee
handbooks and/or collective bargaining agreements.
         (b)   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report
alleging a violation of any provision of the state’s Officials and Employees
Ethics Act to an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State Police, a
State’s Attorney, the Attorney General or any other law enforcement official is
guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an
administrative fine of up to $5,000 against any person who intentionally makes
a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.
(Ord. 04-O-1804, passed 7-7-2004; Ord. 18-O-2191, passed 1-12-2018)
CHAPTER 36: TAXATION
Section
Municipal Retailers’ Tax
   
36.001   Imposition of tax
   
36.002   Payment
Municipal Service Occupation Tax
   
36.015   Imposition of tax
   
36.016   Payment
Police Protection Tax
   
36.030   Levy of tax
   
36.031   Amount of tax
Fire Protection Tax
   
36.045   Levy of tax
Garbage Tax
   
36.060   Levy of tax
Municipal Utility Tax
   
36.075   Definitions
   
36.076   Tax imposed
   
36.077   Tax to be in addition to payment for products or services
   
36.078   Returns
   
36.079   Credit
   
36.080   Recovery of amount
   
36.081   Exemption
Motel and Hotel Accommodations Tax
   
36.095   Imposition of tax
   
36.096   Liability for tax
   
36.097   Collection of tax
   
36.098   Return required; filing
   
36.099   Books and records
   
36.100   Disposition of tax revenue
   
36.101   Non-payment; suspension of license
   
36.102   Enforcement
   
36.103   Penalty assessed
Vehicle Fuel Tax
   
36.115   Definitions
   
36.116   Tax imposed
   
36.117   Payment on retail purchase
   
36.118   Collection
   
36.119   Registration; return; filing
   
36.120   Inventory report
   
36.121   Commission on tax paid when due
   
36.122   Failure to pay or file; penalties and interest
   
36.123   Record-keeping
   
36.124   Sales and uses presumed taxable; burden of proof
   
36.125   Exemptions
Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
36.130   Tax imposed
   
36.131   Tax collection
   
36.132   Records
   
36.133   Cannabis license
Auction Tax
   
36.140   Auction tax imposed
   
36.141   Duty to file return
   
36.142   Penalty
Gas Use Tax
   
36.155   Explanation
   
36.156   Definitions
   
36.157   Tax imposed
   
36.158   Collection of tax
   
36.159   Books and records
Text Message Tax
   
36.170   Definitions
   
36.171   Tax imposed
   
36.172   Payment of retail purchase
   
36.173   Collection
   
36.174   Registration; return; filing
   
36.175   Inventory report
   
36.176   Commission on tax paid when due
   
36.177   Failure to pay or file; penalties and interest
   
36.178   Record-keeping
   
36.179   Sales and uses presumed taxable; burden of proof
   
36.180   Exemptions
Excise Tax on Liquor by the Drink
   
36.195   Definitions
   
36.196   Imposition; rate of tax
   
36.197   Collection of tax
   
36.198   Determination generally; payments
   
36.199   Deficiency determinations
   
36.200   Determination if no return is made
   
36.201   Collection of unpaid tax
   
36.202   Credits for overpayments
   
36.203   Administration; record-keeping
Liquor Tax
   
36.215   Definitions
   
36.216   Tax imposed
   
36.217   Payment on retail purchase
   
36.218   Collection
   
36.219   Registration; return; filing
   
36.220   Inventory report
   
36.221   Commission on tax paid when due
   
36.222   Failure to pay or file; penalties and interest
   
36.223   Record-keeping
   
36.224   Sale and uses presumed taxable; burden of proof
   
36.225   Exemptions
Municipal Electric Utility Tax
   
36.235   Definitions
   
36.236   Tax imposed
   
36.237   Collection of tax
   
36.238   Tax remittance and return
   
36.239   Resales
   
36.240   Books and records
   
36.241   Credits and refunds
Video Gaming Push Tax
   
36.250   Definitions
   
36.251   Tax imposed
   
36.252   Terminal operator registration
   
36.253   Collection, payment and accounting
   
36.254   Additional rules and regulations
   
36.255   Application of city code
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
   
36.270   Definitions
   
36.271   Registration of telecommunications providers
   
36.272   Fee imposed
   
36.273   Collection, enforcement and administration of fee
   
36.274   Compliance with other laws
   
36.275   Existing franchises and licenses
   
36.276   Enforcement
   
36.277   Waiver and fee implementation
Cable/Video Service Provider Fees
   
36.290   Definitions
   
36.291   Provider fee imposed
   
36.292   PEG access support fee
   
36.293   Applicable principles
   
36.294   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
36.295   Audits of service providers
   
36.296   Late fees; payments
Cable/Video Customer Service Protection Law
   
36.310   Customer Service and Privacy Protection Law
   
36.311   Enforcement
   
36.312   Customer credits
Grocery Retailers’ and Service OccupationTax
   
36.325   Municipal grocery retailers’ occupation tax imposed
   
36.326   Municipal grocery service occupation tax
   
36.327   Illinois Department of Revenue to administer both taxes
   
36.328   Clerk to file with Illinois Department of Revenue
 
   
36.999   Penalty
MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ TAX
§ 36.001 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property (excluding items of tangible personal property
titled or registered with an agency of the state; excluding sales of food for
human consumption that is to be consumed off-premises where it is sold, other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption; and excluding prescription and non- prescription
medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials,
syringes and needles used by diabetics) at retail in the city, a home rule
municipal retailers’ occupation tax at the rate of 1% on the gross receipts
from such sales made in the course of such business.
(Prior Code, § 36.001) (Ord. 69-O-719, passed - -1969; Ord. 06-O-1849, passed
3-29-2006)
§ 36.002 PAYMENT.
   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state’s
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
(Prior Code, § 36.003) (Ord. 69-O-719, passed - -1969)
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.015 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of making
sales of service in the city a home rule municipal service occupation tax at a
rate of 1% of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred
by such service persons either in the form of tangible personal property or in
the form of real estate as an incident to a sales service, excluding:
   (A)   Sales of food for human consumption that is to be consumed off-
premises where it is sold, other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food
that has been prepared for immediate consumption; and
   (B)   Prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances
and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics.
(Prior Code, § 36.015) (Ord. 69-O-720, passed - -1969; Ord. 06-O-1850, passed
3-29-2006)
§ 36.016 PAYMENT.
   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state’s
Department of Revenue the amount of tax imposed in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 36.017) (Ord. 69-O-720, passed - -1969)
POLICE PROTECTION TAX
§ 36.030 LEVY OF TAX.
   Pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-1-3, approved 5-29-1961, as
amended, commencing with the year 1970 an annual tax shall be levied on all
taxable property within the city.
(Prior Code, § 36.030) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971)
§ 36.031 AMOUNT OF TAX.
   The amount of the tax levy to be collected with the 1970 general real estate
taxes, and subsequent years, shall not exceed the rate of 0.075% of the value
as equalized or assessed on all taxable property within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 36.031) (Ord. 71-O-764, passed - -1971)
FIRE PROTECTION TAX
§ 36.045 LEVY OF TAX.
   Pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-7-1, approved 5-29-1961, as
amended, there shall be levied an annual tax of not to exceed 0.15% of the
value as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue of all taxable
property within the municipality to provide revenue for the purpose of fire
protection in the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 36.040) (Ord. 69-O-722, passed - -1969)
GARBAGE TAX
§ 36.060 LEVY OF TAX.
   (A)   The tax rate limitation for garbage fund purposes is increased by
0.04% of the full, fair cash value, as equalized or assessed by the Department
of Revenue on all the taxable property within the city.
   (B)   The increase being over and above the legal minimum of 10% of the
full, fair cash value, as equalized or assessed by the Department of Revenue,
as heretofore provided in Illinois Municipal Code, Ch. 24, § 11-9-4.
(Prior Code, § 36.050) (Ord. 607, passed - -1965)
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
§ 36.075 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for the distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas and electricity for use and not for resale, as the
case may be, and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, otherwise, including cash,
credit, services and property of every kind and material and all services
rendered therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of
the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses
whatsoever.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint-stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of the state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
(Prior Code, § 36.060) (Ord. 86-O-1232, passed - -1986; Ord. 93-O-1475, passed
6-16-1993)
§ 36.076 TAX IMPOSED.
   A municipal utility tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following
occupations or privileges:
   (A)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling natural gas, or its derivative, for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the city, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the
gross receipts therefrom; and
   (B)   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing
or selling electricity for use or consumption within the corporate limits of
the city, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the gross receipts
therefrom.
(Prior Code, § 36.061) (Ord. 86-O-1232, passed - -1986; Ord. 93-O-1475, passed
6-16-1993)
§ 36.077 TAX TO BE IN ADDITION TO PAYMENT FOR PRODUCTS OR SERVICES.
   The municipal utility tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or
value of products or services furnished, to the city by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or
installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires,
pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s business.
(Prior Code, § 36.062) (Ord. 86-O-1232, passed - -1986; Ord. 93-O-1475, passed
6-16-1993)
§ 36.078 RETURNS.
   (A)   (1)   On or before December 31 of each year, each taxpayer shall make
a return to the City Treasurer for the months of August, September and October
of said year, stating:
         (a)   His or her name;
         (b)   His or her principal place of business;
         (c)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed;
         (d)   Amount of tax; and
         (e)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may, from time to time, require.
      (2) Effective January 2010 and on or before the last day of every month
thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a like return to the City Treasurer for a
corresponding month’s period. Any amounts previously due to be paid quarterly
shall be due and paid by the taxpayer by the last day of the month of January
2010.
   (B)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the Treasurer the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that, in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he or she so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed), with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts.
(Prior Code, § 36.063) (Ord. 86-O-1232, passed - -1986; Ord. 93-O-1475, passed
6-16-1993; Ord. 10-O-1965, passed 1-6-2010)
§ 36.079 CREDIT.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that, no amounts erroneously paid more than three
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
(Prior Code, § 36.064) (Ord. 86-O-1232, passed - -1986; Ord. 93-O-1475, passed
6-16-1993)
§ 36.080 RECOVERY OF AMOUNT.
   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such
amount.
(Prior Code, § 36.065) (Ord. 86-O-1232, passed - -1986; Ord. 93-O-1475, passed
6-16-1993)
§ 36.081 EXEMPTION.
   No tax is imposed by this subchapter with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not,
under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by the state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas, or electricity or engaged in the business of transmitting
messages, be subject to taxation under the provisions of this subchapter for
such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions
of the Municipal Retailer’s Occupation Tax Act, authorized by § 8-11-1 of the
Illinois Municipal Code.
(Prior Code, § 36.066) (Ord. 86-O-1232, passed - -1986; Ord. 93-O-1475, passed
6-16-1993)
MOTEL AND HOTEL ACCOMMODATIONS TAX
§ 36.095 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is hereby imposed and shall immediately accrue and be collected as a
tax, as herein provided, upon the rental or leasing of any motel or hotel
accommodations in the city on or after 3-1-1997, at a rate of 6% of the gross
rental or leasing charge for each motel or hotel room rented for every 24-hour
period or any fraction thereof; provided that, the tax shall not be levied and
collected upon or from any person or firm which rents a motel or hotel room for
more than 30 consecutive days or to a person who works and lives in the same
motel or hotel facility.
(Prior Code, § 36.080) (Ord. 97-O-1597, passed 1-2-1997)
§ 36.096 LIABILITY FOR TAX.
   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax shall be
borne by the lessee or tenant of any such motel or hotel accommodations. The
tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and all other taxes. It shall be
the duty of every owner, firm, manager or operator of hotel or motel
accommodations to secure the tax from the lessee or tenant of the motel or
hotel accommodations and pay over to the Treasurer of the city the tax under
rules and regulations prescribed by the Treasurer and as otherwise provided in
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 36.081) (Ord. 97-O-1597, passed 1-2-1997)
§ 36.097 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   The tax levied herein shall be secured by the motel or hotel owner, manager
or operator from the lessee or tenant when collecting the price, charge or rent
to which it applies. Every lessee or tenant shall be given a bill, invoice,
receipt or other statement or memorandum of the price, charge or rent payable
upon which the hotel accommodations tax shall be stated, charged and shown
separately. The motel or hotel accommodations tax shall be paid to the person
required to collect it as trustee for and on behalf of the city.
(Prior Code, § 36.082) (Ord. 97-O-1597, passed 1-2-1997)
§ 36.098 RETURN REQUIRED; FILING.
   Every owner, firm, manager or operator of motel or hotel accommodations
within the city shall file a sworn tax return on a monthly basis with the
Treasurer of the city, upon such forms as provided by the Treasurer, showing
motel or hotel accommodations leased or rented during the preceding month and
tax receipts received and remitted. At the time of filing of the tax return,
the owner, firm, manager or operator of motel or hotel accommodations shall pay
to the Treasurer all taxes due for the period to which the return applies. The
remittance and return shall be due on the last day of the month following the
month for which the return and remittance is made.
(Prior Code, § 36.083) (Ord. 97-O-1597, passed 1-2-1997)
§ 36.099 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every owner, firm, manager or operator of motel or hotel accommodations with
the city shall keep books and records showing the prices, rents or charges made
or charged and occupancies taxable under this subchapter. The Treasurer or his
or her designee shall, at all reasonable times, have full access to the books
and records.
(Prior Code, § 36.084) (Ord. 97-O-1597, passed 1-2-1997)
§ 36.100 DISPOSITION OF TAX REVENUE.
   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this subchapter,
including penalties and interest, shall be paid into the General Corporate Fund
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 36.085) (Ord. 97-O-1597, passed 1-2-1997)
§ 36.101 NON-PAYMENT; SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   Should the Mayor of the city find, after a hearing conducted by him or her
on not less than five days’ notice to the owner, firm, manager or operator of
motel or hotel accommodations within the city, that the owner, firm, manager or
operator has wilfully failed to pay the tax imposed by this subchapter, the
Mayor may suspend, revoke or cancel all city licenses, permits or certificates
held by the owner, firm, manager or operator within the city. A finding by the
Mayor under this section shall not relieve the owner, firm, manager or operator
of motel or hotel accommodations within the city of liability for the payment
of the taxes as may be due the city, nor from prosecution therefor.
(Prior Code, § 36.086) (Ord. 97-O-1597, passed 1-2-1997)
§ 36.102 ENFORCEMENT.
   Whenever any owner, firm, manager or operator of motel or hotel
accommodations within the city shall fail to pay any tax due under this
subchapter the City Attorney shall, at the request of the Mayor or City
Treasurer, institute an action to enforce and collect payment for the tax due
in any court of competent jurisdiction within the state.
(Prior Code, § 36.087) (Ord. 97-O-1597, passed 1-2-1997)
§ 36.103 PENALTY ASSESSED.
   (A)   If, for any reason, any tax due under this subchapter is not paid when
due, a penalty of 18% per annum shall be assessed against the unpaid amount.
The amount shall be added to the amount due and collected from the owner, firm,
manager or operator of the motel or hotel which has failed to pay the tax when
due.
   (B)   Upon first determining that a return has not been filed when due or
that a payment of taxes has not been made when due, the Treasurer of the city
shall immediately compute the penalty then due and issue a statement of unpaid
taxes and/or notice of failure to file return to the owner, firm, manager or
operator of motel or hotel accommodations with the city with a copy of the
notice and/or statement to the Mayor of the city.
(Prior Code, § 36.088) (Ord. 97-O-1597, passed 1-2-1997)
VEHICLE FUEL TAX
§ 36.115 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “City of Markham
Vehicle Fuel Tax Ordinance” and the tax imposed herein shall be known and cited
as the “Markham Vehicle Fuel Tax”.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTOR or VEHICLE FUEL DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who produces,
refines, blends, compounds or manufactures vehicle fuel in the city, or
transports or has transported vehicle fuel to any location in the city, or
receives in the city vehicle fuel, on which the city’s Vehicle Fuel Tax has not
been paid, or sells vehicle fuel to a retail dealer for resale in the city.
DISTRIBUTORS shall include any person who transports vehicle fuel into the city
or receives vehicle fuel in the city for his or her own use and consumption,
and not sale or resale.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
corporation, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver, trustee,
conservator, legal representative or other legally recognized entity.
      RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VEHICLE FUEL DEALER. Any person who is engaged in
the business of selling vehicle fuel in the city to a purchaser for the
purchaser’s use or consumption, and not for resale in any form.
      SALE, RESALE or PURCHASE. Any transfer of ownership or title or both, any
exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by
any means whatsoever for consideration.
      SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale to a person for that person’s use or consumption
and not for resale to another.
      TAX. Markham Vehicle Fuel Tax.
      USE. The exercise of any right to or power over vehicle fuel incident to
the ownership thereof, including, but not limited to, the receipt of vehicle
fuel by any person into a fuel supply tank of a vehicle.
      VEHICLE. Any machine or device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a rail, street, road highway or
otherwise upon land, in or upon water or through the air. VEHICLE includes
without limitation automobiles, trucks, buses, trains, motorcycles, boats,
airplanes and helicopters.
      VEHICLE FUEL. Any volatile and inflammable liquid or gas produced,
blended or compounded for the purpose of or which is suitable for operating a
vehicle, or which is used in propelling a vehicle. VEHICLE FUEL includes
without limitations gasoline, gasohol, diesel oil, motor benzol, motor benzene,
propane gas fuel, kerosene and “special fuel”, as defined in the state’s Motor
Fuel Tax Law.
(Ord. 09-O-1953, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.116 TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax hereby imposed upon the privilege of purchasing or using, in the city,
vehicle fuel purchased in a sale at retail. The tax shall be at a rate of $0.03
per gallon of vehicle fuel. The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment
of the tax shall be upon the purchaser or user of the vehicle fuel, and nothing
in this subchapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of
selling or distributing vehicle fuel. It shall be a violation of this
subchapter for any distributor or retail dealer to fail to add this tax to the
retail price of vehicle fuel or to absorb the tax. The tax shall be in addition
to any and all other taxes.
(Ord. 09-O-1953, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.117 PAYMENT ON RETAIL PURCHASE.
   “Use in the city” shall be deemed to occur only at the place in the city
where the vehicle fuel is transferred into the vehicle by which it is to be
consumed. To the extent that a person has paid the tax imposed herein on the
retail purchase of vehicle fuel, he or she shall be exempt from the payment of
and liability for said tax on the use of such fuel.
(Ord. 09-O-1953, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.118 COLLECTION.
   (A)   The city’s Vehicle Fuel Tax shall be collected by each vehicle fuel
distributor who sells such fuel to a retail vehicle fuel dealer doing business
in the city. Any distributor who shall pay the tax to the city shall collect
the tax from any retail dealer to whom the distributor sells vehicle fuel. The
retail dealer shall in turn collect the tax from the purchaser of the vehicle
fuel. Any distributor who sells vehicle fuel directly to a purchaser or user,
for delivery in the city, and not for resale, shall collect the tax from the
purchaser or user.
   (B)   If any retail vehicle fuel dealer receives vehicle fuel upon which the
city’s Vehicle Fuel Tax has not been collected by the distributor, the retail
dealer, shall remit such tax directly to the City Clerk by the last day of the
month following the month in which he or she received such vehicle fuel, and
shall collect such tax from his or her purchasers.
   (C)   If any purchaser or user receives vehicle fuel upon which the city’s
Vehicle Fuel Tax has not been collected by the distributor or retail dealer,
such purchaser or user shall pay the tax directly to the City Clerk by the last
day of the month following the month in which such purchaser or user made the
taxable purchase or use of the vehicle fuel.
   (D)   Any remittance required to be made directly to the city shall be made
to the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a remittance form prescribed by
the City Clerk.
   (E)   Any person who collects the city’s Vehicle Fuel Tax shall do so as a
trustee for and on account of the city.
(Ord. 09-O-1953, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.119 REGISTRATION; RETURN; FILING.
   Every vehicle fuel distributor doing business on 7-15-2009 shall register
with the City Clerk by                     . Every person becoming a
distributor after that date shall register with the City Clerk within 30 days
after the commencement of such business. Every distributor shall file each
month with the City Clerk, a remittance return containing a report of his or
her sale of vehicle fuel to retail dealers or users in the city occurring in
the prior month. The return shall be in a form prescribed and furnished by the
City Clerk. If mailed, the return must be postmarked on or before the last day
of the month following the month for which the report is due. Each such return
shall be accompanied by a remittance of the appropriate amount of tax
applicable to the sales reported. Payment shall be made to the City Clerk.
(Ord. 09-O-1953, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.120 INVENTORY REPORT.
   By                   , every retail vehicle fuel dealer shall file with the
City Clerk, on forms supplied by the City Clerk for that purpose, an inventory
of all vehicle fuel in the retail dealer’s possession on                  at
12:01 a.m. The owner or chief executive officer of the retail dealer shall sign
the inventory report and attest under oath to its accuracy. With the inventory
report, the retail dealer shall pay the city’s Vehicle Fuel Tax due on the sale
of all vehicle fuel in the retail dealer’s possession on first day of each
month at 12:01 a.m. and for which such tax has not been collected on behalf of
the city by a vehicle fuel distributor.
(Ord. 09-O-1953, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.121 COMMISSION ON TAX PAID WHEN DUE.
   A distributor or retail dealer remitting the tax to the city shall be
entitled to a commission of 1% of the remitted amount, to compensate him for
the cost of collection, filing returns and supplying information to the City
Clerk, but in no event shall any commission be allowed on any tax not remitted
when due.
(Ord. 09-O-1953, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.122 FAILURE TO PAY OR FILE; PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (A)   Failure to pay or remit the tax or to file the remittance return
required by this subchapter shall be subject to the following penalties and
interest:
      (1)   Any tax not paid or remitted when due shall bear interest at the
rate of 2% per month, or fraction thereof, until the tax is paid or remitted;
      (2)   In addition to any interest charge, any person who fails to pay or
to remit tax when due shall be subject to a late penalty of 10% of such tax;
and
      (3)   In addition to any interest or penalty charge above, any person who
fails to file a remittance return when due shall be subject to a late filing
penalty of 10% of the total tax liability due for the reporting period.
   (B)   Where the failure to pay or to remit the tax or to file the remittance
return, in a timely manner is due to reasonable cause beyond the control of the
person charged with filing and paying the tax, the penalties described in
divisions (A)(2) and (A)(3) may be waived by the City Clerk.
(Ord. 09-O-1953, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.123 RECORD-KEEPING.
   Every distributor and every retail dealer required to collect and remit the
tax imposed herein shall keep accurate and complete books and records of his or
her business of selling vehicle fuel, including the maintenance of all invoices
and other source documents. Every purchaser or user shall keep accurate and
complete books and records of his or her purchases and uses of vehicle fuel in
the city.
(Ord. 09-O-1953, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.124 SALE AND USES PRESUMED TAXABLE; BURDEN OF PROOF.
   It shall be presumed that all sales and uses of vehicle fuel in the city are
subject to tax under this subchapter until the contrary is established. The
burden of providing that a sale or use is not taxable hereunder shall be upon
the distributor, retail dealer, purchase or user so claiming.
(Ord. 09-O-1953, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.125 EXEMPTIONS.
   The tax imposed by the subchapter shall not apply to the following sales or
uses of vehicle fuel:
   (A)   Sale by a distributor to another distributor holding a valid
registration certificate;
   (B)   Sale by a distributor to a retailer of vehicle fuel whose place of
business is outside the city;
   (C)   Sale or use for purpose other than for propulsion or operation or a
vehicle;
   (D)   Sale to or use by “transportation agency”, as defined in the Regional
Transportation Authority Act, which is operated by receiving a grant from or
has a service agreement with the Regional Transportation Authority or any of
its service boards;
   (E)   Sale or use to the extent the tax imposed by this subchapter would
violate the Illinois or United States Constitution;
   (F)   Sale to or use by the Federal Government or any state or local
government body; and
   (G)   Sale to use by any air, common carrier, certified by the carrier to be
used for consumption, shipment or storage in the conduct of its business as an
air common carrier, for a flight destined for a destination outside the United
States.
(Ord. 09-O-1953, passed 7-15-2009)
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.130 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS
5/8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling cannabis at retail in the city at a rate of 3% of the gross
receipts from the sales made in the course of that business.
   (B)   This tax does not apply to cannabis purchased under the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
   (C)   This tax is in addition to all other taxes and fees imposed by the
City of Markham and State of Illinois.
(Ord. 19-O-2239, passed 9-27-2019)
§ 36.131 TAX COLLECTION.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this subchapter and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident of the tax shall be collected and enforced by the
Illinois Department of Revenue.
   (B)   Persons subject to any tax imposed under this section may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any state tax that sellers are required to collect.
(Ord. 19-O-2239, passed 9-27-2019)
§ 36.132 RECORDS.
   Every person who is subject to this tax shall keep and maintain accurate and
complete documents, books, and records of each transaction or activity subject
to this section, from start to complete, including all original source
documents. All such books and records shall be kept by the owner and shall, at
all reasonable times during normal business hours, be open to inspection,
audit, or copying by the Mayor or his/her designee.
(Ord. 19-O-2239, passed 9-27-2019)
§ 36.133 CANNABIS LICENSE.
   If any holder of a city adult-use cannabis business license fails to remain
current in the payment of the tax imposed by this section, the adult-use
cannabis business license may be suspended or revoked by the Local Cannabis
Commissioner or his or her designee, or the Mayor if the position of Cannabis
Commissioner is not established, until said tax is made current. No adult-use
cannabis may be sold from said premises until the tax has been paid.
(Ord. 19-O-2239, passed 9-27-2019)
AUCTION TAX
§ 36.140 AUCTION TAX IMPOSED.
   There is hereby imposed upon all persons selling vehicles through an auction
process within the city a tax of $5 per vehicle sold by said process.
(Prior Code, § 36.120) (Ord. 06-O-1855, passed 5-3-2006; Ord. 06-O-1862, passed
5-7-2006)
§ 36.141 DUTY TO FILE RETURN.
   (A)   There is further imposed upon the dealer or such other person or
entity selling such vehicles through the auction process the duty of filing a
return with the Treasurer of the city, each month, detailing the location, date
and number of vehicles, together with a description of said vehicles sold under
the auction process and to make remittance to the Treasurer the sum of $5 per
vehicle sold to the city.
   (B)   The Treasurer is empowered to and shall develop and distribute such
forms of registration and reporting documents as might be appropriate for the
enforcement of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 36.121) (Ord. 06-O-1855, passed 5-3-2006; Ord. 06-O-1862, passed
5-7-2006)
§ 36.142 PENALTY.
   (A)   The failure of a dealer, person or entity to file such return within
five days of the end of the month of the sale shall result in a fine of $750
upon conviction and the revocation of such city licenses as might be held by
the person or entity.
   (B)   All funds will be deposited to the General Corporate Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 36.122) (Ord. 06-O-1855, passed 5-3-2006; Ord. 06-O-1862, passed
5-7-2006)
GAS USE TAX
§ 36.155 EXPLANATION.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall be know as the “Municipal Gas Use
Tax” and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the city, the
state or any other municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 07-O-1888, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 36.156 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of the state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. A public utility as defined in § 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act.
   PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT. The Public Utilities Act, as amended.
(220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.)
   RETAIL PURCHASER. Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
   SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term RETAILER means any
person engaged in the business of distribution, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas.
(Ord. 07-O-1888, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 36.157 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by this subchapter, a tax imposed on the
privilege of using or consuming gas in the city that is purchased in a sale at
retail at the rate of $0.04 per therm.
   (B)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the retail purchaser, and nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to
impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling
or transporting gas.
   (C)   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms or gas
delivered to the retail purchaser’s premises, to the Public Utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant hereto on or before the payment due date of the
Public Utility’s bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the City
Collector on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the
month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no Public
Utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant hereto or if the gas is
delivered by a person other than a Public Utility so designated.
   (D)   To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the city by a retail
purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this subchapter if the gross
receipts from the sale at retail of such gas to the retail purchaser are
properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to the
city municipal utility tax, as amended from time to time, authorized pursuant
to § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2).
   (E)   A purchaser who purchases gas for resale and, therefore, does not pay
the tax imposed by this subchapter with respect to the use or consumption of
the gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the
tax directly to the City Collector on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
   (F)   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail
purchaser is billed by a Public Utility on or after 8-1-2007.
(Ord. 07-O-1888, passed 4-18-2007; Ord. 07-O-1892, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 36.158 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   The City Collector is authorized to enter into a contract for
collection of the tax imposed by this subchapter with any Public Utility
providing gas service in the city. The contract shall include and substantially
conform with the following provisions:
      (1)   The Public Utility will collect the tax with respect to gas
delivered by it to its customers as an independent contractor;
      (2)   The Public Utility will be entitled to withhold from tax
collections a service fee equal to 3% of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the City Collector;
      (3)   The Public Utility shall not be liable to the city for any tax not
actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
      (4)   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
   (B)   A Public Utility designated to collect the tax imposed by this
subchapter from its customers shall bill each customer for the tax on all gas
delivered to the customer unless:
      (1)   The customer’s use or consumption is exempt from the tax pursuant
to a duly passed and authorized ordinance of the city; or
      (2)   The Public Utility has received written notification from the city,
that the customer is exempt from the tax.
   (C)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United
States or the state, may not be made the subject of taxation by the city.
   (D)   If it shall appear than an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as a result of mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be:
      (1)   Credited against any tax due, or to become due, under this
subchapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous payment; or
      (2)   Subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become due;
provided that, no amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the
filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited or refunded.
   (E)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of
such amount.
(Ord. 07-O-1888, passed 4-18-2007; Ord. 07-O-1892, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 36.159 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original
source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions
that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under
this subchapter. All such books and records shall, at all times during business
hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the city.
(Ord. 07-O-1888, passed 4-18-2007)
TEXT MESSAGE TAX
§ 36.170 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “City of Markham Text
Message Tax Ordinance” and the tax imposed herein shall be known and cited as
the “Markham Text Message Tax”.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
corporation, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver, trustee,
conservator, legal representative or other legally recognized entity.
      SERVICE PROVIDER or COMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person who is engaged in
the business of servicing, selling and/or providing mobile telecommunication
equipment in the city to a purchaser for the purchaser’s use to receive and/or
send text and instant messages in any form.
      TAX. The Markham Text Message Tax.
      TEXT MESSAGE or INSTANT MESSAGE. The transmission, conveyance or routing
of voice, audio, video, data or any other communications information or signals
to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used,
regardless of the medium utilized for the transmission and/or conveyance of
data for text messaging and instant messaging.
      TEXT MESSAGE TAX. The tax imposed by this subchapter.
      USE. The exercise of any right to or power over text or instant messages
to the ownership thereof, including, but not limited to, the receiving or
sending of text and/or instant messages by any person within city limits.
(Ord. 13-O-2058, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 36.171 TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax hereby imposed upon the privilege of receiving and sending text and/or
instant messages, in the city, text and/or instant messages sent or received
within city limits from a service or communications provider or wholesale from
distributor. The tax shall be at a rate of $0.02 per text or instant message.
The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax shall be upon
the service or communications provider, and nothing in this subchapter shall be
construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of selling or distributing mobile
telecommunications devices or equipment. It shall be a violation of this
subchapter for any distributor or retail dealer to fail to add this tax to the
retail price of mobile telecommunications and/or cellular devices and their
respective data plans or to absorb the tax. The tax shall be in addition to any
and all other taxes.
(Ord. 13-O-2058, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 36.172 PAYMENT ON RETAIL PURCHASE.
   “Use in the City” shall be deemed to occur only at the place in the city
where the text or instant message is transferred, sent and/or received by the
person transferring, sending and/or receiving the text or instant message. To
the extent that a person has paid the tax imposed herein on the retail purchase
of the mobile telecommunication and/or cellular devices and their respective
data plans, he or she shall be exempt from the payment of and liability for
said tax on the use of transferring, sending and/or receiving text and/or
instant messages.
(Ord. 13-O-2058, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 36.173 COLLECTION.
   (A)   The city’s Text Message Tax shall be collected by each service and/or
communications provider, wholesale and/or retail distributor who sells mobile
telecommunications and/or cellular devices and/or equipment to a person
transferring, sending and/or receiving text and/or instant messages in the
city. Any service and/or communications provider, wholesale and/or retail
distributor who shall pay the tax to the city shall collect the tax. The
service and/or communications provider, wholesale and/or retail distributor
shall in turn collect the tax from the owners of the mobile telecommunications
and/or cellular device and their respective cellular and/or data plan payment.
   (B)   If any service and/or communications provider, wholesale and/or retail
distributor receives payment for the use of mobile telecommunications and/or
cellular devices and their respective data plans upon which the city’s Text
Message Tax shall be applied, the service and/or communications provider,
wholesale and/or retail distributors agent shall remit such tax directly to the
City Clerk by the last day of the month following the month in which he or she
received such payment and shall collect such tax from the payment of, and for
continued use of mobile telecommunications and/or cellular devices and their
respective data plans.
   (C)   Any tax remittance required to be made directly to the city shall be
made to the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by remittance form prescribed
by the City Clerk.
   (D)   Any person who collects the city’s Text Message Tax shall do so as a
trustee for and on account of the city.
(Ord. 13-O-2058, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 36.174 REGISTRATION; RETURN; FILING.
   Every service and/or communications provider, wholesale or retail
distributor of mobile telecommunications and/or cellular devices and data plans
doing business on                shall register with the City Clerk by
                      . Every person becoming a service and/or communications
provider, wholesale and/or retail distributor after that date shall register
with the City Clerk within 30 days after the commencement of such business.
Every service and/or communications provider, wholesale and/or retail
distributor shall file each month with the City Clerk a remittance return,
containing a report of their sales and service of mobile telecommunications
and/or cellular devices and the respective data plans and payments received
from persons or users in the city occurring in the prior month. The return
shall be in a form prescribed and furnished by the City Clerk. If mailed, the
return must be postmarked on or before the last day of the month following the
month for which the report is due. Each such return shall be accompanied by a
remittance of the appropriate amount of tax applicable to the sales reported.
Payment shall be made to the City Clerk.
(Ord. 13-O-2058, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 36.175 INVENTORY REPORT.
   By                , every service and/or communications provider, wholesale
and/or retail distributor of mobile telecommunications and/or cellular devices
and data plans shall file with the City Clerk, on forms supplied by the City
Clerk for that purpose, and inventory of all mobile telecommunications and/or
cellular devices and a schedule of the respective data plans and/or packages
with current prices; in the service and/or communications provider, wholesale
and/or retail distributors possession on              at 12:01 a.m. The owner
or chief executive officer of the service and/or communications provider,
wholesale and/or retail distributor; shall sign the inventory report and attest
under oath to its accuracy. With the inventory report, the retail dealer shall
pay to the city the city’s Text Message Tax due on every text or instant
message transferred, sent or received within the city limits.
(Ord. 13-O-2058, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 36.176 COMMISSION ON TAX PAID WHEN DUE.
   A service and/or communications provider, wholesale and/or retail
distributor remitting the tax to the city shall be entitled to a commission of
1% of the remitted, to compensate him or her for the cost of collection, filing
returns and supplying information to the City Clerk, but in no event shall any
commission be allowed on any tax not remitted when due.
(Ord. 13-O-2058, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 36.177 FAILURE TO PAY OR FILE; PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (A)   Failure to pay or remit the tax or to file the remittance return
required by this subchapter shall be subject to the following penalties and
interest:
      (1)   Any tax not paid or remitted when due shall bear interest at the
rate of 2% per month, or traction thereof, until the tax is paid or remitted;
      (2)   In addition to any interest charged, any person who fails to pay or
to remit the tax when due shall be subject to a late penalty of 10% of such
tax; and
      (3)   In addition to any interest or penally charged above, any person
who fails to file a remittance return when due shall be subject to a late
filing penalty of 10% of the total tax liability due for the reporting period.
   (B)   Where the failure to pay or to remit the tax or to file the remittance
return, in a timely manner is due to reasonable cause beyond the control of the
person charged with filling and paying the tax, the penalties described in
divisions (A)(2) and (A)(3) above may be waived by the City Clerk.
(Ord. 13-O-2058, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 36.178 RECORD-KEEPING.
   Every service and/or communications provider, wholesale and/or retail
distributor required to collect and remit the tax imposed herein shall keep
accurate and complete books and records of his or her business of selling
mobile telecommunications and/or cellular devices and data plans, including the
maintenance of all invoices and other source documents. Every service and/or
communications provider, wholesale and/or retail distributor of mobile
telecommunications and/or cellular devices and their respective data plans;
shall keep accurate and complete books and records of his or her sales,
purchases and payments for use and continued service of cellular service and
data plans, text and/or instant messages in the city.
(Ord. 13-O-2058, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 36.179 SALES AND USES PRESUMED TAXABLE; BURDEN OF PROOF.
   It shall be presumed that all sales and uses of mobile telecommunications
and/or cellular devices, respective data plans and all text and/or instant
messages in the city are subject to tax under this subchapter until the
contrary is established. The burden of proving that a sale or use is not
taxable hereunder shall be upon the service and/or communications provider,
wholesale and/or retail distributor so claiming.
(Ord. 13-O-2058, passed 6-19-2013)
§ 36.180 EXEMPTIONS.
   The tax imposed by this suchapter shall not apply to the following sales or
uses of mobile telecommunications and/or cellular devices used to transfer,
send and/or receive text and/or instant messages:
   (A)   Sale or use to the extent the tax imposed by this subchapter would
violate the State or United States Constitution;
   (B)   Sale to or use by the Federal Government or any state or local
governmental body; and
   (C)   To any senior citizens that are the age of 65 or older, retired and/or
on a fixed income.
(Ord. 13-O-2058, passed 6-19-2013)
EXCISE TAX ON LIQUOR BY THE DRINK
§ 36.195 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Markham and, variously, the incorporated territory of the
city, wherein the city is empowered to impose this tax by the Liquor Control
Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
   DUE DATE. The thirtieth day after the close of the monthly period for which
the tax is to be computed.
   LICENSEE. Any person who holds a license or permit from the city to sell
liquor on the premises.
   LIQUOR or DISTILLED SPRITS. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation
or containing alcohol.
   MONTHLY PERIOD. The calendar months of the year.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, social club,
fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate,
trust, receiver, trustee, non-profit corporation, syndicate, or any other group
or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number,
excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision
of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein
provided.
   PURCHASE PRICE. The consideration received for the sale of liquor or
distilled spirits valued in money, wether received in cash or otherwise,
including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or
nature and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the
purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
   PURCHASER. Any person who orders and gives present or future consideration
for any liquor or distilled spirits dispensed by the drink.
   RETURN. Any return filed or required to be filed by this section.
   TAX. Any tax imposed by this section.
(Ord. 08-O-1926, passed 7-2-2008)
§ 36.196 IMPOSITION; RATE OF TAX.
   (A)   In addition to any and all other taxes authorized by law, a tax is
hereby imposed on the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in the city. This tax
shall be paid by the purchaser and nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to impose a tax on the occupation of retail or wholesale alcoholic beverage
dealer. The tax shall be levied according to the following schedule:
      (1)   Beer, a tax at the rate of $0.29 per gallon;
      (2)   Alcoholic liquor, other than beer, containing 14% or less of
alcohol by volume, a tax at the rate of $0.36 per gallon;
      (3)   Alcoholic liquor containing more than 14% and less than 20% of
alcohol by volume, a tax at the rate of $0.80 per gallon; and
      (4)   Alcoholic liquor containing 20% or more of alcohol by volume, a tax
at the rate of $2.68 per gallon.
   (B)   The tax rate stated above shall be apportioned in sales involving a
fraction of a gallon, and shall be rounded down to the nearest cent when less
than one-half a cent is due and rounded up to the nearest cent when one-half
cent or more is due.
(Ord. 08-O-1926, passed 7-2-2008)
§ 36.197 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   Every licensee holding a license to sell liquor or distilled spirits is
authorized and required to collect the tax imposed under this article from the
purchasers of liquor sold by within the licensed premises.
(Ord. 08-O-1926, passed 7-2-2008)
§ 36.198 DETERMINATION GENERALLY; PAYMENTS.
   (A)   Due date taxes. All amounts of such taxes collected by the licensee
shall be due and payable to the Clerk of the city on or before the thirtieth
day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period.
   (B)   Return; persons required to file; contents. The remittance of the
taxes collected under this subchapter shall be made and a return shall be filed
by every licensee with the City Clerk showing the gross sales of liquor and the
amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, along with such other
information as may be required by the City Clerk.
   (C)   Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall
be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be
reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the
amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of
the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales
and use tax as provided for in accordance with state statutes.
   (D)   Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A penalty of
1% is imposed for failure to pay any amount of tax when due and payable to the
city, with a minimum amount of penalty due of $25. Delinquent amounts shall
bear interest at the rate of 1% per month, or fraction thereof, until paid.
(Ord. 08-O-1926, passed 7-2-2008)
§ 36.199 DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   Re-computation of tax; authority to make; basis of re-computation. If
the City Clerk is not satisfied with the return and returns of the tax or the
amounts of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he or she may
compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any
information within his possession or that may come into his or her possession.
One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or
more monthly periods.
   (B)   Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 1%
is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of
any determination shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month, or fraction
thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment.
   (C)   Notice of determination; service of. The City Clerk shall give to the
licensee written notice of his or her determination. The notice may be served
personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the
licensee at his or her business address as it appears in the records of the
city. Service by mail is complete when it is delivered by certified mail with a
receipt signed by addressee.
   (D)   Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed.
Except in case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency
determination shall be mailed within three years after the thirtieth day of the
calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to
be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever shall
last expire.
(Ord. 08-O-1926, passed 7-2-2008)
§ 36.200 DETERMINATION IF NO RETURN IS MADE.
   (A)   Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, th
City Clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the
licensee from the sale of liquor by the drink, or as the case may be, of the
amount of total such receipts in the city which are subject to the tax. The
estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person
failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or
may come into the possession of the City Clerk. Written notice shall be given
in the manner prescribed in §
36.199(C) of this chapter.
   (B)   Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest
shall be applied to the estimated taxed due in the manner prescribed in §
36.199(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-O-1926, passed 7-2-2008)
§ 36.201 COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAX.
   (A)   Alcohol license to sell alcohol conditioned upon payment and
remittance of tax. As a condition for holding a license to sell liquor, a
licensee must comply with this subchapter and collect and remit the tax imposed
in the manner prescribed. Failure to comply will subject the license to
suspension of alcohol selling privileges as provided in the Liquor Control Act
of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
   (B)   Action for delinquent tax. At any time within three years after any
tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and
at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount
of tax required to be collected, the City Clerk may bring an action in a court
of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount
delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees and other
legal fees incident thereto.
   (C)   Duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from
purchase price. If any licensee liable for any amount under this ordinance
sells out his or her business or quits the business, his or her successors or
assigns shall withhold sufficiently form the purchase price to cover such
amount until the former owner produces a receipt issued by the City Clerk
reflecting payment in full of the amount due or a certificate stating that no
amount is due.
   (D)   Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business
fails to withhold purchase price as required, he or she shall be personally
liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him or her to
the extent of the purchase price.
(Ord. 08-O-1926, passed 7-2-2008)
§ 36.202 CREDITS FOR OVERPAYMENTS.
   If it is determined that a licensee has overpaid the tax imposed under this
subchapter, overpaid penalties or interest, or has paid the tax more than once,
the City Clerk, upon filing of a claim by the licensee and audit of the claim,
authorize credit of the overpayment toward the current amount of tax due and
payable from the licensee. All claims for overpayments must be made by the
license, his or her administrators or executors, and must be in writing three
years form the date of payment stating the specific grounds upon which the
claim is founded.
(Ord. 08-O-1926, passed 7-2-2008)
§ 36.203 ADMINISTRATION; RECORD-KEEPING.
   (A)   Authority of City Clerk. The City Clerk or his or her authorized
representative shall administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter
for the levy and collection of the tax herein imposed. The City Clerk shall
have the authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not
inconsistent with this subchapter or other laws of the city and the state, for
the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter and the
collection of the taxes provided herein.
   (B)   Records required. Every licensee for the sale of liquor by the drink
in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all records,
receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers as the City Clerk may require.
   (C)   Examination of records; audits. The City Clerk or any person
authorized in writing by his or her may examine the books, records, financial
reports, inventory, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for
the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made or, if no return is
made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid.
   (D)   Authority to require reports; contents. In administering the
provisions of this subchapter, the City Clerk may require the filings of
reports by any person or class of persons having in his, her or their
possession or custody information relating to the sale of liquor by the drink.
The reports shall be filed with the City Clerk when required and shall set
forth the gross sales from the sale of liquor by the drink, the amount of tax
collected thereon or such other information as the City Clerk may require.
(Ord. 08-O-1926, passed 7-2-2008)
LIQUOR TAX
§ 36.215 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “City of Markham
Liquor Tax Ordinance” and the tax imposed herein shall be known and cited as
the “Markham Liquor Tax”.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTOR or LIQUOR DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who produces, refines,
blends, compounds or manufactures liquor in the city, or transports or has
transported liquor to any location in the city, or receives in the city liquor
which the city’s Liquor Tax has not been paid, or sells liquor to a retail
dealer for resale in the city. DISTRIBUTORS shall include any person who
transports liquor into the city or receives liquor in the city for his or her
own use and consumption and not for sale or resale.
      LIQUOR. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing
alcohol.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
corporation, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver, trustee,
conservator, legal representative or other legally recognized entity.
      RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL LIQUOR DEALER. Any person who is engaged in the
business of selling liquor in the city to a purchaser for the purchaser’s use
or consumption, and not for resale in any form.
      SALE, RESALE or PURCHASE. Any transfer of ownership or title or both, any
exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by
any means whatsoever for consideration.
      SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale to a person for that person’s use or consumption
and not for resale to another.
      TAX. The Markham Liquor Tax.
      USE. The exercise of any right to or power over liquor incident to the
ownership thereof, including, but not limited to, the receipt of liquor by any
person.
(Ord. 09-O-1954, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.216 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   In addition to any and all other taxes authorized by law, a tax is
hereby imposed on the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in the city. This tax
shall be paid by the purchaser and nothing in this subchapter shall be
construed to impose a tax on the occupation of retail or wholesale alcoholic
beverage dealer. The tax shall be levied according to the following schedule:
      (1)   Beer, a tax at the rate of $0.029 per gallon;
      (2)   Alcoholic liquor, other than beer, containing 14% or less of
alcohol by volume, a tax at the rate of $0.36 per gallon;
      (3)   Alcoholic liquor containing more than 14% and less than 20% of
alcohol by volume, a tax at the rate of $0.89 per gallon; and
      (4)   Alcoholic liquor containing 20% or more of alcohol by volume, a tax
at the rate of $2.68 per gallon.
   (B)   The tax rate stated above shall be apportioned in sales involving a
fraction of a gallon, and shall be rounded down to the nearest cent when less
than one-half cent is due and rounded up to the nearest cent when one-half cent
or more is due.
(Ord. 09-O-1954, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.217 PAYMENT ON RETAIL PURCHASE.
   “Use in the City” shall be deemed to occur only at the place in the city
where the liquor is available for sale, sold or consumed. To the extent that a
person has paid the tax imposed herein on the retail purchase of liquor, he or
she shall be exempt from the payment of and liability for said tax on the use
of such liquor.
(Ord. 09-O-1954, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.218 COLLECTION.
   (A)   (1)   The city’s Liquor Tax shall be collected by each liquor
distributor who sells such liquor to a retail liquor dealer doing business in
the city.
      (2)   Any distributor who shall pay the tax to the city shall collect the
tax from any retail dealer to whom the distributor sells liquor.
      (3)   The retail dealer shall in turn collect the tax from the purchaser
of the liquor.
      (4)   Any distributor who sells liquor directly to a purchaser or user,
for delivery in the city, and not for resale, shall collect the tax from the
purchaser or user.
   (B)   If any retail liquor dealer receives liquor upon which the city’s
Liquor Tax has not been collected by the distributor, the retail dealer, shall
remit such tax directly to the City Clerk by the last day of the month
following the month in which he or she received such liquor, and shall collect
such tax from his or her purchasers.
   (C)   If any purchaser or user receives liquor upon which the city’s Liquor
Tax has not been collected by the distributor or retail dealer, such purchaser
or user shall remit such tax directly to the City Clerk by the last day of the
month following the month in which such purchaser or user made the taxable
purchase or used the liquor.
   (D)   Any remittance required to be made directly to the city shall be made
to the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by a remittance form prescribed by
the City Clerk.
   (E)   Any person who collects the city’s Liquor Tax shall do so as a trustee
for and on account of the city.
(Ord. 09-O-1954, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.219 REGISTRATION; RETURN; FILING.
   Every liquor distributor doing business on 7-15-2009 shall register with the
City Clerk by                  . Every person becoming a distributor after that
date shall register with the City Clerk within 30 days after the commencement
of such business. Every distributor shall file each month with the City Clerk,
a remittance return containing a report of the sale of liquor to retail dealers
or users in the city occurring in the prior month. The return shall be in a
form prescribed and furnished by the City Clerk. If mailed, the return must be
postmarked on or before the last day of the month following the month for which
the report is due. Each such return shall be accompanied by a remittance of the
appropriate amount of tax applicable to the sales reported. Payment shall be
made to the City Clerk.
(Ord. 09-O-1954, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.220 INVENTORY REPORT.
   By               , every retail liquor dealer shall file with the City
Clerk, on forms supplied by the City Clerk for that purpose, an inventory of
all liquor in the retail dealer’s possession on               at 12:01 a.m. The
owner or chief executive officer of the retail dealer shall sign the inventory
report and attest under oath to its accuracy. With the inventory report, the
retail dealer shall pay the city the city’s Liquor Tax due on the sale of all
liquor in the retail dealer’s possession on the first day of each month at 12:
01 a.m. and for which such tax has not been collected on behalf of the city by
a liquor distributor.
(Ord. 09-O-1954, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.221 COMMISSION ON TAX PAID WHEN DUE.
   A distributor or retail dealer remitting the tax to the city shall be
entitled to a commission of 1% of the remitted amount, to compensate him or her
for the cost of collection, filing returns and supplying information to the
City Clerk, but in no event shall any commission be allowed on any tax not
remitted when due.
(Ord. 09-O-1954, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.222 FAILURE TO PAY OR FILE; PENALTIES AND INTEREST.
   (A)   Failure to pay or remit the tax or to file the remittance return
required by this subchapter shall be subject to the following penalties and
interest:
      (1)   Any tax not paid or remitted when due shall bear interest at the
rate of 2% per month, or fraction thereof, until the tax is paid or remitted;
      (2)   In addition to any interest charge, any person who fails to pay or
to remit tax when due shall be subject to a late penalty of 10% of such tax;
and
      (3)   In addition to any interest or penalty charge above, any person who
fails to file a remittance return when due shall be subject to a late filing
penalty of 10% of the total tax liability due for the reporting period.
   (B)   Where the failure to pay or to remit the tax or to file the remittance
return, in a timely manner is due to reasonable cause beyond the control of the
person charged with filing and paying the tax, the penalties described in
divisions (A)(2) and (A)(3) above may be waived by the City Clerk.
(Ord. 09-O-1954, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.223 RECORD-KEEPING.
   Every distributor and every retail dealer required to collect and remit the
tax imposed herein shall keep accurate and complete books and records of his or
her business of selling liquor, including the maintenance of all invoices and
other source documents. Every purchaser or user shall keep accurate and
complete books and records of his or her purchases and uses of liquor in the
city.
(Ord. 09-O-1954, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.224 SALE AND USES PRESUMED TAXABLE; BURDEN OF PROOF.
   It shall be presumed that all sales and uses of liquor in the city are
subject to tax under this subchapter until the contrary is established. The
burden of providing that a sale or use is not taxable hereunder shall be upon
the distributor, retail dealer, purchase or user so claiming.
(Ord. 09-O-1954, passed 7-15-2009)
§ 36.225 EXEMPTIONS.
   The tax imposed by this subchapter shall not apply to the following sales or
uses of liquor:
   (A)   Sale by a distributor to another distributor holding a valid
registration certificate;
   (B)   Sale by a distributor to a retailer of liquor whose place of business
is outside the city;
   (C)   Sale or use to the extent the tax imposed by this subchapter would
violate the State or United States Constitution; and
   (D)   Sale to or use by the Federal Government or any state or local
government body.
(Ord. 09-O-1954, passed 7-15-2009)
MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX
§ 36.235 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXEMPT PURCHASER. The city in circumstances where it is required to purchase
electricity for municipal use or any other person qualifying as exempt by a
proper resolution by the city.
   PERSON. Any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator, guardian, or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office, or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2,
directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of
electricity.
   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the city, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, other than an exempt
purchaser.
   TAX COLLECTOR. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
(Ord. 99-O-1676, passed 6-2-1999)
§ 36.236 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2 and any and all other applicable
authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming
electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the
corporate limits of the city at the following rates, calculated on a monthly
basis for each purchaser:
      (1)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
$0.570 per kilowatt-hour;
      (2)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
$0.374 per kilowatt-hour;
      (3)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
$0.337 per kilowatt-hour;
      (4)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
$0.327 per kilowatt-hour;
      (5)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
$0.318 per kilowatt-hour;
      (6)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
$.0.299 per kilowatt-hour;
      (7)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
$0.294 per kilowatt-hour;
      (8)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
$0.290 per kilowatt-hour;
      (9)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month,
$0.285 per kilowatt-hour; and
      (10)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month, $0.280 per kilowatt-hour.
   (B)   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the city, the state or any other political subdivision of the state.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, the tax shall
not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax
would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the
Constitution of the State of Illinois.
   (D)   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after July 1, 1999, and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity
by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such
customers for delivery services in accordance with Section 16-104 of the Public
Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-104), or the first bill issued to such customers
on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
(Ord. 99-O-1676, passed 6-2-1999)
§ 36.237 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to the provisions of §
36.239 of this subchapter regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers,
the tax imposed under this subchapter shall be collected from purchasers by the
person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers electricity
to such purchasers.
      (2)   This tax shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who
delivers the electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time
and in the same manner as the original charge for delivering electricity.
   (B)   Any tax required to be collected by this chapter and any tax in fact
collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the city by the person delivering
the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity shall be
allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the charges
for which are written off as uncollectable and provided further, that if such
charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be obligated to
remit such tax.
   (C)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax they collect to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax, and supplying data to the city
upon request. For purposes of this subchapter, any partial payment of a billed
amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to be for
the delivery of electricity.
(Ord. 99-O-1676, passed 6-2-1999)
§ 36.238 TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURN.
   (A)   Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a form
prescribed by the City Treasurer. The return and accompanying remittance shall
be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during which
the tax is collected.
   (B)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under this subchapter, then the
purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the City Treasurer and
pay the tax directly to the city on or before the last day of the month
following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
(Ord. 99-O-1676, passed 6-2-1999)
§ 36.239 RESALES.
   (A)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in this city shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the City
Treasurer and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity;
and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially
nontaxable as a sale for resale.
   (B)   If a person who receives electricity in the city claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the City
Treasurer for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it
is not liable for the tax imposed by this subchapter on any purchase of
electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the City Treasurer
shall reasonably require.
   (C)   Upon approval of the application, the City Treasurer shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   (D)   The City Treasurer may cancel the resale number of any person if the
person fails to pay any tax payable under this subchapter for electricity used
or consumed by the person, or if the number:
      (1)   Was obtained through misrepresentation; or
      (2)   Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making
resales.
   (E)   (1)   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by
this chapter directly to the City Treasurer pursuant to §
36.237(B) of this subchapter on the amount of electricity that the reseller
uses or consumes and shall collect the tax pursuant to §
36.237 of this subchapter and remit the tax pursuant to §
36.237(A) of this subchapter on the amount of electricity delivered by the
reseller to a purchaser.
      (2)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the City
Treasurer the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller and such
other information that the City Treasurer may reasonably require.
(Ord. 99-O-1676, passed 6-2-1999)
§ 36.240 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every tax collector and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by
this subchapter shall keep accurate books and records of its business or
activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions
that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this
subchapter. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
(Ord. 99-O-1676, passed 6-2-1999)
§ 36.241 CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions contained in this subchapter, in order
to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the city, no person shall be
entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this subchapter
unless the persons files a claim for refund or credit within one year after the
date on which the tax was paid or remitted.
(Ord. 99-O-1676, passed 6-2-1999)
VIDEO GAMING PUSH TAX
§ 36.250 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise specified, the terms used in this section shall
have the same definitions as those listed in the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/
1.
   (B)   PLAY. Each individual push of the video gaming terminal which
initiates the simulation provided by the video gaming terminal. Play shall not
include the push of individual wager amounts, selection of types of games on
the video gaming terminal or entry of any information or printing of winning
receipts.
(Ord. 21-O-2314, passed 10-31-2021)
§ 36.251 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   An amusement tax is hereby imposed upon any person who participates in
the play of a video gaming terminal that takes place within the jurisdictional
boundaries of the City of Markham. The rate of tax shall be equal to one cent
($0.01) per play on a video gaming terminal.
   (B)   This tax is in addition to all other taxes imposed by the State of
Illinois or municipal corporation or political subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 21-O-2314, passed 10-31-2021)
§ 36.252 TERMINAL OPERATOR REGISTRATION.
   Within 30 days after the effective date of this subchapter or 30 days after
installation of video gaming terminals, each terminal operator of a video
gaming terminal shall apply for registration as a tax collector with the city.
The application shall be submitted to the city on the forms provided by the
city and contain such information reasonably required by the city to impose,
collect and audit all amounts related to the push tax.
(Ord. 21-O-2314, passed 10-31-2021) Penalty, see §
36.999
§ 36.253 COLLECTION, PAYMENT AND ACCOUNTING.
   (A)   It shall be the joint and several duty of every terminal operator of a
video gaming terminal(s) to secure from each person participating in the play
of a video gaming terminal the push tax imposed by this chapter. For purposes
of this chapter, it shall be presumed that the amount of the push tax imposed
on each person, unless the taxpayer or tax collector provides otherwise with
books, records, or other documentary evidence, has been collected from the
person by the terminal operator. Push tax payments accompanied by tax returns
prescribed by the city shall be remitted to the city on or before the 20th day
of the month following the month in which payment for the push tax is made.
   (B)   Every terminal operator of a video gaming terminal who is required to
collect the push tax by this chapter shall be considered a tax collector for
the city. All push tax amounts collected shall be held by the terminal operator
as trustee for and on behalf of the city. The failure of the terminal operator
to collect the tax shall not excuse or release the person from the obligation
to pay the tax. The ultimate incidence of the push tax shall remain on the
person and shall never be shifted to the terminal operator.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, in order to permit
sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the city, no person shall be entitled to
a refund of, or credit for, the push tax imposed by this chapter unless the
person files a claim for a refund or credit within one year after the date on
which the push tax was paid or remitted to the city.
   (D)   The terminal operator of any video gaming terminal(s) shall be subject
to audit, inspection, and record keeping provisions of this code. It shall be
unlawful for any terminal operator and/or person to prevent, hinder, or
interfere with the city's officials, employees, and/or agents designated to
discharge their respective duties in the performance and enforcement of the
terminal(s) to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the city's
officials, employees, and/or agents will at all times have full access.
(Ord. 21-O-2314, passed 10-31-2021) Penalty, see §
36.999
§ 36.254 ADDITIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city is authorized to adopt, promulgate, and enforce any additional
rules and regulations pertaining to the interpretation, collection,
administration, and enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-O-2314, passed 10-31-2021) Penalty, see §
36.999
§ 36.255 APPLICATION OF CITY CODE.
   Any citation under this chapter may be in addition to any other citations
issued by the city under any and all applicable sections of the Code of
Markham.
(Ord. 21-O-2314, passed 10-31-2021)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
§ 36.270 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS CHARGES. The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act
or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the city and
for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in money whether paid
in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every
kind or nature, to be determined without any deduction on account of the cost,
or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended the amount thereof
shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES for private line service
shall include charges imposed at each channel point within the city and charges
for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel provided within the
city. GROSS CHARGES shall not include:
      (1)   Any amount added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
under:
         (a)   The fee imposed by this chapter;
         (b)   Additional charges added to a purchaser’s bill under §§ 9-221 or
9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5;
         (c)   Amounts collected under § 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal
Code, being 65 ILCS 5;
         (d)   The tax imposed by the Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, being
35 ILCS 630;
         (e)   911 surcharges; or
         (f)   The tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunications received outside the
city;
      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment and also includes the usage of computers under
a time sharing agreement;
      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified under § 9-222.1 of the
Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5 to the extent of such exemption and
during the period of time specified by the city;
      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporation and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
      (7)   BAD DEBT. Any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at retail
for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that has
become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal
income tax standards. If the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is
subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion
during the reporting period in which the payment is made;
      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices; or
      (9)   Charges for telecommunication and all services and equipment
provided the city.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-
way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, include utility easement
wherein the city has acquired the right and authority to locate or permit the
location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities. PUBLIC
RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal city property that is not
specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not include city
buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are
situated in the public right-of-way.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any retailer having
or maintaining within the state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office,
distribution facilities, transmission facilities sales office, warehouse or
other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within
this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective
of whether such place or business or agent or other representative is located
here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is
licensed to do business in the state.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS, AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection there
with for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air-to-ground
systems and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of the customer’s
primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the location in
the state where bills are sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel
services, telegraph services, teletype write service, computer exchange
services, private lines services, specialized mobile radio services or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar means, between or among points by wire cable, fiber
optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar facilities. Unless the
context clearly requires otherwise, TELECOM-MUNICATIONS shall also include
wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined. TELECOM-MUNICATIONS shall
not include:
      (1)   Value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission;
      (2)   Purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service
provider for use as a component part of the service provider by him or her to
the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end
communications. Retailer access charges, right of access, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision and used as a component of, or integrated into end-to-end
communications service shall not be included in gross charges, as sales for
resale; and
      (3)   The provision of cable services through a cable system, as defined
in the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.) as now or
hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open
video system fee payable to the city through an open video system as defined in
the rules of the Federal Communication Commission (47 C.D.F. §§ 76.1550 et
seq.) as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.
      (1)   Any telecommunication retailer; and
      (2)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER. Includes every person
engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as
defined in this section. The city may, in its discretion, upon application,
authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not
maintaining a place of business within the state, who, to the satisfaction of
the city, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of the
fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the fee
upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirement as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the city.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services, as defined in § 704(C) of the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 (Pub. Law No. 104-104), U.S.C. § 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter
amended, including all commercial mobile radio services and paging services.
(Prior Code, § 119.01) (Ord. 98-O-1652, passed 7-1-1998; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed
9-4-2024)
§ 36.271 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.
   (A)   Every telecommunications provider, as defined by this subchapter,
shall register with the city within 30 days after the effective date of this
subchapter or becoming a telecommunications provider whichever is later, on a
form to be provided by the city provided, however, that any telecommunications
retailer that has filed a return pursuant to §
36.273(C) of this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the city
pursuant to this section has the affirmative duty to submit an amended
registration form or current return as required by § 36.273(C) of this chapter
as the case may be, to the city within 30 days from the date of the occurrence
of any changes in the information provided by the telecommunications provider
in the registration form or most recent return on file with the city.
(Prior Code, § 119.02) (Ord. 98-O-1652, passed 7-1-1998; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed
9-4-2024)
§ 36.272 FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   A city communications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby imposed
upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 6% of all gross charges
charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses within the city
for telecommunications originating or received in the city.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this subchapter, the city infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the city by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this subchapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   The city telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee authorized
by this section shall be collected, enforced and administered as set forth in §
36.273 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 119.03) (Ord. 98-O-1652, passed 7-1-1998; Ord. 04-O-1810, passed
8-18-2004; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024) Penalty, see §
36.999
§ 36.273 COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF FEE.
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the city infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the City Treasurer, the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
city not later that the last day of the month subsequent to the month in which
a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that, the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the city
infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for expenses
incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the city shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the City Treasurer which
shall contain such information as the City Treasurer may reasonably require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this subchapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by the
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the city. The charge imposed under division (A)
above by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this subchapter shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this subchapter whether
as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this chapter from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment: provided, however, the City Treasurer may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide written substantiation for such
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless:
      (1)   The credit is used only to offset a claim of underpayment made by
the city within the applicable statutory period of limitations; and
      (2)   The credit derives from an overpayment made by the same
telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory period of
limitations.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this subchapter by telecommunications retailers
shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as
described immediately below:
      (1)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act, being 35 ILCS 630;
      (2)   “Gross receipts” for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in § 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code, being 65 ILCS 5;
      (3)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the municipal telecommunications
tax as prescribed in § 8-11-17 of the Illinois Municipal Code, being 65 ILCS 5;
and
      (4)   “Gross revenue” for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in § 2-202 of the Public Utilities Act, being 220
ILCS 5.
   (G)   The city shall have the right, on its discretion, to audit the books
and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this chapter to
determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to the
city for the city infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of the
amount of the city infrastructure maintenance fee due to the city by the
telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the city plus 5% of the total
amount of the underpayment determined in an audit, plus any costs incurred by
the city in conducting the audit, in an amount not to exceed 5% of the total
amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. The sum shall be paid to the
city within 21 days after the date of issuance of an invoice for the same.
   (H)   The City Administrator or his or her designee may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this subchapter consistent with its provisions as may be required from time
to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered
pursuant to §
36.271 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 119.04) (Ord. 98-O-1652, passed 7-1-1998; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed
9-4-2024)
§ 36.274 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes;
   (B)   Standards for construction, over, under or within, use of or repair of
the public rights-of-way, including standards relating to freestanding towers
and other structures upon the public right-of-way, as provisions;
   (C)   Liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction under, over, within or
repair of the public rights-of-way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses on structures not located on, over or within the right-of-way.
(Prior Code, § 119.05) (Ord. 98-O-1652, passed 7-1-1998; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed
9-4-2024)
§ 36.275 EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES.
   Any franchise, license or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the city entered into before the effective date of this
subchapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid
according to and for their stated terms, except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived.
(Prior Code, § 119.06) (Ord. 98-O-1652, passed 7-1-1998; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed
9-4-2024)
§ 36.276 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 119.07) (Ord. 98-O-1652, passed 7-1-1998; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed
9-4-2024)
§ 36.277 WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION.
   (A)   The city hereby waives all fees, charges and other compensation to
accrue after the effective date of the waiver to the city by a
telecommunication retailer pursuant to any existing city franchise, license or
similar agreement with telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee. This
waiver shall only be effective during the time the infrastructure maintenance
fee provided for in this subchapter is subject to being lawfully imposed on the
telecommunications retailer and collected by the telecommunications retailer
from the customer.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail/
return receipt requested to each telecommunications retailer with whom the city
has a franchise.
   (C)   The city infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this
subchapter shall become effective and imposed on the first day of the month not
less than 90 days after the city provides written notice by certified mail to
each telecommunications retailer with whom the city has an existing franchise,
license or similar agreement during such time as the fee is subject to being
lawfully imposed and collected by the retailer and remitted to the city. The
infrastructure maintenance fee shall apply to gross charges billed on or after
the effective date as established in the preceding sentence.
(Prior Code, § 119.08) (Ord. 98-O-1652, passed 7-1-1998; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed
9-4-2024)
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEES
§ 36.290 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABLE SERVICE. As defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSIONS. The Illinois Commerce Commissions.
   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within
the city.
      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;
         (b)   Event-base charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
         (c)   Rental of top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment;
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to activation, installation and
repair charges;
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges;
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds, check charges
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments;
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service within the
city. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the city
divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant regional
or national compensation arrangement;
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that this derived from the
operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder’s network,
such as a “home shopping” or similar channel, subject to division (1)(i) below;
         (i)   In case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities or applications, the
portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business; and
         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);
         (b)   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service;
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to non-
cable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder’s books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards or orders;
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the city and pay the fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service;
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a municipality, state, federal or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes;
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to “home shopping” or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be
paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-
401.
   PEG. Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and 220 ILCS
5/21-801.(d) by the holder to the city for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE. The provision of “cable service” or “video service” to subscribers
and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and 220 ILCS 5/
21-801 by the holder to the city for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wire line facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 322(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enable users to
access content, information, electronic mail or other services offered over the
public internet.
(Ord. 13-O-2065, passed 8-21-2013; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 36.291 PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the city.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of the
holder’s gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice to the city. The holder shall not notify the city at least ten
days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the city.
   (D)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the city. The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence on
the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this subchapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
subchapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder’s application.
   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the city in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit
for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such
credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B) above.
(Ord. 13-O-2065, passed 8-21-2013; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 36.292 PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE.
   (A)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable or video service in the city in addition to the fee
imposed pursuant to §
36.291(B) of this chapter.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be 1% of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of
gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the city or its designee
for PEG access support in the city.
   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the city
or to the entity designated by the city to manage PEG access. The holder’s
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in §
36.291(D) of this chapter.
   (D)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (E)   Credit for other payments.
      (1)   An incumbent cable operator that elects to terminate an existing
agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would
have been due, all the monetary payments for PEG access that would have been
due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been terminated
pursuant to that section.
      (2)   All payments made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the
previous sentence may be credited against the fees that the operator owes under
division (B) above.
(Ord. 13-O-2065, passed 8-21-2013; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 36.293 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this subchapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(Ord. 13-O-2065, passed 8-21-2013; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 36.294 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the city’s simplified
municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to any
telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the local
unit of government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
(Ord. 13-O-2065, passed 8-21-2013; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 36.295 AUDITS OF SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   (A)   Audit requirement. The city will notify the holder of the requirements
the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers to submit to
an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the same
requirements the city imposes on other cable service or video service providers
in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and to recompute
any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the city. If all
local franchises between the city and cable operators terminate, the audit
requirements shall be those adopted by the city pursuant to the Local
Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act (50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.). No acceptance
of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the amounts are
correct.
   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the city’s submission of an invoice for the sum.
(Ord. 13-O-2065, passed 8-21-2013; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 36.296 LATE FEES; PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments that are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by the city pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights
Act (50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.).
(Ord. 13-O-2065, passed 8-21-2013; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
CABLE/VIDEO CUSTOMER SERVICE PROTECTION LAW
§ 36.310 CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW.
   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/7-501 are hereby adopted by
reference and made applicable to the cable and video providers offering
services within the city’s boundaries.
   (B)   Amendments. Any amendments to the Cable and Video Customer Protection
Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this subchapter shall be
incorporated into this subchapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable
and video providers offering services within the municipality’s boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this subchapter by reference
without formal action by the authorities of the city.
(Ord. 10-O-1966, passed 2-17-2010; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 36.311 ENFORCEMENT.
   The city does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
city.
(Ord. 10-O-1966, passed 2-17-2010; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 36.312 CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   The city hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in provisions of 220 ILCS 5/70-501(s)
and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle
following the violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable
or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is
under no obligation to request the credit.
(Ord. 10-O-1966, passed 2-17-2010; Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
GROCERY RETAILERS’ AND SERVICE OCCUPATIONAL TAX
§ 36.325 MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
subchapter is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of § 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 24-O-2402, passed 12-4-2024)
§ 36.326 MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in §
36.325 above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of § 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 24-O-2402, passed 12-4-2024)
§ 36.327 ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 24-O-2402, passed 12-4-2024)
§ 36.328 CLERK TO FILE WITH ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   As required under § 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this subchapter
with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before April 1, 2025.
(Ord. 24-O-2402, passed 12-4-2024)
§ 36.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who wilfully violates any other provision of §§
36.075 through
36.081 of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $500, and, in addition, shall
be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
   (C)   Any person, owner, firm, manager or operator of motel or hotel
accommodations within the city found guilty of violating, omitting or refusing
to comply with the provisions of §§
36.095 through
36.103 of this chapter or of resisting the enforcement of any of the provisions
of those sections shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500, for
each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
which a violation occurs or continues.
   (D)   (1)   It shall be a violation of §§
36.250 through
36.255 for any person to fail to file a report within the time prescribed in
this chapter, to knowingly furnish false or inaccurate information or to
otherwise fail to comply with this chapter. Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
      (2)   All payments not remitted when due shall be paid together with a
penalty assessment on the unpaid balance at a rate of 1.5% per month.
      (3)   Any person who falsely reports or fails to report the amount of
push tax due required by this chapter shall be in violation of this chapter and
is subject to city license suspension or revocation, fines, seizure of
terminals and reporting to the Illinois Gaming Board.
      (4)   Suspension or revocation of city license. The Mayor or his or her
designee shall have the power to suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke
any video gaming license issued by the city for cause, if he/she determines a
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has occurred. However, no
such license shall be revoked or suspended except after the holding of a public
hearing by the Mayor or his or her designee. Ten days' notice of the hearing
shall be given to the licensee. Alternatively, the licensee shall have the
opportunity to engage in a prehearing conference and agree to negotiated
penalties rather than proceed to a hearing.
      (5)   Fine imposed. In addition, any terminal operator violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of $500 for the first
offense, and $750 for the second offense, and $1,000 for a third offense and
subject to reporting to the Illinois Gaming Board.
      (6)   Seizure for unlawful use. If the city determines a reasonable basis
for believing any terminal operator is using a video gaming terminal in an
illegal manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other federal,
state, or municipal law and/or regulation, said video gaming terminal may be
seized by the city, followed by an administrative hearing with notice to the
terminal operator within seven days of seizure to determine the appropriateness
of the seizure, and held until such time as the terminal operator of such video
gaming terminal pays any delinquent push tax amount, reimburses the city for
actual cartage costs incurred in the seizure and pays the city $20 for each day
the video gaming terminal has been in storage.
   (E)   (1)   Any person violating any provision of §§
36.270 through
36.277,
36.290 through
36.296, and
36.310 through
36.312 for which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of §§ 36.270 through
36.277 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 119.99)
      (3)   Any cable service or video service provider who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of §§
36.290 through
36.296 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
      (4)   The city, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1), does hereby provide
for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video
Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach and
shall not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
         (a)   MATERIAL BREACH means any substantial failure of a cable or
video provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in
any provision of the law.
         (b)   The city shall give the cable or video provider written notice
of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
         (c)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties,
shall be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been
remedied by the cable or video service provider after the notice in division
(4)(b) above.
(Prior Code, § 36.999) (Ord. 86-O-1232, passed - -1986; Ord. 93-O-1475, passed
6-16-1993; Ord. 97-O-1597, passed 1-2-1997; Ord. 21-O-2314, passed 10-31-2021;
Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
CHAPTER 37: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Council approval required for expenditures over $5,000 from Loss
Prevention Fund
   
37.02   Reimbursement of expenses incurred by city officials
   
37.03   Fees for criminal history record review
   
37.04   Vehicle licenses
   
37.05   Petty cash policy
Municipal Contracts
   
37.15   Contracts for public improvements
   
37.16   Municipal supplies contract
   
37.17   Advertisement for bids
Investment of City Funds
   
37.30   Policy
   
37.31   Scope
   
37.32   Prudence
   
37.33   Objectives
   
37.34   Delegation of authority
   
37.35   Ethics; conflicts of interest
   
37.36   Authorized financial dealers and institutions
   
37.37   Authorized and suitable investments
   
37.38   Collateralization
   
37.39   Safekeeping and custody
   
37.40   Diversification
   
37.41   Maximum maturities
   
37.42   Internal control
   
37.43   Performance standards
   
37.44   Reporting
   
37.45   Market value
   
37.46   Investment policy review
 
   
37.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Business Regulations, see Title XI
   City Council, see
Ch. 30
   Taxation, see
Ch. 36
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 COUNCIL APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR EXPENDITURES OVER $5,000 FROM LOSS
PREVENTION FUND.
   Prior to the expenditure of any sum in excess of $5,000 from the Insurance
Loss Prevention Fund, the expenditure claim must be approved by the City
Council. The Mayor shall not sign and the City Treasurer shall not issue a
payment in violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 37.01) (Ord. 88-O-1310, passed 5-18-1988)
§ 37.02 REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES INCURRED BY CITY OFFICIALS.
   (A)   The Annual Appropriation Ordinance shall list the total amount
allocated for expenses for city officials, both elected and appointed.
   (B)   An expense/voucher report, signed by the official shall be submitted
to the City Treasurer’s office for reimbursement in time to be on the bill list
for the next regular City Council meeting.
   (C)   The expense/voucher report must be supported by paid receipts or by
itemization adequate to determine that reimbursement are for actual
expenditures incurred by the official in the course of duty.
   (D)   The Treasurer’s office shall issue a check for expenses incurred when
supported by paid receipts or itemization as provided in division (C) above.
Said check shall be signed by both the Mayor and the Treasurer upon approval of
the bill list by the Council.
(Prior Code, § 37.02) (Ord. 87-O-1256, passed 1-7-1987)
§ 37.03 FEES FOR CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD REVIEW.
   (A)   There is established a fee in the amount of $10 lawful currency of the
United States of America for the purpose of defraying to the greatest extent
possible the cost of conducting a personal criminal history records review.
   (B)   The fee, as established in division (A) above, shall be payable by the
individual requesting a personal criminal history record review and shall be
paid at the time that such person may submit to the appropriate authorities of
the city a request for access and review to his personal criminal history
record.
(Prior Code, § 37.03) (Ord. 76-O-936, passed - -1976)
§ 37.04 VEHICLE LICENSES.
   (A)   Motor vehicle licenses issued by the city are required for the
following vehicles:
      (1)   All vehicles owned by residents of the city;
      (2)   All vehicles owned by those who have resided in the city for more
than 30 days;
      (3)   All vehicles owned by those that have a city address listed on
their driver's license; and
      (4)   All vehicles registered with the State of Illinois that list a
business or residential address within the city.
   (B)   Motor vehicle licenses, in the form of city stickers, are mandatory
and shall be affixed to the lower righthand corner of the vehicle's windshield.
   (C)   A grace period of 30 days shall apply to all vehicles that require an
initial vehicle sticker. Individuals applying for an initial vehicle sticker
must show proof that the vehicle was purchased within the past 30 days,
registered with an address within the city within the past 30 days, or proof of
a change of residency within the past 30 days to be entitled to a no-fee
vehicle license as specified in division (F) of this section. Failure to
provide said proof shall result in the issuance of tickets, penalties and late
fees as specified herein.
   (D)   Motor vehicle licenses shall be effective from January 1 to December
31 of a calendar year. Motor vehicle licenses must be picked up from the City
Hall no later than the end of February of each calendar year. Failure to pick
up a vehicle sticker by this date will result in the issuance of tickets,
penalties and late fees. The late fees shall be as follows:
 
Type               March 1 - March 31   April 1 - December 31
Passenger vehicles $25 ($5 for seniors) $50 ($10 for seniors)
Class B trucks     $44 ($5 for seniors) $88 ($10 for seniors)
Motorcycles        $15 ($5 for seniors) $30 ($10 for seniors)
Commercial trucks  $50                  $100
 
   (E)   Motor vehicle license fees shall be paid annually to the City Clerk
and shall be as follows:
License Fee
License                                                                Fee
Motorcycles                                                            No fee
Passenger vehicles                                                     No fee
Class B trucks                                                         No fee
Motor trucks, motor driven commercial vehicles and motor vehicles used
for public hire, gross weight in pounds including vehicle and maximum   
load
Pounds                            Class                                Fee
   3,000 or less               A                                    $38
   3,001 to 8,000              B                                    $44
   8,001 to 10,000             C                                    $50
   10,001 to 12,000            D                                    $56
   12,001 to 14,000            E                                    $62
   14,001 to 16,000            F                                    $68
   16,001 to 20,000            G                                    $75
   20,001 to 24,000            H-1                                  $81
   24,001 to 30,000            H-2                                  $88
   30,001 to 36,000            H-3                                  $94
   24,001 to 41,000 (3 or more X                                    $100
axles)
   41,001 to 45,000 (3 or more K                                    $106
axles)
   45,001 to 50,000 (4 or more L                                    $112
axles)
   50,001 or 59,000 (4 or more N                                    $119
axles)
   59,001 to 72,000 (5 axles)  P                                    $125
 
   (F)   Any violation of this section shall result in a penalty of no less
than $50 nor more than $150 per violation. A separate offense is deemed to have
been committed on each day during which or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 01-O-1724, passed 10-17-2001; Ord. 24-O-2405, passed 12-11-2024) Penalty,
see §
37.99
Cross-reference:
   Traffic Code, see Title VII
§ 37.05 PETTY CASH POLICY.
   (A)   Scope. The petty cash fund is established to make incidental purchases
where normal purchasing methods are not practical. All other purchases must go
through the accounts payable requisition process. Petty cash can never be used
for personal expenses or loans. Only city employees are allowed to utilize
petty cash funds.
   (B)   Petty cash custodian. The Treasurer shall appoint a petty cash
custodian. The petty cash custodian is responsible for insuring that petty cash
funds remain locked in the cash box at all times when not in use. The petty
cash custodian shall maintain custody of the keys to the cash box. The petty
cash custodian shall also insure that employees submit a “petty cash request
form” (Exhibit A) for all petty cash requests. The petty cash custodian shall
keep a ledger of all petty cash expenditures and submit petty cash
reimbursement requests.
   (C)   General ledger. A petty cash fund shall be established in the general
ledger. The balance should match cash on hand.
   (D)   Audit. Petty cash funds shall be reconciled on a monthly basis and
audited at fiscal year end.
   (E)   Procedures.
      (1)   The city employee completes the “petty cash request form” (Exhibit
A) and submits to the Treasurer’s office.
      (2)   The petty cash custodian gives the employee the cash and records
the petty cash withdrawal on the “petty cash tracking spreadsheet” (Exhibit B).
      (3)   Within two business days of issuance the employee returns any
change and the original receipt to the petty cash custodian.
      (4)   The petty cash custodian reconciles the returned cash with the
receipt and updates the “petty cash tracking spreadsheet” (Exhibit B).
      (5)   When petty cash is depleted to more than 40% of beginning balance
the petty cash custodian prepares a “petty cash AP voucher” (Exhibit C) and
submits to the Finance Director for approval.
      (6)   The Finance Director will review the voucher, and when approved
submit to Accounts Payable.
      (7)   Once the petty cash check is received from Accounts Payable it is
cashed and funds are locked back in the cash box.
   (F)   Balance. A petty cash fund shall be established in the amount of
$1,000. Additional funds may be added to this balance at the discretion of the
Treasurer.
   (G)   Dual control. The petty cash fund requires the use of dual control.
The petty cash custodian may not authorize the replenishment of the petty cash
fund nor cash the petty cash checks. Reimbursement requests will be reviewed
and approved by the Finance Director. Reimbursement checks will be negotiated
by the Finance Director and handed over to the petty cash custodian.
   (H)   Prohibited uses. The following are prohibited uses for petty cash:
      (1)   Personal use including use of personal bank accounts.
      (2)   Salaries or wages.
      (3)   Purchases of goods or services used in the normal operation of city
business.
      (4)   Payroll advances.
      (5)   Non-employee purchases.
      (6)   Purchases over $350.
(Ord. 23-O-2357, passed 4-26-2023)
MUNICIPAL CONTRACTS
§ 37.15 CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   Any work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for in whole or
in part by special assessments or special taxation, when the expense thereof
will exceed $500, shall be constructed by a contract let to the lowest
responsible bidder after advertising for bids. In the event municipal employees
are used for the performance of all labor, then all material of the value of
$500 or upward used in the construction of the work shall be purchased by
contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising for bids.
(Prior Code, § 37.15) (Ord. 71-O-781, passed - -1971)
§ 37.16 MUNICIPAL SUPPLIES CONTRACT.
   All supplies needed for use of the municipality, when the expense thereof
will exceed $500, shall be furnished by contract let to the lowest bidder after
advertising for bids. For the purpose of determining the lowest bidder, the
provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-9-2, as amended, shall be adhered to.
(Prior Code, § 37.16) (Ord. 71-O-781, passed - -1971)
§ 37.17 ADVERTISEMENT FOR BIDS.
   All proposals to award contracts involving in excess of $500 shall be
published at least ten days in advance of the date announced for the receiving
of bids in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the municipality.
(Prior Code, § 37.17) (Ord. 71-O-781, passed - -1971)
INVESTMENT OF CITY FUNDS
§ 37.30 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to invest public funds in a manner which will
provide the highest investment return and the maximum security while meeting
the daily cash flow demands of the city and conforming to all state and local
statutes governing the investment of public funds.
(Prior Code, § 37.25) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.31 SCOPE.
   This policy includes all funds governed by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 37.26) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.32 PRUDENCE.
   Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then
prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in
the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment
considering the probable safety of their capital, as well as the probable
income to be derived. The standard of prudence to be used by investment
officials shall be the “prudent person” standard and shall be applied in the
context of managing an overall portfolio.
(Prior Code, § 37.27) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.33 OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   The primary objective, in order or priority, shall be:
      (1)   Legality: conforming with federal, state, and other legal
requirements;
      (2)   Safety: preservation of capital and protection of investment
principal;
      (3)   Liquidity: maintenance of sufficient liquidity to meet operating
requirements; and
      (4)   Yield: attainment of market rates of return.
   (B)   The portfolio should be reviewed periodically as to its effectiveness
in meeting the city’s needs for safety, liquidity, rate of return,
diversification and its general performance.
(Prior Code, § 37.28) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.34 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   Management and administration responsibility for the investment program is
hereby delegated to the Treasurer, who at the direction of the City Council,
shall establish written procedures for the operation of the investment program.
(Prior Code, § 37.29) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.35 ETHICS; CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Officers and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from
personal business activity that could conflict with the proper execution and
management of the investment group, or that could impair their ability to make
impartial decisions.
(Prior Code, § 37.30) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.36 AUTHORIZED FINANCIAL DEALERS AND INSTITUTIONS.
   The Treasurer will maintain a list of financial institutions authorized to
provide investment services. In addition, a list will also be maintained of
approved security brokers/dealers selected by creditworthiness.
(Prior Code, § 37.31) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999; Ord. 16-O-2142,
passed 8-17-2016)
§ 37.37 AUTHORIZED AND SUITABLE INVESTMENTS.
   (A)   Investments may be made in any type of security allowed for in state
statutes regarding the investment of public funds.
   (B)   Investments shall be made that reflect the cash flow needs of the fund
type being invested.
(Prior Code, § 37.32) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.38 COLLATERALIZATION.
   Funds on deposit (checking accounts, certificates of deposit and the like)
in excess of FDIC limits must be secured by some form of collateral, witnessed
by a written agreement and held at an independent third party institution in
the name of the city.
(Prior Code, § 37.33) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.39 SAFEKEEPING AND CUSTODY.
   All security transactions, including collateral for repurchase agreements,
entered into by the city, shall be conducted on a delivery-versus-payment (DVP)
basis. Securities will be held by an independent third party custodian
designated by the Treasurer and evidenced by safekeeping receipts and a written
custodial agreement.
(Prior Code, § 37.34) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.40 DIVERSIFICATION.
   The city shall diversify its investments to the best of its ability based on
the type of funds invested and the cash flow needs of those funds.
Diversification can be by type of investment, number of institutions invested
in and length of maturity.
(Prior Code, § 37.35) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.41 MAXIMUM MATURITIES.
   To the extent possible, the city shall attempt to match its investments with
anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched to a specific cash flow, the
city will not directly invest in securities maturing more than ten years from
the date of purchase.
(Prior Code, § 37.36) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.42 INTERNAL CONTROL.
   (A)   The Treasurer is responsible for establishing and maintaining an
internal control structure designed to ensure that the assets of the city are
protected from loss, theft or misuse. The internal control structure shall be
designed to provide reasonable assurance that these objectives are met.
   (B)   The internal controls shall address the following points:
      (1)   Control of collusion;
      (2)   Supervision of transaction authority from accounting;
      (3)   Custodial safekeeping; and
      (4)   Written confirmation of telephone transactions for investments and
wire transfers.
(Prior Code, § 37.37) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.43 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   This investment portfolio will be managed in accordance with the guidelines
specified within this subchapter. The portfolio should obtain a comparable rate
of return during a market/economic environment of stable interest rates.
Portfolio performance should be compared to benchmarks with similar maturity,
liquidity and credit quality. The basis used by the Treasurer to determine
whether market yields are being achieved shall be the U.S. Treasury Bill and
the average Illinois Fund rate.
(Prior Code, § 37.38) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.44 REPORTING.
   The Treasurer shall prepare an investment report at least monthly. The
report should be provided to the City Council and available on request. The
report should be in a format suitable for review by the general public. An
annual report should also be provided to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 37.39) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.45 MARKET VALUE.
   A statement of the market value of the portfolio shall be issued to the City
Council quarterly.
(Prior Code, § 37.40) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.46 INVESTMENT POLICY REVIEW.
   The policy shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the Treasurer and any
modifications made thereto must be approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 37.41) (Ord. 99-O-1688, passed 12-15-1999)
§ 37.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates §
37.04 of this chapter shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not less
than $50 nor exceeding $200. A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 11-O-1985, passed 3-16-2011)
CHAPTER 38: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
Homeland Security Emergency Management Agency
   
38.01   Creation; purpose
   
38.02   Coordinator and members
   
38.03   Functions and duties
   
38.04   Service as mobile support team
   
38.05   Mutual aid agreement
   
38.06   Disaster emergency declared by Governor
   
38.07   Compensation
   
38.08   Reimbursement for expenses by state
   
38.09   Purchases and contracts authorized
   
38.10   Oath
   
38.11   Office space
   
38.12   Tax for emergency services and disaster operations
Proclamation of Emergency; Curfew
   
38.25   Proclamation by Mayor
   
38.26   When proclamation effective
   
38.27   Expiration of emergency
Continuity of Government
   
38.40   Short title
   
38.41   Definitions
   
38.42   Emergency interim successors
   
38.43   Assumption of power; duties of interim successor
   
38.44   Recordation and publication of rank and addresses
   
38.45   Taking office
   
38.46   Quorum and vote requirements
Emergency Response Fees
   
38.60   Definitions
   
38.61   Liability
   
38.62   Charges
   
38.63   Assessments; waiver of fees
   
38.64   Remedies
HOMELAND SECURITY EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
§ 38.01 CREATION; PURPOSE.
   There is created the city’s Homeland and Security Emergency Management
Agency to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage resulting
from disaster cause by enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action, or from
natural or human-made disaster, in accordance with the state’s Emergency
Services and Disaster Act of 1975.
(Prior Code, § 38.01) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
§ 38.02 COORDINATOR AND MEMBERS.
   (A)   This Homeland and Security Emergency Management Agency shall consist
of the coordinator and such additional members as may be selected by the
Coordinator.
   (B)   (1)   The Coordinator of the city’s Homeland and Security Emergency
Management Agency shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve until removed
by same.
      (2)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training and operation of the city’s Homeland and
Security Emergency Management Agency, subject to the direction and control of
the Mayor as provided by state statute.
      (3)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to
serve as the Coordinator, the Mayor or any person designated by him or her,
shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in
this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 38.02) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
§ 38.03 FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES.
   The city’s Homeland and Security Emergency Management Agency shall perform
such Homeland and Security Emergency Management Agency functions within the
city as shall be prescribed in and by the State Homeland and Security Emergency
Management Agency plan and program prepared by the Governor, and such orders,
rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor and, in addition,
shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may be required
pursuant to any mutual-aid agreement with any other political subdivision,
municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the state’s ESDA
Act of 1975.
(Prior Code, § 38.03) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
§ 38.04 SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   (A)   All or any members of the city’s Homeland and Security Emergency
Management Agency organization may be designated as members of a mobile support
team crated by the Director of the state’s ESDA as provided by law.
   (B)   The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the
Coordinator of the city’s Homeland and Security Emergency Management Agency
organization.
   (C)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a city employee or officer
while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall
receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities
incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid
officer or employee of the city, while so serving, shall receive from the state
reasonable compensation as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 38.04) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
§ 38.05 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT.
   The Coordinator of the city’s Homeland and Security Emergency Management
Agency may negotiate mutual-aid agreements with other political subdivisions of
the state, but no such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved
by the Mayor and by the state’s Director of ESDA.
(Prior Code, § 38.05) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
§ 38.06 DISASTER EMERGENCY DECLARED BY GOVERNOR.
   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or
from human-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the city’s
Homeland and Security Emergency Management Agency to cooperate fully with the
state’s ESDA and with the Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as
provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 38.06) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
§ 38.07 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the city’s Homeland and Security Emergency Management Agency who
are paid employees or officers of the city, if called for training by the
state’s Director of ESDA, shall receive for the time spent in such training,
the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held, members who are not
such city employees or officers shall receive from such training time such
compensation as may be established by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 38.07) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
§ 38.08 REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES BY STATE.
   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the state to the city for expenses incident to training
members of the city’s Homeland and Security Emergency Management Agency as
prescribed by the state’s Director of ESDA, compensation for services and
expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside the city in
response to a call by the Governor or state’s Director of ESDA, as provided by
law, and any other reimbursement made by the state incident to the city’s
Homeland and Security Emergency Management Agency activities as provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 38.08) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
§ 38.09 PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The Mayor may, on recommendation of the Coordinator of the city’s
Homeland and Security Emergency Management Agency, authorize any purchase of
contracts necessary to place the city in a position to combat effectively any
disaster resulting from the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile,
and to protect the public health and safety, protect property, and provide
emergency assistant to victims in the case of such disaster, or from human-made
or natural disaster.
   (B)   In the event of enemy-caused or other disaster, the Coordinator of the
city’s Homeland and Security Emergency Management Agency is authorized, on
behalf of the city, to procure such services, supplies, equipment or material
as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard
to the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law
pertaining to city contracts or obligations, as authorized by the state’s ESDA
Act of 1975, provided that if the Mayor meets at such time he or she shall act
subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(Prior Code, § 38.09) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
§ 38.10 OATH.
   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the city’s Homeland and
Security Emergency Management Agency organization shall, before entering upon
his or her duties, subscribe to the following oath, which shall be filed with
the Coordinator:
I,                              , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the
territory, institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private,
against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely,
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do
further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United State or of this State by force or violence; and
that during such time as I am affiliated with the City of Markham Homeland and
Security Emergency Management Agency organization, I will not advocate nor
become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence.
(Prior Code, § 38.10) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
§ 38.11 OFFICE SPACE.
   The Mayor is authorized and directed to provide such space in the police and
fire headquarters building and elsewhere as may be available and necessary for
the accommodation of the city’s Homeland and Security Emergency Management
Agency organization.
(Prior Code, § 38.11) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
§ 38.12 TAX FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER OPERATIONS.
   The Mayor may make an appropriation for Homeland and Security Emergency
Management Agency purposes in the manner provided by law, and may levy in
addition for Homeland and Security Emergency Management Agency purposes only, a
tax not to exceed $0.05 per $100 of the assessed value of all taxable property
in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the state’s ESDA Act of 1975;
however, that amount collectible under such levy shall in no event exceed $0.25
per capita.
(Prior Code, § 38.12) (Ord. 76-O-910, passed - -1976; Ord. 10-O-1968, passed 4-
21-2010)
PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY; CURFEW
§ 38.25 PROCLAMATION BY MAYOR.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
      CURFEW. A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering,
standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant
premises within the corporate limits of the city except officials of any
governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to
said civil emergency.
      EMERGENCY.
         (a)   A riot of unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power
to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law;
or
         (b)   Any natural disaster, epidemic, or manmade calamity, including
outbreak of disease, flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or
explosion, or eminent threat of any of those events within the corporate limits
of the city, resulting in or threatening the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Declaration. Whenever an emergency, as defined in division (A) of this
section exists, the Mayor is authorized to declare the existence of a Local
State of Emergency by means of a written declaration of the Mayor, under oath,
setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency, describing the nature
of the emergency and declaring that a Local State of Emergency exists in
accordance with the definitions set forth in this section. This declaration
must be filed with the Municipal Clerk as soon as practicable after issuance.
   (C)   Curfew authorized. After proclamation of a Local State of Emergency by
the Mayor, he or she may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical
areas of the city or to the city as a whole, as he or she deems reasonable and
advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night as he or she
deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
   (D)   Orders authorized. After the proclamation of a Local State of
Emergency, the Mayor may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare,
and to address this issue caused threatened by emergency, make take any and all
of the following actions by executive order during the state of emergency:
      (1)   All actions reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency;
      (2)   Approve previously appropriated expenditures of the city for the
purpose of continuing the operations of the municipality;
      (3)   In the event the Local State of Emergency extends beyond the
current fiscal year and a new budget has not been approved, the Mayor shall be
authorized to approve new spending by the city during the existence of the
Local State of Emergency;
      (4)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns
and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted;
      (5)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer;
      (6)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixes to a motor vehicle;
      (7)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever; and
      (8)   Order the closing of any other business establishment anywhere
within the city for the period of the emergency as the Mayor determines to be
necessary.
   (E)   Duration. The declaration herein authorized shall be effective until
the adjournment of the next regular or special meeting of the City Council,
whichever comes first, unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the Mayor
or his or her Emergency Interim Successor, indicating that the civil emergency
no longer exists. The Mayor or his or her Emergency Interim Successor, shall
have the power to re-proclaim the existence of an emergency on the 15th and
31st (or 30th) of each month, during the time said emergency exists.
   (F)   Notice. Upon issuing the declaration herein authorized, the Municipal
Clerk shall notify the news media situated within the city, and shall cause at
least four copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency
and any curfew to be posted at the following places within the city: the City
Hall, the police station, the post office, and in the area of any curfew.
   (G)   Violations. Any person violating the provisions of this section or
executive orders issues pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an offense against
the city and shall be punished as provided by Title XIII of the Markham Code of
Ordinances.
   (H)   Effect on other ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to impair the powers contained in this code, giving power to the
police and fire departments, but shall be construed together with existing
ordinance now in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
(Prior Code, § 38.25) (Ord. 68-O-684, passed - -1968; Ord. 20-O-2254, passed 3-
18-2020)
§ 38.26 WHEN PROCLAMATION EFFECTIVE.
   The proclamation of emergency provided in this subchapter shall become
effective immediately upon its issuance and dissemination to the public by
appropriate news media. The Chief of Police shall cause such proclamation,
forthwith upon its issuance, to be delivered to all news media within the city,
and he or she shall also use public address systems or other sound devices
throughout the city to notify the public of the proclamation and curfew.
(Prior Code, § 38.26) (Ord. 68-O-684, passed - -1968)
§ 38.27 EXPIRATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter shall expire not later than the adjournment of the first regular
meeting of the City Council after the state of emergency is declared, or upon
issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists, whichever
occurs first. However, such emergency may be extended for such additional
periods of time as determined necessary by resolution of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 38.27) (Ord. 68-O-684, passed - -1968)
CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT
§ 38.40 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Continuity of
Government Ordinance” of the city.
(Prior Code, § 38.40) (Ord. 492, passed - -1962)
§ 38.41 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTACK. Any attack or series of attacks by an enemy of the United States
causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to civilian property
or person sin the United States in any manner, by sabotage or by the use of
bombs, missiles, shellfire or atomic, radiological, chemical, bacteriological
or biological means or other weapons or processes.
   DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY. A person who is presently authorized to perform all
of the functions, exercise all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of
an office in the event the office is vacant or at such times as is lacks
administration due to the death, absence or disability of the incumbent
officer.
   EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR. A person designated pursuant to this chapter or
possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but not the office, of
the city officer in the event that such officer or any duly authorized deputy
is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office.
   UNAVAILABLE. Either that a vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy
authorized to exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of the
office, or that the lawful incumbent of the office (including any deputy
exercising the powers and discharging the duties of an office because of a
vacancy) any his or her duly authorized deputy are absent or unable, for
physical, mental or legal reasons, to exercise the power and discharge the
duties of the office.
(Prior Code, § 38.41) (Ord. 492, passed - -1962)
§ 38.42 EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSORS.
   (A)   Within 30 days following the effective date of this subchapter, and
thereafter within 30 days after first entering upon the duties of his or her
office, the Mayor, each member of the City Council and the City Clerk shall, in
addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate such number of emergency
interim successors to his office and specify their rank in order of succession
after any duly authorized deputy so that there will be not less than three duly
authorized deputies or emergency interim successors or combination thereof for
the office.
   (B)   The Council shall within the time specified in division (A) above, in
addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate for appointive officers and
employees including the Chief of the Fire Department, Chief of the Police
Department, Superintendent of Public Works, Director of Building and Housing,
City Attorney and Health Officer such number of emergency interim successors to
these officers and specify their rank in order of succession after any duly
authorized deputy so that there will be not less than three duly authorized
deputies or emergency interim successors or combination thereof for each
officer or employees are appointed or hired, but not covered in this division
(B), the Council shall, within the time specified in division (A) above, make
appointments in compliance with this division (B).
   (C)   The incumbent in the case of those elective officers specified in
division (A) above, and the Council in case of those appointive officers and
employees specified in division (B) above, shall review and, as necessary,
promptly revise the designations of emergency interim successors to insure that
at all times there are at least three such qualified emergency interim
successors or duly authorized deputies or any combination thereof for each
officer specified.
   (D)   No person shall be designated or serve as an emergency interim
successor unless he or she may, under the constitution and statutes of the
state and the ordinances of the city, hold the office of the person to whose
powers and duties he or she is designated to succeed, but no provision of this
code or any ordinance prohibiting an officer or employee of the city from
holding another office shall be applicable to an emergency interim successor.
   (E)   A person designated as an emergency interim successor holds that
designation at the pleasure of the designator; provided that, he or she must be
replaced if removed. He or she retains this designation as emergency interim
successor until replaced by another appointed by the authorized designator.
(Prior Code, § 38.42) (Ord. 492, passed - -1962; Ord. 19-O-2240, passed 10-2-
2019)
§ 38.43 ASSUMPTION OF POWER; DUTIES OF INTERIM SUCCESSOR.
   If, in the event of an attack, any officer or employee named in §
38.42(A) and (B) of this chapter and any duly authorized deputy is unavailable,
his or her emergency interim successor highest in rank in order of succession
who is not unavailable shall, except for the power and duty to appoint
emergency interim successors, exercise the powers and discharge the duties of
such officer. An emergency interim successor shall exercise these powers and
discharge these duties only until such time as the lawful incumbent officer or
any duly authorized deputy of an emergency interim successor higher in rank in
order of succession exercises, or resumes the exercise of, the powers, and
discharges the duties of his office, or until, where an actual vacancy exists,
a successor is appointed to fill such vacancy or is elected and qualified as
provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 38.43) (Ord. 492, passed - -1962)
§ 38.44 RECORDATION AND PUBLICATION OF RANK AND ADDRESSES.
   The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized
deputy shall be filed with the City Clerk and each designation, replacement or
change in order of succession of an emergency interim successor shall become
effective when the designator files with the Clerk the successor’s name,
address and rank in order of succession. The Clerk shall keep on file all such
data regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors and it
shall be open to public inspection.
(Prior Code, § 38.44) (Ord. 492, passed - -1962)
§ 38.45 TAKING OFFICE.
   At the time of their designation, emergency interim successors shall take
such oath and do such other things, if any, as may be required to qualify them
to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which they may
succeed.
(Prior Code, § 38.45) (Ord. 492, passed - -1962)
§ 38.46 QUORUM AND VOTE REQUIREMENTS.
   In the event of an attack, quorum requirements for the City Council shall be
suspended, and where the affirmative vote of a specified proportion of members
(four) for approval of an ordinance, resolution or other action would otherwise
be required, the same proportion of those voting thereon shall be sufficient.
(Prior Code, § 38.46) (Ord. 492, passed - -1962)
EMERGENCY RESPONSE FEES
§ 38.60 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMBULANCE.
      (1)   A motor vehicle maintained, operated or used on the streets, alleys
or public ways of the village, exclusively for the purpose of responding to
calls of an emergency nature or a non-emergency nature for the transportation
of persons who are sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or
helpless at the time of the dispatch of the vehicle. Each AMBULANCE shall have
at least two ambulance technicians in attendance.
      (2)   AMBULANCE does not include a vehicle specifically equipped for the
care and treatment of premature and high-risk infants and does not include a
vehicle specially equipped with a device capable of transmitting to the nearest
state-approved trauma center facility electrocardiograms via telemetry and
other similar equipment. An AMBULANCE may be used by prior appointment for the
transportation of persons sick, injured, incapacitated or non-ambulatory
invalid individuals, not requiring medical emergency care in transit. An
AMBULANCE may also render services within the village in case of accidents,
calamities or other extreme emergencies as a backup vehicle if insufficient
numbers of mobile intensive care units are available or if requested by a
private individual or his or her relative or guardian for strictly his private
use. An AMBULANCE may also render services in case of accidents, calamities or
other emergencies anywhere in the city if requested to do so by the state or
local public officer having responsibilities in connection with the emergency.
   AMBULANCE SERVICE. A person who is engaged in the business or service of
operating ambulances within the city.
   AMBULANCE TECHNICIAN or TECHNICIAN. A trained and qualified registered
emergency medical technician, certified by the National Registry of Emergency
Medical Technicians of Columbus, Ohio, and responsible for the interim care of
the patient during transit and at the origin of transit. Evidence of such
certification or capability of being certified within three months shall be
presented to the License Officer prior to employment as an ambulance technician
by an ambulance or MICU service.
   CERTIFIED EMERGENCY MOBILE INTENSIVE CARE TECHNICIAN or REGISTERED EMERGENCY
MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-II. An individual who has completed all training required by
and is certified as a mobile intensive care technician by the state’s
Department of Public Health. Such an individual shall present to the license
officer a letter of recommendation from the Medical Coordinator of the nearest
state MICU project prior to being employed as a certified mobile intensive care
technician by an ambulance of MICU service.
   EMERGENCY RESPONSE SERVICES. Includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Police response; and
      (2)   Fire Department response in conjunction with ambulance services.
(Ord. 0-7-12, passed 1-9-2012; Ord. 13-O-2064, passed 8-21-2013)
§ 38.61 LIABILITY.
   Notwithstanding any other provision or rule of law, the following persons
shall be jointly, or jointly and severally liable for all costs of emergency
response services as set forth in this subchapter:
   (A)   The owner of the property on which emergency response services are
provided or occur;
   (B)   The owner of a vehicle at which emergency response services are
provided or occur;
   (C)   Any person involved in any activity which caused or contributed to the
causation of the emergency, including, but not limited to, any person filing a
false report resulting in dispatch of emergency response services;
   (D)   In cases involving the rescue or recovery of an individual, the
individual and his or her employer if the person was in the city in furtherance
of the employer's interests;
   (E)   In cases involving the rescue or recovery of property, the owner of
the property and anyone who had custody or control of the property at the time
of the emergency; and
   (F)   Any person requiring emergency response services in conjunction with
an ambulance.
(Ord. 13-O-2064, passed 8-21-2013)
§ 38.62 CHARGES.
   The charges for city emergency response services or any other rescue service
are as follows:
   (A)   Emergency response: $150; and
   (B)   Non-resident response: $250.
(Ord. 13-O-2064, passed 8-21-2013)
§ 38.63 ASSESSMENTS; WAIVER OF FEES.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall preclude the assessment of fees or
other charges pursuant to any other city ordinance or resolution, including but
not limited to penalties for filing or causing false fire alarms.
(70 ILCS 705/6(h))
   (B)   The Treasurer is hereby authorized to waive any or all of the fees due
under this subchapter. He or she may do so by policy or on an individual basis.
(Ord. 13-O-2064, passed 8-21-2013)
§ 38.64 REMEDIES.
   Any person or entity that refuses to pay or fails to pay the above-listed
service charges within 60 days of notice of the charge will be deemed to have
violated this subchapter. The city reserves the right to pursue all remedies at
law and equity to recover service charges due and owing, including the use of
the services of a collection agency.
(Ord. 13-O-2064, passed 8-21-2013)
CHAPTER 39: CITY POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
39.01   Property annexed must annex to Park District
   
39.02   Disturbance of county rights-of-way; indemnification agreement with
county
Affirmative Action for Utilization of Minority Business Enterprises
   
39.15   Establishment of program
   
39.16   Scope of legislative act; intent
   
39.17   Definitions
   
39.18   Policy
   
39.19   Lists of minority business enterprises to be kept
   
39.20   Designation of specific projects and commodities for qualified minority
business enterprises
   
39.21   Performance bond
   
39.22   Administrative departments to provide assistance
   
39.23   Responsibility for implementation of policy
Sexual Harassment Reporting Procedure
   
39.30   Sexual harassment reporting procedure
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 39.01 PROPERTY ANNEXED MUST ANNEX TO PARK DISTRICT.
   As a condition to the passage of an ordinance annexing any property to bring
it within the city limits of the city, it is required that the petitioner or
petitioners for such annexation shall make application for annexation into the
city’s Park District and do whatever is necessary to bring about their
annexation of such property into the city’s Park District.
(Prior Code, § 39.01) (Ord. 572, passed - -1965)
§ 39.02 DISTURBANCE OF COUNTY RIGHTS-OF-WAY; INDEMNIFICATION AGREEMENT WITH
COUNTY.
   In consideration of waiver by the county of the insurance and surety bond
requirements or projects or activities which may be undertaken by the city
involving as disturbance of any right-of-way of the county within the corporate
limits of the city that it is agreed that:
   (A)   The city, or its successors, or assigns, shall indemnify and save
harmless the county, its officers, agents, employees and servants against all
loss, damage or expense that it or they may sustain as a result of any suit,
actions or claims of any character brought on account of property damage,
injury to or death of any person, or persons including persons performing any
work or activity under a permit issued by the county’s Highway Department which
any arise in connection with the work or activities to be performed under all
permits arising in any manner from the negligence or wrongful acts or failure
to act by the city and its employees in the performance of the work or
activity; and
   (B)   The city shall, at its own expense, appear, defend and pay all charges
of attorneys, costs and other expenses arising therefrom or incurred in
connection therewith, and, if any judgment shall be rendered against the county
in any such action, the city shall, at its own expense. Satisfy and the city
shall discharge the same.
(Prior Code, § 39.02) (Ord. 87-O-1269, passed 4-1-1987)
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION FOR UTILIZATION OF MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISES
§ 39.15 ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM.
   There is hereby established an Affirmative Action Program for the
Utilization of Minority Business Enterprises, and the Mayor is hereby directed
to implement the policies established in said programs.
(Prior Code, § 39.10) (Ord. 86-O-1240, passed 8-6-1986)
§ 39.16 SCOPE OF LEGISLATIVE ACT; INTENT.
   This subchapter and each of its terms shall be the effective legislative act
of a municipality without regard to whether such provisions should contain
terms contrary to the provision of current or subsequent nonpreemptive state
law, or legislate in a manner, or regarding a matter not delegated to
municipalities by state law. It is the intent of the corporate authorities of
the city that to the extent that the terms of this subchapter should be
inconsistent with any non-preemptive state law, that this subchapter shall
supersede state law in that regard within its jurisdiction.
(Prior Code, § 39.11) (Ord. 86-O-1240, passed 8-6-1986)
§ 39.17 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE. A business enterprise in which 51% or more of
the investment capital is owned or controlled by members of minority groups.
   MINORITY GROUP. Women and any racial, religious or ethnic group which is a
minority within the Chicago metropolitan area, the members of which have been
hindered in their ability to engage in business enterprises because of racial,
religious, ethnic or sex discrimination. MINORITY GROUPS include Blacks,
Hispanics, American Indians and Oriental.
(Prior Code, § 39.12) (Ord. 86-O-1240, passed 8-6-1986)
§ 39.18 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city that all contracts for the purchase by the city
of goods and/or services in excess of $2,500 shall contain the following
clause:
Contractor agrees that he shall actively solicit bids for the subcontracting of
goods or services from qualified minority business enterprises. At the request
of the city, contractor shall furnish evidence of his compliance with his
minority solicitation requirement. Contractor further agrees to consider the
grant of subcontractors to bidders who are minority business enterprises in a
light favorable to said minority enterprises where proposals are substantially
equal. Contractor further affirms that in obtaining his performance and bid
bonds, he will seek out and attempt to utilize companies which have records of,
and/or which will make commitments to, the bonding of minority contractors on a
rate basis comparable to their bonding of similar non-minority contractors. The
contractor may be required to submit this evidence as part of the bid or
subsequent to it. Contractor further agrees that 50% of its employees who
perform the contractor’s contractual obligations with the city shall be either
members of a minority group or residents of the city, unless such an agreement
would violate an applicable law, rule or regulation, or the Constitutions of
either the United States or the State of Illinois. For purposes of determining
whether the aforementioned not less than 50% standard has been met, employees
of subcontractors shall be considered employees of the contractor.
(Prior Code, § 39.13) (Ord. 86-O-1240, passed 8-6-1986)
§ 39.19 LISTS OF MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISES TO BE KEPT.
   The purchasing agents of the city shall develop and maintain source lists of
minority business enterprises and shall include those applicable business
enterprises in solicitation of service and/or materials. Said list shall be
kept substantially current and shall include new business enterprises as the
occasion warrants. All other departments of the city involved in the
solicitation of services or materials shall utilize the aforesaid list on bid
solicitations. All departments of the city shall affirmatively and actively
seek the participation of minority business enterprises in procurement of goods
and services. Each department of the city shall submit a quarterly report on
the utilization of minority business enterprises to the office of the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 39.14) (Ord. 86-O-1240, passed 8-6-1986)
§ 39.20 DESIGNATION OF SPECIFIC PROJECTS AND COMMODITIES FOR QUALIFIED MINORITY
BUSINESS ENTERPRISES.
   Consistent with all applicable laws, rules, regulations and the
Constitutions of the United States and the state, the Mayor shall, in
developing the work program and purchasing program of the city for each year,
designate specific projects and commodities which are to be preserved for
qualified minority business enterprises. Qualified business enterprises shall
be requested to submit proposals as to their cost of performing such contracts.
Upon approval of the annual budget, the Mayor shall meet with the appropriate
persons to determine those projects and commodities to be designated as reserve
for minority business enterprises. One of the considerations to be made by the
Mayor is the availability of competition among minority business enterprises in
the areas chosen. The Mayor shall not proceed with the program until the
Mayor’s designation of projects and commodities for minority business
enterprises is approved by the City Council as being consistent with city
policy and with all applicable laws, rules, regulations and the Constitutions
of the United States and the state. The results of each years program shall be
reported to the Council annually with recommendations for appropriate charges.
(Prior Code, § 39.15) (Ord. 86-O-1240, passed 8-6-1986)
§ 39.21 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   When the Mayor determines that the provisions of a performance bond which
would otherwise be required by any law, rule or regulation of the city or by
any state law, rules or regulation which does not preempt the power of
municipal units of local government is not needed to protect the city, and when
an alternative means of protecting the city in the performance of work is
available, a requirement of a performance bond shall not be included as part of
the bid specifications. It is the policy of the city that this procedure should
be utilized when it is determined that the requirement of a performance bond
would tend to discourage minority business enterprises form doing business with
the city.
(Prior Code, § 39.16) (Ord. 86-O-1240, passed 8-6-1986)
§ 39.22 ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS TO PROVIDE ASSISTANCE.
   The administrative departments of the city shall cooperate with all
agencies, public and private, formed for the purpose of assisting minority
business enterprises to the extent necessary to complete studies and surveys of
the role and function of minority business enterprises. Said administrative
departments shall further give all necessary technical assistance to minority
business enterprises in the preparation and submission of bids for the
provision of goods and services.
(Prior Code, § 39.17) (Ord. 86-O-1240, passed 8-6-1986)
§ 39.23 RESPONSIBILITY FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICY.
   The office of the Mayor of the city shall be charged with the responsibility
for implementation and procedural development of the policies set out in this
subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 39.18) (Ord. 86-O-1240, passed 8-6-1986)
SEXUAL HARASSMENT REPORTING PROCEDURE
§ 39.30 SEXUAL HARASSMENT REPORTING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Pursuant to 5 ILCS 430/70-5 of the Act, elected city officials are
encouraged to promptly report claims of sexual harassment by another elected
official. Every effort should be made to file such complaints as soon as
possible, while facts are known, and potential witnesses are available. If the
elected official feels comfortable doing so, he or she should directly inform
the harassing individual that the individual's conduct or communication is
offensive and must stop.
   (B)   Elected officials should report claims of sexual harassment against an
Alderman to the Mayor or the City Clerk. If the report is made to the Mayor,
the Mayor shall promptly notify the City Clerk. If the Mayor is the subject of
the complaint, the City Clerk shall notify the most senior Alderman. The senior
Alderman is defined as the Alderman who was sworn into office on the earliest
date. If two or more aldermen were sworn into office on the same date,
seniority will be determined by alphabetical order of the Alderman's last name.
If the report is made to the City Clerk, the City Clerk shall promptly notify
the Mayor. If the City Clerk is the subject of the complaint, the Mayor shall
notify the most senior Alderman. Reports of sexual harassment will be
confidential to the greatest extent possible.
   (C)   When a complaint of sexual harassment is made against an elected
official, the Mayor shall appoint a qualified independent human resources
investigator, the Cook County Inspector General or, as a last resort, a law
firm that has experience in workplace investigations to conduct an independent
review of the allegations. If the allegations concern the Mayor, or the Mayor
is a witness or otherwise conflicted, the City Clerk shall make the
appointment. If the allegations concern both the Mayor and the City Clerk and/
or they are both witnesses or otherwise conflicted, the senior most Alderman
shall make the appointment. The investigator shall prepare a written report and
submit it to the Mayor and City Council.
   (D)   If the investigator finds that the elected official that is the
subject of the investigation has engaged in sexual harassment, the matter will
be addressed in accordance with the authority of the Board and the finding
shall be forwarded to the complainant and the Illinois Department of Human
Rights.
(Ord. 20-O-2259, passed 4-15-2020)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
      
51.   WATER
      
52.   SEWER USE
      
53.   WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Purpose
   
50.002   Definitions
Disposal and Collection
   
50.015   Accumulation of garbage on premises prohibited
   
50.016   Containers; household; non-household
   
50.017   Disposal of garbage in streets and public places prohibited
   
50.018   Disposal of wet garbage
   
50.019   Disposal of cardboard cartons and tree cuttings
   
50.020   Collection; schedule; frequency; duty of households
   
50.021   Restrictions on placement of containers for pickup
   
50.022   Scavenger regulations
   
50.023   City to provide exclusive scavenger service for residential premises;
containers
   
50.024   Rates of charges for service; residential; commercial
   
50.025   Special collection of bulky items and debris
Spring Cleanup
   
50.040   Purpose
   
50.041   Determination of date for spring cleanup
   
50.042   Disposal of tree trimmings
Citations and Payment of Fines
   
50.055   When citation issued
   
50.056   Serving notice to appear
   
50.057   Payment by violator
   
50.058   Fee for violation; non-payment of fine
Enforcement
   
50.070   Enforcement by Health Officer
   
50.071   Removal of garbage by city; notice; lien
   
50.072   Suit at law
   
50.073   Implementations
Illegal Disposal of Garbage
   
50.085   Illegal disposal of garbage on streets or private property
   
50.086   Use of motor vehicles in illegal disposal of garbage
   
50.087   Towing and forfeiture of motor vehicles used in illegal disposal
   
50.088   Enforcement
 
   
50.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter shall be to regulate and control the
accumulation, removal and disposal of refuse, garbage and rubbish and to
eliminate unhealthy, unsanitary and unsightly conditions in the city.
(Prior Code, § 50.01) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978)
§ 50.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. Rejected food wastes and includes every waste accumulation of
animal, fruit or vegetable matter used or intended for food, and such paper as
may necessarily be used for wrapping.
   REFUSE. All solid wastes of a community including garbage, ashes, rubbish,
dead animals, paper, sweepings and solid market and industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH. Such matter as ashes, cans, metalware, broken glass, crockery,
dirt, sweepings, boxes, wood, grass clippings or litter of any kind.
   SCAVENGER or REFUSE DISPOSAL CONTRACTOR. Any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the business of collecting and disposing of garbage, refuse and
rubbish.
(Prior Code, § 50.02) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978)
DISPOSAL AND COLLECTION
§ 50.015 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE ON PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   The owner, occupant and lessee of any premises in the city shall cause to be
removed from the premises all garbage, rubbish and refuse and shall keep the
premises at all times free and clean from any accumulation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 50.10) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.016 CONTAINERS; HOUSEHOLD; NON-HOUSEHOLD.
   (A)   Household container specifications. All household garbage, which shall
be drained and wrapped, and all household rubbish, excepting bulky rubbish such
as trees and branches, shall be stored in durable rust- resistant, non-
absorbent water-tight and easily washed containers which shall have covers.
Containers of the type intended to be emptied manually shall have adequate
handles or bales to facilitate collection and shall be not less than 20, nor
more than 30, gallons in capacity. Grass clippings and tree leaves may be
stored in plastic bags having a maximum capacity of four bushels.
   (B)   Non-household container specifications. All institutional, commercial
and industrial garbage shall be stored in durable, metal, rust-resisting or
corrosion-resistant, non-absorbent, water-tight and easily washable containers,
which shall have covers. Containers of the type intended to be emptied manually
shall have adequate handles or bales to facilitate collection, and shall be not
less than 20, nor more than 30, gallons in capacity. Grass clippings and tree
leaves may be stored in plastic bags having a minimum capacity of four bushels.
(Prior Code, § 50.11) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978)
§ 50.017 DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE IN STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES PROHIBITED.
   It shall unlawful to dispose of or place any garbage or refuse in any street
or any other public place within the city, nor shall any person dispose of or
place any garbage, rubbish or refuse on private property, whether owned by such
person or not, within the limits of the city, unless the same shall be enclosed
in a suitable container or containers, for collection. A container shall be a
can of galvanized iron or non-corrosive material, rodent- proof, water-tight
and of the type commonly sold as a garbage can, of a suitable gauge and
construction to ensure durability.
(Prior Code, § 50.12) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.018 DISPOSAL OF WET GARBAGE.
   Each such occupant, person or tenant in possession shall cause all garbage
produced in or brought into such house, building or apartment, except that
disposed of by means of a garbage grinder, to be thoroughly drained of any
surplus liquid, securely wrapped and deposited in said container. All other
refuse or rubbish, as defined in §
50.002 of this chapter, may be deposited in such containers for collection.
(Prior Code, § 50.13) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978)
§ 50.019 DISPOSAL OF CARDBOARD CARTONS AND TREE CUTTINGS.
   (A)   Large cardboard cartons shall be broken down and bundled or tied
securely. Tree cuttings and branches shall be bundled securely in lengths not
to exceed four feet and heights to exceed two feet. The weight of any bundled
refuse shall not exceed 50 pounds.
   (B)   Beginning 12-1-2001, all grass clippings, leaves and yard waste shall
be placed in paper recycling bags or plastic garbage bags with a maximum 30-
gallon capacity. In order to be collected, a sticker must be affixed to each
bag which can be purchased at the city at a cost of $0.50 per sticker.
(Prior Code, § 50.14) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978; Ord. 01-O-1723, passed 10-17-2001) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.020 COLLECTION; SCHEDULE; FREQUENCY; DUTY OF HOUSEHOLDS.
   (A)   (1)   All household garbage, refuse and rubbish shall be collected at
least once a week according to the following schedule and in accordance with
the following schedule. Collection of garbage, refuse and rubbish from
residential customers shall be completed on each day before the hour of 3:00
p.m. and shall be collected from various areas within the city in accordance
with the following schedule, to wit:
 
          From 159th Street south to 167th Street between Kedzie Parkway and
Monday    Dixie Highway and from 156th Place south to 159th Street between
          Dixie Highway and Western Avenue
Tuesday   From 159th Street south to 167th Street between Kedzie and the
          municipal boundary lying west of Crawford Avenue
Wednesday From 161st Street south to 167th Street between Dixie Highway and
          Park Avenue
          From 159th Street north to 155th Street between Central Park Avenue
          and Kedzie Avenue; from 159th Street north and east to Calitonia
          between Rockwell Street and Kedzie Avenue; and that portion of the
Thursday  city lying west of Interstate 57 east of Crawford Avenue, south of
          149th Street and north of 159th Street
          Or
          From 159th Street north between Rockwell on the east and Crawford on
          the west to the northern municipal city boundary
 
      (2)   All are as depicted on the map appended to the ordinance codified
herein as “Exhibit A”, which map is incorporated herein by reference and made a
part hereof as though fully set forth.
   (B)   It shall be mandatory for every household or other residential
establishment within the city to provide for the collection of such garbage,
refuse or rubbish and to place the same in proper containers for pickup by the
licensed scavenger or the city’s Department of Sanitation in accordance with
the schedule in this section.
   (C)   All institutional, commercial and industrial garbage and refuse shall
be collected daily, except Sunday; rubbish shall be collected at least weekly.
(Prior Code, § 50.15) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978; Ord.82-O-1088, passed 6-21-1982; Ord. 04-O-1786, passed 3-17-2004)
Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.021 RESTRICTIONS ON PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS FOR PICKUP.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful to place containers or bundles of refuse on the
public rights-of-way for the purpose of pickup by commercial refuse haulers or
the city’s Department of Sanitation any earlier than 6:00 p.m. of the day
preceding the date of pickup.
      (2)   It is also unlawful to leave any empty containers upon the public
rights-of-way past the hour of 8:00 p.m. on the pickup day.
   (B)   It is unlawful to place or permit to be left upon the roadway any
containers or bundles at any time.
(Prior Code, § 50.16) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.022 SCAVENGER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person owning, driving or controlling the use of any vehicle used
for the carrying or transporting of any garbage, refuse or rubbish shall cause
or permit the vehicle, when in use for such purpose, to stand or remain before
or near any building or premises occupied by any person for an unreasonable or
unnecessary length of time. All scavenger vehicles shall be of the all-metal,
totally enclosed, packer type so that garbage, refuse or rubbish being carried
or transported on city streets will not be exposed and so that noxious fluids
will not leak out. Any person owning, driving or controlling such scavenger
vehicle shall cause all such vehicles to be thoroughly disinfected at least
once a week unless the same shall not have been used since the last
disinfection thereof. The vehicle or vehicles shall be subject to city
inspection from time to time.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of a
scavenger, or collecting or removing garbage or offal, without first securing a
license therefor. Any person desiring such a license shall make application, in
writing, to the City Clerk in accordance with
Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances. All licenses issued to a scavenger or
refuse disposal contractor shall be for a period not to exceed one year
expiring on April 30 of each year.
   (C)   The annual license fee for a refuse disposal collector or scavenger
shall be $35 for one vehicle, plus $15 for each additional vehicle. The fee for
licenses issued after May 1 in any year shall be prorated over the period the
license will be in effect.
   (D)   (1)   All persons doing business as scavengers in the city must be
fully in compliance with all sections of this code of ordinances and ordinances
relating to the business, or relating to traffic or the movement of vehicles on
the streets.
      (2)   (a)   No license shall be issued under the provisions of this
subchapter unless the applicant for such license has first submitted proof of
insurance in the form of a certificate or memorandum of insurance issued by an
insurer duly authorized to issue such policies in the state; such insurance to
be written by a company acceptable to the City Council. Such certificate or
memorandum shall show that the applicant for a license has public liability
insurance covering his or her operation within the city, shall show the date of
expiration of such insurance and shall certify that the same shall not be
cancelled without at least ten days’ notice to the city. Upon cancellation or
expiration without renewal of such insurance, the license issued hereunder to
the insured shall be void.
         (b)   Such insurance shall be in the amount of not less than $100,000
for personal injuries including accidental death to any one person, in an
amount not less than $300,000 for each such accident and, as to property
damage, not less than $25,000 for each accident.
      (3)   No license shall be issued under the provisions of this subchapter
unless the applicant for such a license agrees to hold the city harmless from
any and all claims, damages or loss of use resulting from the applicant’s
business operations in the city. The insurance coverage shall include an
endorsement covering said “hold harmless” agreement in favor of the city.
      (4)   No license shall be issued under the provisions of this subchapter
unless the applicant files a performance bond with the sureties to be approved
by the Mayor and Council in the sum of $10,000 with the city as beneficiary,
conditioned upon the applicant continuing to properly operate the business of
scavenger for the period covered by the license in accordance with the
provisions of this code and to perform such collection and disposal services on
all accounts in accordance with provisions of this chapter. Upon cancellation
or expiration of such bond without replacement or renewal, the license issued
hereunder shall be void.
      (5)   No license shall be issued unless the applicant agrees to make
garbage and refuse collections in the areas and on the days as determined by
the city.
      (6)   Scavengers who contract for individual residential or commercial
(business) accounts for garbage, refuse and rubbish disposal and collection
shall service all such accounts not withstanding whether the account is paid in
full or not for at least 30 days after such account is delinquent; and, further
provided, they give notice to the city of all accounts, and all accounts
delinquent more than 30 days. Scavengers must notify the city of all changes in
accounts.
(Prior Code, § 50.17) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.023 CITY TO PROVIDE EXCLUSIVE SCAVENGER SERVICE FOR RESIDENTIAL PREMISES;
CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Effective 7-1-1982, the city shall be the only entity authorized to
provide scavenger services to and for single- and multiple-family residences
located within the corporate boundaries.
   (B)   Owners and occupants of each single- or multi-family dwelling within
the corporate boundaries shall be furnished with suitable containers for the
storage of garbage and refuse and the collection thereof by the city. Such
containers: shall be of a type, size and construction determined by the city;
shall be compatible with existing city equipment and procedures for the
collection of garbage and waste; and shall be provided by the city without
charge to the resident user thereof.
   (C)   Containers shall at all times remain the property of the city.
Residential users thereof shall be responsible to the city for damage to or
loss of such containers attributable to the negligence of, carelessness of or
willful acts of such resident users.
   (D)   No person, firm, organization, association, partnership, joint venture
or other entity, other than the city, shall engage in or undertake to provide
scavenger services to or for any residential structure or residential use
within the corporate boundaries of the city.
   (E)   No license shall henceforth be issued to any person, firm or entity
for the purpose of conducting a business of providing scavenger service to any
residential structure or use within the corporate boundaries of the city. Any
person, firm, corporation or other entity presently holding a current and valid
license to so operate shall be entitled, upon application to the city, to a
refund of moneys paid for such license, said refund to be prorated on a daily
basis from May 1 to July 1.
(Prior Code, § 50.18) (Ord. 82-O-1086, passed 5-17-1982) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.024 RATES OF CHARGES FOR SERVICE; RESIDENTIAL; COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   The charge for residential garbage and refuse disposal services for
fiscal year 2025-2026 starting October 1, 2025 will be $26.93 which will be due
each month for each residence.
   (B)   Spring clean-up shall be for one week during the month of May, at the
city’s discretion. During the clean-up week, all household trash will be
collected, including branch pick up. Branches must be separated from the
household trash and placed at the curb on the regularly scheduled garbage pick
up day during clean-up week. Cut trees will be picked up for a fee, to be
determined by the size (cubic yards). There shall be an additional charge for
trash collected in addition to the 90-gallon cart and two bags, up to four
cubic yards. Trash in excess of four cubic yards will not be collected without
city approval. Once approved, the excess trash will also be subject to an
additional charge. Charges for excess trash, bulk items and branches (outside
of clean-up week) shall be placed on the water account.
(Prior Code, § 50.19) (Ord. 85-O-1181, passed 6-22-1985; Ord. 87-O-1267, passed
3-18-1987; Ord. 94-O-1503, passed 7-20-1994; Ord. 97-O-1606, passed 5-7-1997;
Ord. 98-O-1650, passed 7-1-1998; Ord. 98-O-1655, passed 7-15-1998; Ord. 13-O-
2054, passed 4-24-2013; Ord. 19-O-2234, passed 6-19-2019; Ord. 21-O-2304,
passed 7-21-2021; Ord. 25-O-2415, passed 9-3-2025)
§ 50.025 SPECIAL COLLECTION OF BULKY ITEMS AND DEBRIS.
   (A)   (1)   There shall be certain days and times designated by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works in the spring and fall of the
year for the pick-up and disposal of bulky items and debris from residential
locations within the city at no additional charge.
      (2)   The designation of those dates and times shall be given the widest
possible publication and notice to the residents of the city.
   (B)   Residents may contact the Department of Public Works for the pick-up
of bulky items and debris from residential locations at times other than those
published dates and times in the spring and fall of the year; provided that,
payment of fees for such services in the amount of $15 for a one-half truck
load and $30 for a full truck load as may be estimated by the Superintendent of
Public Works as necessary to accomplish such task, is made not less than five
days in advance of the date of the requested service, to the city at the office
of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 50.20) (Ord. 98-O-1647, passed 6-17-1998; Ord. 98-O-1655, passed
7-15-1998)
SPRING CLEANUP
§ 50.040 PURPOSE.
   For a two-week period in the spring season of each calendar year, there
shall be conducted in the city a spring cleanup for the purpose of encouraging
and assisting the residents of the city in their individual efforts to improve
the aesthetic appearance of their properties, thereby producing a beneficial
effect upon the city as a whole.
(Prior Code, § 50.30) (Ord. 75-O-894, passed - -1975)
§ 50.041 DETERMINATION OF DATE FOR SPRING CLEANUP.
   The dates during which the spring cleanup shall be conducted shall be
determined and established each year in such manner that the program may be
both compatible with other business of the city and conducted at such time that
appropriate weather conditions may be anticipated.
(Prior Code, § 50.31) (Ord. 75-O-894, passed - -1975)
§ 50.042 DISPOSAL OF TREE TRIMMINGS.
   During the course of the cleanup, the city shall arrange for the pickup and
disposal of accumulated tree trimmings and branches which have been deposited
at areas to be designated for such pickup and disposal.
(Prior Code, § 50.32) (Ord. 75-O-894, passed - -1975)
CITATIONS AND PAYMENT OF FINES
§ 50.055 WHEN CITATION ISSUED.
   Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest a person without warrant
because of any violation of the provisions of this chapter, the police officer
may, in lieu of the filing of a complaint in court, in the first instance issue
to such alleged violator a citation, advising the person that he or she has
violated a specified provisions of this chapter or any applicable ordinance
requesting him or her to make payment in an amount applicable to the violation
as set forth in §
50.058 of this chapter as settlement of the violation claim and informing him
or her that, upon failure to so settle, a complaint will be filed in the
Circuit Court of the county, charging him or her with such violation.
(Prior Code, § 50.45) (Ord. 613, passed - -1966)
§ 50.056 SERVING NOTICE TO APPEAR.
   In the event that the person to whom the citation is issued fails to settle
and pay the violation claim within the prescribed time, or within a period of
time specified in a final notice, if one is served upon him or her, then the
peace officer is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be served upon the
alleged violator and is authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the
same in the Circuit Court of the county.
(Prior Code, § 50.46) (Ord. 613, passed - -1966)
§ 50.057 PAYMENT BY VIOLATOR.
   (A)   Pursuant to the citation, the person so accused of the violation may
settle and compromise the violation claim in respect to the chapter or any
applicable ordinance violation by paying the municipality the applicable amount
as shown in the schedule set forth in §
50.058 of this chapter, within a period to be specified in the citation, not
more than seven days after the time the alleged offense was committed.
   (B)   Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions
contained in the citation, at the office of the Police Department, which shall
issue a receipt for the money so received and promptly remit the amount to the
City Treasurer to be credited to the proper municipal fund.
(Prior Code, § 50.47) (Ord. 613, passed - -1966)
§ 50.058 FEE FOR VIOLATION; NON-PAYMENT OF FINE.
   The violation claim described in the citation to be issued pursuant to the
terms of this chapter may be settled, compromised and paid in the respective
amounts set forth in the following schedule.
   (A)   In the event that the payment is made prior to the mailing by the
municipality or by the peace officer of a final notice, $5 shall be accepted as
settlement.
   (B)   In the event that payment has not be paid prior to the mailing of a
final notice and, in fact, final notice has been mailed, $7 shall be accepted
as settlement.
   (C)   In the event that payment is not made within the time prescribed in
the final notice, and a notice to appear has been served and a complaint filed
in the Circuit Court of the county, payment of any fine and costs shall be in
such amounts as may be determined and established by the Circuit Court of the
county.
(Prior Code, § 50.48) (Ord. 613, passed - -1966; Ord. 69-O-705, passed - -1969)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 50.070 ENFORCEMENT BY HEALTH OFFICER.
   The Health Officer shall notify anyone who violates the provisions of this
chapter in writing to such person directing him or her to cease and desist with
respect to such violation. Should the condition continue to exist the Health
Officer shall issue a citation or summons to such violator. Should the
violation still exist, the Health Officer shall cause a complaint to be sworn
to and warrant to be issued for such violation.
(Prior Code, § 50.60) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978)
§ 50.071 REMOVAL OF GARBAGE BY CITY; NOTICE; LIEN.
   (A)   The Health Officer, knowing a health hazard exists due to uncollected
garbage, refuse or rubbish, shall report same to the Mayor who, after giving
notice to the violator to remove such garbage, refuse or rubbish, may cause the
city to remove and collect such garbage, refuse or rubbish from the property by
the use of city vehicles and city employees, or by an agreement with a licensed
scavenger.
   (B)   The costs for such services rendered in the collection and cleanup and
disposal of such garbage, refuse or rubbish shall constitute a lien on the real
estate operated as provided by statute, superior to all subsequent liens and
encumbrances, except tax liens, if within 60 days after such cost and expense
are incurred the city or person performing the service by authority of the
city, in his or its own name, files notice of lien in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of the county or in the office of the Registrar of Title of
the county if the real estate affected is registered under the Torrens system.
   (C)   The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a
description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the
amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service and the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
city.
   (D)   However, the lien of such city shall not be valid as to any purchaser
whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to removal of
the garbage and debris and prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of
such city shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other
lienor whose rights in and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of
such notice.
   (E)   Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons
interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall
be released by the city or person in whose name the lien has been filed and the
release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien.
   (F)   The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in the case of
mortgages or mechanics’ liens. Suit to foreclose this lien shall be commenced
within two years after the date of filing notice of lien.
(Prior Code, § 50.61) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978)
§ 50.072 SUIT AT LAW.
   Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the city from filing an action in a
suit at law for total costs and expenses incurred for the removal of garbage,
refuse and rubbish against any person.
(Prior Code, § 50.62) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978)
§ 50.073 IMPLEMENTATIONS.
   (A)   There is created a standing committee of five members composed of
three Council members and two members of the public, to be appointed by the
Mayor upon the advice and consent of the City Council, to meet monthly and
review all problems arising in the city with respect to the subject matter of
this chapter with the duty to make further recommendations to the Council and
with the purpose of eliminating unhealthy, unsanitary and unsightly conditions
in the city.
   (B)   The Health Officer of the city shall serve as an ex officio member of
the committee.
(Prior Code, § 50.63) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978)
ILLEGAL DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE
§ 50.085 ILLEGAL DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE ON STREETS OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of garbage, materials, refuse
or abandoned vehicles or materials on, upon or about any public street, way or
place of upon any private property in or near (within 150 feet of) the
corporate limits of the city at any time.
(Prior Code, § 50.70) (Ord. 02-O-1733, passed 4-17-2002) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.086 USE OF MOTOR VEHICLES IN ILLEGAL DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership or other entity to
utilize a motor vehicle in the illegal disposal of garbage, materials, refuse
or abandoned vehicles or materials on, upon or about any public street, way or
place or upon any private property in the city.
(Prior Code, § 50.71) (Ord. 02-O-1733, passed 4-17-2002) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.087 TOWING AND FORFEITURE OF MOTOR VEHICLES USED IN ILLEGAL DISPOSAL.
   Each person enforcing the provisions of this subchapter is hereby authorized
and directed to forthwith seize and tow such motor vehicle, as an abandoned
vehicle, as may have been used in the illegal dumping of garbage pursuant to
this subchapter and pursuant to the provisions of Ch. 90 of this code of
ordinances and of the forfeiture provisions of the state’s Motor Vehicle Act,
being 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 50.72) (Ord. 02-O-1733, passed 4-17-2002) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.088 ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter may be enforced by any sworn member of the city’s Police
Department, Fire Department, Director of Building and Housing, Ordinance
Enforcement Officer and such other person as may be specially charged by the
Mayor with the duty to enforce this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 50.73) (Ord. 02-O-1733, passed 4-17-2002)
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this
chapter, for which another penalty is not provided, shall be fined not less
than $10, nor more than $500 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
   (B)   The penalty for the violation of the provisions of §
50.017 of this chapter shall be set forth in this section; except that, the
minimum fine shall be $2,000 and the maximum fine shall be $5,000.
   (C)   Violation of the terms and provisions of §
50.023 of this chapter shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $500. For the
purpose of enforcement of §
50.023 of this chapter, each separate instance of unauthorized and prohibitive
provision of scavenger service to a residence or residential use within the
city, or each day of failure or refusal to utilize a container to be provided
by the city for each residential user shall constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   The penalty for the violation of §§
50.085 through
50.088 of this chapter shall be as set forth division (A) above; except that,
the minimum and maximum fine shall be $500.
(Prior Code, § 50.99) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
20-1978; Ord. 82-O-1086, passed 5-17-1982; Ord. 02-O-1733, passed 4-17-2002)
CHAPTER 51: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Billing of water service to tenant in rental property
   
51.002   Flooding of ice rinks; application
   
51.003   Ground water as potable water supply
Extension of Water Mains
   
51.015   Approval required for extensions
   
51.016   Cost of extension
   
51.017   Fee for new water service
   
51.018   Application for water main extension; specifications; costs
   
51.019   Bond required for installation or extension of water mains
   
51.020   Specifications of appurtenances
   
51.021   Location of mains
   
51.022   Excavations
   
51.023   Disturbance of street surface prohibited
   
51.024   Inspections and tests of lines and fittings
   
51.025   Backfill of trenches and other openings
Water Service Connections and Meters
   
51.040   Meter requirements
   
51.041   Meter reading
   
51.042   Applying for water service
   
51.043   Construction meters
   
51.044   Payment for water service
   
51.045   Disconnection and reconnection fees
   
51.046   No water service
   
51.047   Water usage
   
51.048   Bankruptcy filings
Fire Hydrants
   
51.060   Use of fire hydrants
   
51.061   Maintenance
   
51.062   Specifications for construction of fire hydrants
   
51.063   Installation of fire hydrants
   
51.064   Distance between fire hydrants
   
51.065   Connection of fire hydrants to water mains; bond required
Water Use Restrictions
   
51.080   Superintendent to make rules and regulations for certain water usage
   
51.081   Restrictions
Emergency Water Use Plan
   
51.095   Mayor to declare water shortage emergency
   
51.096   Plan to prohibit or restrict water usage effective during emergency;
title
   
51.097   Prohibition or restrictions on water usage during emergency
Backflow Prevention; Cross-Connection Control
   
51.110   Backflow prevention
   
51.111   Cross-connection control
   
51.112   Surveys and investigations
   
51.113   Inspection of cross-connection controls
   
51.114   Remedy for illegal cross-connections
   
51.115   Responsibility for clean-up of contaminated water
Administration and Enforcement
   
51.130   Joint acquisition, operation; authorization; Commissioner appointed
   
51.131   Operation of water system; Manager to supervise
   
51.132   General Waterworks Development Plan established; adoption of plan
   
51.133   Personnel; hiring and discharging
   
51.134   Bonds of employees
   
51.135   Books of account
   
51.136   Preparation of forms used in the Water Department
 
   
51.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 BILLING OF WATER SERVICE TO TENANT IN RENTAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Director of
Building and Housing of the city, there shall be presented to the Water
Department an application for water service in the name of the tenant or person
so occupying the premises in question, said application to be in the form and
style as provided by the Department.
   (B)   (1)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the Inspector
unless the Department shall have approved such application for water service
submitted to it by the tenant of the premises in question or the person so
occupying said premises.
      (2)   (a)   The Water Department shall not approve the issuance of an
occupancy permit until and unless all outstanding water service billings to the
address in question have been paid in full.
         (b)   Should there be an outstanding billing to a tenant who has moved
or filed bankruptcy, then the billing for the unpaid service or for that
service barred by the discharge in bankruptcy shall be made to the owner of the
premises in question and no approval of the application for water service shall
be granted unless and until such charges have been paid in full.
   (C)   In the case of multi-unit structures the billing for water service
shall remain in the name of the owner or manager of said premises; provided
that, the record owner of the premises in question as shown by the tax billing
by the Assessor of the county shall be the person to whom all billings for
water service shall be made, unless such other person as might claim an
interest in the property in question shall make application to the Department
for water service and pay the appropriate deposits and comply with such other
rules and regulations of the Department.
   (D)   This section shall not diminish in any manner the authority of the
Department to impress a lien upon the property in question for unpaid water
service as provided by law, notwithstanding the billing of water service in the
name of the tenant or such other person occupying the premises in question.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of all owners or managers of property located
within the city limits and receiving water service from the city to notify the
Department when there is a change of occupancy of the premises in question.
Said notice shall be in written form to the Department, giving among other
things, the street address of the property, the permanent tax index number of
said property, the name of the person surrendering occupancy of the premises,
their forwarding address and the name of the person to commence occupancy of
the premises or a statement under oath that the premises will remain unoccupied
and that the person so reporting will inform the city when a new occupant will
occupy the premises.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for occupants to remain in occupancy of a
premises where the water service has been shut off for a period of six days or
more and that the Water Department is authorized to seek an eviction of such
persons in the local court or the Circuit Court of the county. Where there is a
determination that children are involved in the occupancy of the premises, the
Water Department shall notify the state’s Department of Children and Family
Services of the impending eviction.
   (G)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for a landlord, owner, agent or occupant to
continue water service to a premises which has been vacated by a previous
tenant or occupant and that any subsequent water service shall be in the name
of the then current tenant or occupant of the premises.
      (2)   The penalty contained in §
51.999 of this chapter imposing a fine of not less than $25, nor exceeding,
shall be applicable to a landlord, owner, agent or occupant who has continued
the water service declared unlawful by this section. Also, a separate affiance
shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation of this
division (G) occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 51.001) (Ord. 1357, passed 12-6-1989; Ord. 94-O-1521, passed 12-
7-1994; Ord. 06-O-1861, passed 6-7-2006; Ord. 06-O-1874, passed 9-20-2006; Ord.
07-O-1880, passed 1-17-2007) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.002 FLOODING OF ICE RINKS; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Any person desiring to flood any area in the city for ice skating
purposes shall first make application to the Mayor and City Council requesting
permission to utilize the city water supply for such purposes.
   (B)   The application shall state the name and address of the applicant and
the name of the organization, if any, which the applicant represents. The
application shall give the address of the area to be flooded and the
approximate dates upon which such flooding shall occur.
(Prior Code, § 51.002)
§ 51.003 GROUND WATER AS POTABLE WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PERSON. Any individual partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision or any other legal entity or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
      POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes or preparing foods.
   (B)   Use of ground water as a potable water supply prohibited. Except for
such uses or methods in existence before the effective date of this section,
the use or attempt to use as a potable water supply ground water from within
the corporate limits of the city by the installation or drilling of wells or by
any other method is hereby prohibited, including at points of withdrawal by the
city.
(Ord. 98-O-1644, passed 6-17-1998) Penalty, see §
51.999
EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS
§ 51.015 APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR EXTENSIONS.
   Extensions of water mains within the city shall be made only upon the
approval of the Mayor and City Council and under the direction of the
Superintendent of Public Works. Plans and specifications must conform with
state statutes and must be approved by the state’s Sanitary Water Board before
proceeding with the installation.
(Prior Code, § 51.015)
§ 51.016 COST OF EXTENSION.
   Any person desiring the installation of any water mains, or extensions in,
upon, or along streets, easements or public places may make or cause such
installations to be made at their cost. They shall furnish and install pipe and
all other appurtenances incidental to main or main extension installation in
accordance with the specifications contained in this chapter. Any deviation
from the provisions as set forth in this section shall be made only at the
discretion of and upon the approval of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 51.016)
§ 51.017 FEE FOR NEW WATER SERVICE.
   Before a new water service is provided by the city, a water service fee
shall be paid to the Water Department as follows:
   (A)   For each new three-quarter-inch water service, including tapping the
main, furnishing and installing the corporation cock and meter, and furnishing
the curb stop and service box, $250; except that, if there is an existing tap
to which no previous service has been connected and all appurtenances are in
place, and the applicant shall comply with all provisions of this chapter, then
the charge for permitting each three-quarter-inch connection and furnishing and
installing a meter shall be $200. An applicant desiring to make his or her own
tap and furnishing the appurtenances listed in this division (A), except the
meter, shall be charged $200;
   (B)   Where land has been platted in accordance with
Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances and the developer has installed water mains
in accordance with the plan, the charge for items outlined in division (A)
above, shall be $100, or if all items, except the meter, are furnished by the
applicant, the charge shall be $50; and
   (C)   Charge for taps larger than three-quarter-inch shall be established
after consideration of the particular case by the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 51.017)
§ 51.018 APPLICATION FOR WATER MAIN EXTENSION; SPECIFICATIONS; COSTS.
   (A)   If the property to be provided with water service is not served along
at least one entire frontage by a water main of city standard quality, the
owner of the property shall apply to the Department of Public Works for a water
main extension. The water main extension shall be designed and constructed by
the Department of Public Works or, at the discretion of the Superintendent of
Public Works, authority may be requested of the Mayor and City Council to
contract for the design and/or the construction of the extension.
   (B)   The charge for this service shall be $6.50 per lineal foot of six-inch
main extension and appurtenances. The lineal foot of main shall be measured
along the top of pipe excluding all hydrant connections and up to 66 feet of
street or avenue crossings may be excluded.
   (C)   Water service fees shall be the same as if the land had been platted
in accordance with
Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Reimbursement shall be made to any person who shall, in order to serve
his or her own property, be forced to construct a water main which abuts the
property of another.
   (E)   Any person making application for a building permit for the lots
served by any water installation installed within the last five years under the
provisions of this section must, prior to the issuance of such permit, pay as a
fee, in addition to all other fees and charges, a sum of $6.50 per lineal foot
of six-inch main extension and appurtenances abutting the lot.
   (F)   Upon receipt of funds under the provisions of this section, the person
making the installation shall be entitled to reimbursement for all such sums.
(Prior Code, § 51.018) (Ord. 575, passed - -1965)
§ 51.019 BOND REQUIRED FOR INSTALLATION OR EXTENSION OF WATER MAINS.
   (A)   Any person making an installation or extension of water mains within
the city shall, before commencing work, furnish the city with the following: a
surety bond or performance bond in an amount to be determined by the Mayor and
City Council.
      (1)   The surety or performance bond shall be made payable to the city
for an injury to any person or property, or death to any person or persons from
any accident that is directly or indirectly resultant from such installation
and shall further, by the bond, save, protect and render the city harmless from
all damage, cost or expenses, suits or cause of action that may arise as a
consequence of such installation, or the use of defective materials or
workmanship.
      (2)   The bond shall further stipulate that any change, deviation or
violation in plans as submitted to the Mayor and City Council for approval
shall be construed as creating an immediate liability of surety and the
principal under the bond.
      (3)   An opportunity shall be given the person to rectify the change,
deviation or violation within a reasonable time set by the Mayor and Council.
   (B)   The Mayor and Council may waive these requirements in their sole
discretion.
(Prior Code, § 51.019)
§ 51.020 SPECIFICATIONS OF APPURTENANCES.
   Sizes, types and kinds of fitting, couplings, pipe, unions, fees, gate
valves and other appurtenances used in water main extensions must conform to
specifications approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 51.020)
§ 51.021 LOCATION OF MAINS.
   Unless authorized otherwise in writing by the Mayor and City Council, the
mains in east and west streets or alleys shall be located on the north side of
the right-of-way, and in the north and south streets or alleys, on the west
side of the right-of-way, 17 feet outside property lines in alleys.
(Prior Code, § 51.021)
§ 51.022 EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Ground shall be excavated in open trenches or in tunnels if specified
by the Superintendent of Public Works to a depth necessary to secure five feet
of cover.
   (B)   The bottom of the trench shall not be less than five feet below the
existing ground level in the street, unless otherwise authorized by the
Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 51.022)
§ 51.023 DISTURBANCE OF STREET SURFACE PROHIBITED.
   Unless authorized by the Superintendent of Public Works, whenever any lines
are required to go across streets, the street surface shall not be disturbed.
The pipe shall be installed at the level specified in §
51.022 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.023)
§ 51.024 INSPECTIONS AND TESTS OF LINES AND FITTINGS.
   All lines and fittings shall be inspected under the direction of the
superintendent. After all lines have been laid and fittings tightened, a test
of the lines under 100 pounds pressure, shall be made with full inspection for
defects and leaks. Any defects shall be corrected and another test made.
(Prior Code, § 51.024)
§ 51.025 BACKFILL OF TRENCHES AND OTHER OPENINGS.
   After a final test and inspection of the lines has been made, if the lines
comply with the requirements set forth by the Mayor and City Council, the
trenches and other openings for the mains or lines shall then be backfilled and
the ground surface left in the same condition as before the installation was
started.
(Prior Code, § 51.025)
WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS AND METERS
§ 51.040 METER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All premises using the city water supply must be equipped with an
adequate water meter and outside remote meter reader furnished by the city. No
person, firm, corporation or entity shall be supplied with water by the city
unless a meter with an outside meter reader is installed and maintained in
proper working condition at said premises.
   (B)   After the meter is placed and sealed, only members or employees of the
Water Department/Public Works shall be allowed to repair, remove or in any way
interfere with the meter. The owner of the property in which the meter had been
installed shall at all times be responsible for any damage done by freezing,
hot water, fire or other breakage and shall be charged with the cost of repair
thereof, plus cost of installation. The aforesaid fees will be automatically
added to the respective property’s water bill.
   (C)   No person shall injure, deface, mar, destroy or tamper with any water
meter.
   (D)   In the event of a defective meter where the seal is intact, or a cable
has been accidentally cut, the consumer shall be billed at an estimated usage
based on the previous usage or the minimum charge, whichever is greater.
   (E)   The owner or lessee shall be responsible for the maintenance and
repair of all water lines and appurtenances thereto located upon the property
concerned and the maintenance, repair and elimination of any water leaks. The
costs of any change, replacement or repair shall be the responsibility of the
resident of such property and the city shall not be obligated for any portion
of such costs.
(Ord. 13-O-2056, passed 6-5-2013) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.041 METER READING.
   No person, firm, corporation or entity may continue to be supplied with
water by the city unless he, she or they permit access at least three times
each year to enable an employee of the city to check the condition and reading
of the inside meter against the outside touch-pad remote system reading.
However, if the city cannot get a reading with its remote system, it may have
accesses more than three times and as many times as needed with reasonable
notice. If access is denied the water is subject to be shutting off.
(Ord. 13-O-2056, passed 6-5-2013) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.042 APPLYING FOR WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   At the time of making an application for water service, any person,
firm, corporation or entity for a residential property shall pay a service fee
to the city of $250. The meter and outside meter reader shall remain the
property of the city.
   (B)   At the time of making an application for water service, any person,
firm, corporation or entity for commercial property shall pay a meter service
fee equal to the current price quoted by the manufacturer for a water meter
based on the size of the meter and the amounts of water usage. The meter,
outside remote and transceiver unit shall remain the property of the city. If a
meter is removed for any reason, the owner will be charged $150 to replace the
meter. If the outside transceiver unit is removed for any reason, the owner
will be charged $150 to replace the meter and $75 to replace the bottom plate.
5/8” residential meter$250 service fee
3/4” meters           $380 service fee
1” meters             $414 service fee
1-1/2” meters         $617 service fee
2” meters             $770 service fee
2” compound meters    $1,675 service fee
3” compound meters    $2,015 service fee
4” compound meters    $3,130 service fee
6” compound meters    $5,490 service fee
 
   (C)   (1)   All billing for the water service shall remain in the name of
the owner of said premises; unless such other person as might claim an interest
in the property in question shall make an application with:
         (a)   A copy of the deed which shows they have interest in the
property;
         (b)   A copy of a death certificate of the current owner and a Will
which shows that the current owner devised the property to them; or
         (c)   A copy of a trust agreement that shows that they have power of
direction in the trust agreement and they pay the appropriate service fee and
comply with such other rules and regulations of the Water Department.
      (2)   Tenants cannot apply for water service for residential property
without the authorization of the owner. The owner must complete and sign the
application on the tenant’s behalf understanding they will be solely
responsible if the tenant(s) vacate(s) the property leaving any outstanding
balances on the water account. Owner also must provide a copy of the tenant’s
signed lease. Any commercial tenant that applies for water service must provide
a copy of their signed lease with the owner.
   (D)   Upon termination of residential or commercial service at a particular
premise, the city will refund the service fee paid, less the outstanding water
charges, and, if applicable, cost for repairs and/or replacement for any damage
to the meter, meter parts or remote meter reading equipment.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of all owners or managers of the property located
within the city limits and receiving water service from the city, to notify the
Water Department when there is a change of occupancy of the premises in
question. Said notice shall be in writing to the Water Department, and provide
among other things, the street address of the property, the tax permanent index
number of said property, the name of the person surrendering occupancy of the
premises their forwarding address and the name of the persons to commence
occupancy of the premises or a statement under oath stating the premises will
remain unoccupied and that the person so reporting will inform the city when a
new occupant occupies the premises.
   (F)   All businesses must apply for service before the issuance of a city
business license.
(Ord. 13-O-2056, passed 6-5-2013)
§ 51.043 CONSTRUCTION METERS.
   (A)   Residential, commercial and industrial builders must pay a $250
service fee for the use of a temporary meter and a minimum monthly bill for
water and sewer usage. Builders must have meters installed at the time of
passing the rough plumbing inspection. Builders are responsible for contacting
the Water Department to schedule an appointment. Builders are also responsible
for paying the costs for all water and sewer usage.
   (B)   All temporary meters will terminate two weeks from the date of
installation and will be disconnected after the deadline without further
notification. If the property requires a temporary meter extension/additional
use beyond the deadline, the owner must obtain written authorization from the
Building and Housing Department and pay the costs for all water and sewer usage
through the deadline.
   (C)   Upon termination of a residential, commercial or industrial temporary
meter at a particular property, the city will refund any monies not used for
service, less any outstanding water and sewer charges and, if applicable, costs
for repairs and/or replacement for any damage to a meter, meter parts or remote
meter reading equipment.
   (D)   The builder must request a meter installation after passing a rough
plumbing inspection. If the builder fails to obtain a temporary meter, but uses
the city’s water and sewer system, they will be charged for a minimum of
200,000 gallons of water if the property has sod or 20,000 gallons of water if
the property does not have sod.
(Ord. 13-O-2056, passed 6-5-2013; Ord. 17-O-2161, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 20-O-
2288, passed 10-21-2020)
§ 51.044 PAYMENT FOR WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   Charges for water service are set by ordinance and are subject to
amendments from time to time.
   (B)   All charges for water, sewer and refuse are payable on a monthly
basis. The owner of the premises, the occupants thereof, and the user of the
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such
premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the city only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are
jointly and severally liable to the city. Each monthly bill must be paid in mil
by the due date. Partial payments may not be made towards a water bill.
   (C)   Should the owner, user, or occupant of the premises refuse or delay
payments of penalties and/or repair costs, the water shall be disconnected by
the city until all said moneys are paid.
   (D)   Should there be an outstanding billing to a tenant who has moved or
filed bankruptcy then the billing for the unpaid service or for that service
barred by the discharge in bankruptcy shall be made to the owner of the
premises in question and no approval of the application for water service shall
be granted unless and until such charges have been paid in full.
   (E)   The Water Department shall not approve the issuance of an occupancy
permit until and unless all outstanding water service billings to the address
in question have been paid in full.
   (F)   (1)   The full and complete responsibility for the payment of unpaid
water bills by a tenant of Canterbury Shopping Center or any other commercial
development, who moves out of the said Canterbury Shopping Center or is evicted
shall be on the entity which is the owner or manager of the Shopping Center or
any other commercial development.
      (2)   Failure of the owner or manager of the Shopping Center or any other
commercial development to pay said unpaid water bill within 30 days of
notification shall subject said owner or manager to legal action in the local
municipal court to collect said unpaid water bill.
   (G)   (1)   If a check made payable to the city is returned by a financial
institution for any reason, then the account to which the payment was credited
will be charged a $50 service fee by the city (example: insufficient funds;
fraud; closed account; and the like). The account’s responsible party or issuer
of the non-cashable check shall be responsible for immediately making payment
for the water service and service fee with cash or a cashier’s check or money
order. If payment is not made, water service shall be subject to disconnection.
      (2)   If an electronic payment to the city has been authorized and the
payment is not honored by the financial institution for any reason, then the
account to which the payment was credited will be charged a $50 service fee by
the city (example: insufficient funds; fraud; closed account; and the like).
The account’s responsible party shall be responsible for immediately making
payment for the water service and service fee with cash or a cashier’s check or
money order. If payment is not made, water service shall be subject to
disconnection.
      (3)   If a credit card or debit card payment to the city is made and the
financial institution that issued the card denies or refuses to honor the
transaction for any reason (example: fraud; identity theft; closed account; and
the like), then the account to which the payment was credited will be charged a
$50 service fee by the city. The account’s responsible party shall be
responsible for immediately making payment for the water service and service
fee with cash or a cashier’s check or money order. If payment is not made,
water service shall be subject to disconnection.
(Ord. 13-O-2056, passed 6-5-2013; Ord. 17-O-2189, passed 12-6-2017)
§ 51.045 DISCONNECTION AND RECONNECTION FEES.
   (A)   Upon disconnection of any services, a $75 turn off fee shall be paid
in full in addition to all penalties, repair costs, any disconnection fees or
reconnection fees and outstanding water costs before the water service is
reconnected.
   (B)   Upon certain conditions and circumstances, the city may have to dig up
and remove the B-Box, and when the city has to dig up and remove the B-Box a
disconnect fee of $500 for services provided by the city will be impose.
   (C)   (1)   A reconnection fee in the amount of $500 will be imposed prior
to reconnection for damage to the B-Box which causes the city to repair B-Box
before reconnection.
      (2)   Also, a reconnection fee in the amount of $500 for services
provided by the city will be imposed if the B-Box had to be re-installed
because the city had to dig it up and remove it.
      (3)   The reconnection fee for service requests for any time other than
during normal working hours of 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday
shall be $150.
   (D)   No personal checks will be accepted to pay any fees in this section
after service has been disconnected.
(Ord. 13-O-2056, passed 6-5-2013)
§ 51.046 NO WATER SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful for occupants to remain in occupancy of premises where
the water service has been disconnection for a period of six days or more and
the Water Department is authorized to seek an eviction of such unlawful
occupants in the Circuit Court of the county. Where there is a determination
that children are involved in the occupancy of the premises, the Water
Department shall notify the state’s Department of Children and Family Services.
(Ord. 13-O-2056, passed 6-5-2013) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.047 WATER USAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, business,
resident, agency or entity, whether a customer of the city’s Water Department
or not, to engage in any non-essential and unnecessary outside water use. Water
use will constitute an unnecessary use if it is being used in a non-traditional
way that is contrary to the use of the majority of the residents in the city.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation,
business, resident, agency or entity, whether a customer of the city’s Water
Department or not, to engage in lawn sprinkling during the period from May 15
to September 15 of each year, except during the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 12:00
a.m.
      (2)   The outside use of water permitted by this subchapter shall be
further restricted in the following manner: those premises assigned even
address numbers shall be allowed the restricted outside use of water only on
even numbered calendar days and those premises assigned odd address numbers
shall be allowed the restricted outside use of water only on odd numbered
calendar days. Violators shall be subject to a fine for each violation. The
determining address number shall be the last digit of the property address and
not the street, drive or place number in the address.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a property owner, agent or occupant to
continue water service to premises in the name of a person who has vacated the
premises or in the name of a deceased person. All water service must be in the
name of the current owner(s) or commercial tenant of the premises.
(Ord. 13-O-2056, passed 6-5-2013) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.048 BANKRUPTCY FILINGS.
   (A)   Chapter 7. When a notice of filing is received from the Bankruptcy
Court, the customer’s current account will be inactivated and assigned a
bankruptcy status code. Payment of any scheduled amount owed will be stayed as
of the date of the Chapter 7 filing. The water service fee under §
51.042 of this chapter will be credited to the pre-filing account balance. Any
remainder will be refunded to the customer. If the stay is lifted or the case
dismissed, then any amount owed at that time shall be the customer’s
responsibility. A Chapter 7 account will be opened by using the first eight
digits of the regular account number and adding “07” at the end. A customer
must re-establish service pursuant to §
51.042(A) of this chapter within 14 calendar days of the Chapter 7 filing. If
the customer fails to do so, water service will be subject to disconnection.
Any amount owed after the date of filing will be the customer’s responsibility.
   (B)   Chapter 13. When a notice of filing is received from the Bankruptcy
Court, the customer’s current account will be inactivated and assigned a
bankruptcy status code. Payment of any scheduled amount owed will be stayed as
of the date of the Chapter 13 filing. The water service fee under §
51.042(A) of this chapter will be credited to the pre-filing account balance.
Any remainder will be refunded to the customer. A proof of claim listing the
pre-filing amount owed will be filed by the city. If the stay is lifted or the
case dismissed, then any amount owed at that time shall be the customer’s
responsibility. A Chapter 13 account will be opened by using the first eight
digits of the regular account number and adding “13” at the end. A customer
must reestablish service pursuant to §
51.042(A) of this chapter within 14 calendar days of the Chapter 13 filing. If
the customer fails to do so, water service will be subject to disconnection.
Any amount owed after the date of filing will be the customer’s responsibility.
(Ord. 13-O-2056, passed 6-5-2013)
FIRE HYDRANTS
§ 51.060 USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   No person shall open any hydrant or standpipe to draw water therefrom
or in any manner or form tamper with or place obstructions in the hydrant or
standpipe. Use of hydrants or standpipes is restricted to members of the Fire
Department in the discharge of their duties as firefighters or to those person
authorized by the Water Committee.
   (B)   No person shall in any manner obstruct the access to hydrant,
standpipe, valve or any public faucet that permits the drawing of water, in any
street, alley or easement that will in any manner hinder or delay a member of
the Fire Department to reach such appurtenances.
(Prior Code, § 51.050) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.061 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The Water Department shall maintain fire hydrants in good working
order. All hydrants shall be tested twice per year by the Superintendent or
some other person designated by the Water Committee. Minor repairs or
adjustments must be made at the time of testing. All major repairs must be
reported, in writing, to the Water Committee.
   (B)   The Department shall keep hydrants clear of weeds to the extent that
the hydrants will be visible from the street.
   (C)   The Water Department is responsible for the painting of hydrants as
the need arises. This painting is to be done in accordance with the hydrant
identification code established by the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 51.051)
§ 51.062 SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   All fire hydrants installed in the city, shall comply with the following
specifications.
   (A)   Hydrants shall have two two and one-half-inch hose connections and one
four and one-half-inch steamer connection.
   (B)   Threads shall be National Standard fire threads.
   (C)   Hydrants must be provided with a drain mechanism so that the entire
barrel drains down to the level of the valve seat when shut off.
   (D)   All parts must be of sufficient strength to withstand a 300-pound
water test when assembled.
   (E)   A six-inch sleeve shall be installed on the hydrant base. A six-inch
auxiliary valve shall be connected to the sleeve and water main.
(Prior Code, § 51.052) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.063 INSTALLATION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   All hydrants shall be installed on a limestone or gravel bed. The
minimum size of this bed shall be ten inches in width, ten inches in length and
four inches in depth. No less than eight cubic feet of gravel or limestone
shall be used and gravel or limestone must be of sufficient size to pass two-
inch screen.
   (B)   All hydrants shall be buried a minimum of five feet. The distance from
the edge of the fire hydrant aboveground to the steamer connection must be not
less than 18 inches, nor more than 24 inches.
(Prior Code, § 51.053)
§ 51.064 DISTANCE BETWEEN FIRE HYDRANTS.
   The distance between fire hydrants shall not be more than 300 feet. The
installation of all fire hydrants in the city must further comply with all
provisions of the rules and regulations pertaining to the installation of fire
hydrants, as promulgated from time to time by the office of the Fire Marshal of
the state.
(Prior Code, § 51.054)
§ 51.065 CONNECTION OF FIRE HYDRANTS TO WATER MAINS; BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   No fire hydrant shall be connected to a city water main by anyone
other than a licensed and bonded plumbing contractor.
   (B)   A performance bond shall be required of the plumbing contractor in the
minimum amount of $50,000, with good and sufficient sureties payable to the
city, and the bond must be filed with the City Clerk before installation of any
fire hydrant is started by the plumbing contractor. The bond shall cover all
fire hydrants connected by the plumbing contract during the period of the life
of the bond.
   (C)   In addition to the performance bond, a maintenance bond, with good and
sufficient sureties, payable to the city, may be required of the contractor
and/or principal, by the City Council, for each fire hydrant or series or
groups of fire hydrants, installed by the contractor or principal involved. A
PRINCIPAL is defined to be a land developer, owner, agent, corporation or any
person who engages a contractor to install fire hydrants in the city.
Maintenance bonds must be for a period of one year and shall be filed with the
Clerk.
   (D)   All bonds shall be approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 51.055)
WATER USE RESTRICTIONS
§ 51.080 SUPERINTENDENT TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR CERTAIN WATER USAGE.
   The Superintendent of Public Works, with the approval of the City Council,
shall make all necessary rules and regulations and change such rules and
regulations at such time and in such manner as is deemed proper for regulating
the use of water for air conditioning equipment, and for uses outside a
dwelling such as lawn sprinkling or car washing.
(Prior Code, § 51.065)
§ 51.081 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   At all times of the year lawn sprinkling, whether performed by manual
hose and sprinkler placement or by automatic systems, is permitted only between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. through 11:00 p.m.
Other outdoor water use is unregulated from September 16 of any year to May 14
of the following year.
   (B)   Between May 15 and September 15, inclusive, of every year, all outdoor
water use is permitted only on an odd/even basis (on odd numbered calendar days
if the last digit in the street address is odd and on even numbered calendar
days if the last digit in the street address is even) and only during the hours
of 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. through 11:00 p.m. on the
permitted days.
   (C)   Outdoor water use as regulated above shall include, but not be limited
to, all lawn and garden sprinkling hose-fed sprinklers or underground
irrigation systems for residential and commercial property, all non- commercial
car washing, residential pool maintenance and other similar uses, but shall not
include water used for construction or building renovation purposes, commercial
car wash operations or the filling of residential or other swimming pools.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the above regulations, newly-sodded lawns may be
watered more frequently than otherwise permitted upon application for and
receipt of a special permit from the Public Works Department.
   (E)   Unnecessary use is defined to mean all uses by any person, firm or
corporation that is not strictly essential to maintain reasonable standards of
health and sanitary conditions, or to maintain the essential requirements of
any business activity which is authorized by license to operate in the city.
   (F)   In addition to the above restrictions, lawn sprinkling systems shall
comply with the city’s Plumbing Code by being equipped with an approved rain
detection device at installation. Upon application, the Building Department
will issue a permit for the installation of an approved rain detection device,
on an existing lawn sprinkling system that does not have such a device.
(Ord. 09-O-1959, passed 8-5-2009) Penalty, see §
51.999
EMERGENCY WATER USE PLAN
§ 51.095 MAYOR TO DECLARE WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY.
   The Mayor is hereby designated to be the person empowered and authorized to
declare a water shortage emergency to exist within the city, and to immediately
put into effect a Water Conservation Plan aimed to conserving the city’s water
supply during said shortage.
(Prior Code, § 51.080) (Ord. 78-O-969, passed 1-17-1978)
§ 51.096 PLAN TO PROHIBIT OR RESTRICT WATER USAGE EFFECTIVE DURING EMERGENCY;
TITLE.
   (A)   At such times as the Mayor declares a water shortage emergency exists,
he or she shall put into effect a plan which shall, in his or her sole
judgment, cause such prohibitions or restrictions on the use of water within
the city, which shall continue until the water shortage abates.
   (B)   The Plan shall be known as the Water Conservation Plan for the city,
and the Mayor shall promulgate such rules and regulations as shall, in his or
her judgment, be necessary to conserve water during the water shortage
emergency.
(Prior Code, § 51.081) (Ord. 78-O-969, passed 1-17-1978)
§ 51.097 PROHIBITION OR RESTRICTIONS ON WATER USAGE DURING EMERGENCY.
   The Mayor may either prohibit or restrict the usage of water as follows:
   (A)   Residential external use of water for sprinkling, pools and car
washing;
   (B)   Commercial car wash establishments;
   (C)   Commercial laundries; and
   (D)   Industrial use.
(Prior Code, § 51.082) (Ord. 78-O-969, passed 1-17-1978)
BACKFLOW PREVENTION; CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 51.110 BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   All plumbing installed within the city shall be installed in accordance with
the state’s Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. If in accordance with the
state’s Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the Superintendent of Public Works,
an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the
public water supply system, the Superintendent of Public Works will give notice
to the water customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water
customer shall, at their own expense, install such an approved device at a
location and in a manner in accordance with the state’s Plumbing Code, the
state’s Environmental Protection Agency and all applicable local regulations,
and shall have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon
installation and as required by the state’s Plumbing Code, the state’s
Environmental Protection Agency and local regulations.
(Ord. 08-O-1925, passed 6-4-2008)
§ 51.111 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.
   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply
of the city may enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality,
unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and method of
connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works and the state’s Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 08-O-1925, passed 6-4-2008) Penalty, see §
51.999
§ 51.112 SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works to cause surveys
and investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two years, or as
often as the Superintendent of Public Works shall deem necessary. Records of
such surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at
least five years.
(Ord. 08-O-1925, passed 6-4-2008)
§ 51.113 INSPECTION OF CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROLS.
   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the right
to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the
public water supply of distribution system of the city for the purpose of
verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections, and the Superintendent
of Public Works or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding
the required cross-connection control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees
or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the Superintendent of
Public Works any information which he or she may request regarding the piping
system or systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such
information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Superintendent
of Public Works, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as
provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. 08-O-1925, passed 6-4-2008)
§ 51.114 REMEDY FOR ILLEGAL CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The Superintendent of Public Works of the city is hereby authorized
and directed to discontinue, after a five-day notice to the occupant thereof,
the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this subchapter is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he or she may deem necessary to eliminate any danger
of contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service
to such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been
eliminated or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this subchapter
and until a disconnection fee is paid to the city. Immediate disconnection with
verbal notice can be effected when the Superintendent of Public Works is
assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water
supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of
the cause of disconnection.
   (B)   Immediate disconnection without notice to any party, can be effected
to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the public water
supply; provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the Superintendent of
Public Works or the state’s Environmental Protection Agency, such action is
required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the
public water supply. Neither the public water supply, the Superintendent of
Public Works, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any
injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said
customer’s water supply in accordance with the terms of this subchapter,
whether or not said termination was with or without notice.
(Ord. 08-O-1925, passed 6-4-2008)
§ 51.115 RESPONSIBILITY FOR CLEAN-UP OF CONTAMINATED WATER.
   The consumer responsible for back siphoned or back pressured material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-contamination or an improperly
installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed,
must bear the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.
(Ord. 08-O-1925, passed 6-4-2008)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.130 JOINT ACQUISITION, OPERATION; AUTHORIZATION; COMMISSIONER APPOINTED.
   (A)   It is necessary and for the best interests of the city, that it
acquire and operate jointly with the Village of Midlothian, Cook County,
Illinois, a common source of supply of water in order that sufficient water for
the use of the city and its inhabitants for public and domestic purposes be
available at all times.
   (B)   Pursuant to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/11-135-1 et seq., as amended,
the Mayor and City Council shall determine and elect to acquire and operate
jointly with the Village of Midlothian, a common source of supply of water.
   (C)   Pursuant to the terms of 65 ILCS 5/11-135-1 et seq., as amended, the
Mayor is authorized and directed with the approval of the Council to appoint a
Commissioner to act as a member of the Commission to be organized and to be
known as the Midlothian-Markham Water Commission, with the powers and duties as
prescribed by the law referred to in this section.
(Prior Code, § 51.095) (Ord. 483, passed - -1962)
§ 51.131 OPERATION OF WATER SYSTEM; MANAGER TO SUPERVISE.
   (A)   The water system shall be operated as a Division of the Waterworks and
Sewerage System and shall be referred to as the Water Department.
   (B)   The Water Department shall be under the supervision of the Manager.
   (C)   The Manager, being the Superintendent of Public Works, shall have
supervision and control of the city waterworks system.
(Prior Code, § 51.096)
§ 51.132 GENERAL WATERWORKS DEVELOPMENT PLAN ESTABLISHED; ADOPTION OF PLAN.
   There shall be established a General Waterworks Development Plan for the
city. The plan shall be adopted by the Mayor and City Council by resolution,
and made a part of this chapter by reference.
(Prior Code, § 51.097)
§ 51.133 PERSONNEL; HIRING AND DISCHARGING.
   (A)   The Water Department Manager shall hire part-time help, as required,
and shall make recommendations to the City Council for employment of salaried
personnel.
   (B)   The Manager may discharge any employee of his or her Department; the
discharge to be subject to review by the Mayor and Council.
(Prior Code, § 51.098)
§ 51.134 BONDS OF EMPLOYEES.
   All employees of the Water Department, whose duties require the handling of
funds and moneys properly accountable to the city, shall furnish a surety bond
in a penal sum to be determined by the City Council upon the appointment of the
employees. The costs of the bond shall be defrayed by the Department.
(Prior Code, § 51.099)
§ 51.135 BOOKS OF ACCOUNT.
   (A)   The Manager shall keep or cause to be kept, full and complete books of
account, showing the exact condition of the financial affairs of the Water
Department and, for the purpose shall establish a complete and comprehensive
system of bookkeeping, which system shall show also how much water each
consumer uses and the amount charged therefor.
   (B)   All such books of account shall be open at all times for inspection by
the Mayor and members of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 51.100)
§ 51.136 PREPARATION OF FORMS USED IN THE WATER DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Manager, subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Council,
shall prepare or cause to be prepared suitable forms for water bills, notices
and permits and other papers required for use in the Water Department and shall
include thereon such information concerning the rules and regulations,
ordinances and water rates pertaining to the Department as he or she may deem
advisable.
   (B)   Such forms may include information for billing of sewer and/or garbage
collection service.
(Prior Code, § 51.101)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not less than $25, nor exceeding $500. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §
51.002 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500,
for each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   Any person violating the provisions of §
51.003 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of up to $100 for each
violation.
   (D)   (1)   Any person, firm, corporation or entity that shall violate the
provisions of §§
51.040 through
51.048 of this chapter shall upon conviction thereof be fined in an amount not
exceeding $500 for each violation and a separate violation shall be deemed to
have been committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues. Except violations of §
51.043(E) of this chapter involving a builder who fails to obtain a
construction meter and the property contains sod, there will be a minimum fine
of $1,000 imposed. Any person violating any provisions of §§
51.040 through
51.048 of this chapter shall become liable to the city of any expense, loss or
damage by the city due to such violation. However, aforesaid expenses are not
an exclusive list all of the expenses the city may charge, but the aforesaid
fees will be automatically added to the respective property’s water bill. The
penalty imposing a fine of not less than $500 shall be imposed to a property
owner, agent or occupant who has continued water service in violation of §
51.047(C) of this chapter, which makes it unlawful for the water service bill
to be in the name of anyone other than the current tenant(s) or owner(s) of the
premises. The city may take legal action against any person, firm, corporation
or entity that violates the provisions of §§
51.040 through
51.048 of this chapter in the local municipal court and/or the Circuit Court of
the county.
      (2)   In the event of removal or necessary repair of water meters or the
remote reading system due to a broken meter seal or a cut cable to the outside
meter reader or similar action, a penalty fee of $250 to $500, plus any
necessary costs for repairs or replacement of the meter, meter parts or remote
meter reading equipment, shall be added to the first monthly bill becoming due
and payable after the detection of damage to any of the above noted equipment.
   (E)   Any person, corporation or organization of any kind violating the
provisions of §
51.081 of this chapter, or of any special permit obtained under §
51.081 of this chapter, shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $750,
for each offense. Each day or violation and each violating location shall be
considered a separate offense under §
51.081 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 51.999) (Ord. 474, passed - -1962; Ord. 1357, passed 12-6-1989;
Ord. 98-O-1644, passed 6-17-1998; Ord. 09-O-1959, passed 8-5-2009; Ord. 13-O-
2056, passed 6-5-2013)
CHAPTER 52: SEWER USE
Section
   
52.01   Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Chicago rules adopted
   
52.02   Use of the public sewers
   
52.03   Protection of sewage works from damage
   
52.04   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
52.05   Definitions
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 METROPOLITAN WATER RECLAMATION DISTRICT OF CHICAGO RULES ADOPTED.
   The city hereby ordains, adopts and enacts the model attached to the
ordinance codified herein, proposed by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Chicago, a copy of which is incorporated herein as though set forth
in full in hace verba, omitting pages two and 23 thereof and including
Attachment 1, pages two and 18, and including all other pagination, article,
paragraph, section designations, with the blanks filled in with the appropriate
designations, words, figures, dates and index and definitions.
(Ord. 98-O-1659, passed 9-3-1998; Ord. 00-O-1703, passed 10-18-2000)
§ 52.02 USE OF THE PUBLIC SEWERS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any separate sanitary
sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the Approving Authority. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the
Approving Authority or authorized regulatory agencies, to a storm sewer,
combined sewer, or natural outlet.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      (1)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      (2)   Any water or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      (3)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      (4)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable
of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and
paper dishes, cup, milk containers, and the like, either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the city or regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the
discharge that such wastes can harm either the sewers sewage substances,
materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the
approving authorities that such wastes can harm either the sewers sewage will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances
prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C).
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F
(65°C).
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the city or authorized regulatory agencies.
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the city or authorized regulatory agencies for such materials.
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the city or authorized regulatory agencies as necessary after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state,
federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the city or authorized
regulatory agencies in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
      (8)   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the city or authorized regulatory agencies
in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
      (10)   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/l at any time except as
permitted by the city or authorized regulatory agencies in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations.
      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and/or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of water constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (E)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in the preceding section, and/or which are in
violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June 26,
1978, relating to the EPA General Pretreatment Regulations, and any amendments
thereto, and which in the judgment of the city or authorized regulatory
agencies may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes,
equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the city or authorized regulatory agencies may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of division (K) below. If the city or authorized regulatory agencies permits
the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of
the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
city or authorized regulatory agencies, and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
   (F)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the city or authorized regulatory agencies they are necessary for
the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or
any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city or
authorized regulatory agencies, and shall be located as to be readily and
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
   (G)   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her expense.
   (H)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the city or authorized regulatory agencies permits the pretreatment
or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation, the owner of any
property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install
a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and
safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by
the city or authorized regulatory agencies permits the pretreatment or
equalization of waste flows, the design and installation. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his or her expense and shall be maintained by him or
her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (I)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
water and wastes to illustrate compliance with §§
52.02—
52.05 and §
52.99 and any special conditions for discharge established by the city or
regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type,
and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as
stipulated by the city, but no less than once per year the industry must supply
a complete analysis of the constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure
that compliance with the federal, state, and local standards are being met. The
owner shall report the results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the
city at such times and in such manner as prescribed by the city. The owner
shall bear the expense of all measurements, analyses, and reporting required by
the city. At such times as deemed necessary the city reserves the right to take
measurements and samples for analyses by an outside laboratory service.
   (J)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in §§
52.02—
52.05 and §
52.99 shall be determined in accordance with the regulatory agencies with
jurisdiction, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special
manhole has been required the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. The
particular analyses Involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all
outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should
be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined
from periodic grab samples.
   (K)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the
industrial concern.
   (L)   The Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago
(“MWRD”) Sewage and Waste Control Ordinance (“SWCO”), per latest edition, as
the same may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference by the city, as authority for administration and enforcement of
the industrial waste pretreatment program within areas of the city that are
subject to the agreement for sewerage services between the MWRD and the city
and amendments thereto.
(Ord. 23-O-2349, passed 2-1-2023) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment,
which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall
be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 23-O-2349, passed 2-1-2023) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.04 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The city or authorized regulatory agencies and other duly authorized
employees of the city or the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
Chicago, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of §§
52.02—
52.05. The city or authorized regulatory agencies or representative shall have
no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical,
oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a
direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or
facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) above, the city or authorized regulatory agencies or duly
authorized employees of the city, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District
of Greater Chicago shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or
death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against
liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted
against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operating,
except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to
maintain conditions as required in §
52.02(I).
   (C)   The city or authorized regulatory agencies and other duly authorized
employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be
city permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a
duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of
the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if
any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the
duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 23-O-2349, passed 2-1-2023)
§ 52.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
52.02 through
52.05 and §
52.99, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (A)   Federal government.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
      FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 466 et seq.) as
amended (Pub. L. 95-217).
      FEDERAL GRANT. The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II-Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
   (B)   State government.
      DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970.
      STATE GRANT. The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the
State of Illinois.
   (C)   Local government.
      APPROVING AUTHORITY. The City Council, Mayor, Superintendent of Public
Works, and all approved city employees or authorized regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction.
      CITY. The City of Markham.
      ORDINANCE. This ordinance, §§
52.02 through
52.05 and §
52.99 of this municipal code.
   (D)   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any
individual, firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   (E)   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued
by the Administrator, or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment
of the Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant
to section 402 of the Federal Act.
   (F)   Clarification of word usage.  SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissible.
   (G)   Wastewater and its characteristics.
      BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized
in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standards laboratory
procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
      EFFLUENT CRITERIA. As defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
      FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
      GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of
food.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
      MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that:
         (a)   Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day; or
         (b)   Has a flow greater than 10% of the flow carried by the municipal
system receiving the waste; or
         (c)   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined
in standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
         (d)   Is found by the permit issuant authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
      MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water. It has
replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
      pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures, outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
      POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial
or other waste on a treatment works or stream. One POPULATION EQUIVALENT is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.22 pounds of
suspended solids.
      PPM. Parts per million by weight.
      PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
      SEWAGE is used interchangeably with WASTEWATER.
      SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float, on the surface of, or
are in suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are
removable by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of
SUSPENDED SOLIDS shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the
IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
      UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
      WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of
course, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together
with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water that may be present.
      WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. As defined in the Water Pollution Regulations of
Illinois.
   (H)   Sewer types, and appurtenances.
      BUILDING DRAIN That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
      EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
      SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
         BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
         COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
         PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of
the city. It shall also include, sewers within or outside the boundaries of the
city that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the city
sanitary (or combined) sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with city funds.
         SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and groundwaters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
         STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater
drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted
cooling water.
      SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
      STORMWATER RUNOFF. That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   (I)   Treatment.
      PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewaters from sources before
introduction into the wastewater treatment works.
      WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or
POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT.
   (J)   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes
required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and
transport effluent to a watercourse.
   (K)   Watercourse and connections.
      NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface or groundwater.
      WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 23-O-2349, passed 2-1-2023)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person found to be violating any provisions of §§
52.02 through
52.05 except §
52.03 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the
violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction
thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations.
      (2)   Any person or persons found to be in continued violation of §§
52.02 through
52.05 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense.
A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed for each day that a
violation exists. In addition to the imposition of fines, the person or persons
may be directed to correct and remedy the code violation. Noncompliance with
these sections is also a basis for the revocation of a business certificate per
the terms of this municipal code.
(Ord. 23-O-2349, passed 2-1-2023)
CHAPTER 53: WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
Section
General Provisions
   
53.01   Superintendent of Public Works to manage system
   
53.02   Reports and expenses
   
53.03   Rates and charges for use and service of system
Billing
   
53.15   Liability for charges
   
53.16   Payment of bills
   
53.17   Delinquent charges; notice; reconnection fee
   
53.18   Multiple service connections
   
53.19   Filing claims for city with county officers
Private Water and Sewer Systems
   
53.30   Private sewer systems restricted
   
53.31   Septic tanks prohibited; discontinuation when sewer main becomes
available
   
53.32   Inspector of Sanitary Facilities and Private Water Supply Systems
   
53.33   Permit required; application; information to accompany application
   
53.34   Specifications for private water supply
 
   
53.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Chicago rules adopted, see §
52.01
   Water, see
Ch. 51
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.01 SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS TO MANAGE SYSTEM.
   The Superintendent of Public Works of the city is the Manager of the
combined waterworks and sewerage system, and is referred to in this chapter as
the “Manager”.
(Prior Code, § 53.01)
§ 53.02 REPORTS AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   The combined Waterworks and Sewerage Department shall each month, or
more often if required, submit a report in writing to the Mayor and City
Council with a copy thereof to the City Treasurer listing therein, but not
limited thereto, the following data:
      (1)   Billings for service rendered and collections received during the
previous calendar month; and
      (2)   A statement of charges, showing the pro rata portion of the
expenses of the business office of the Water Department, properly chargeable to
the sewer division thereof for billing, collecting and accounting for the sewer
revenue.
   (B)   The city shall be reimbursed out of the Waterworks and Sewerage Fund
for any costs, charges or expenses incurred by the city in connection with the
management, control, operation and maintenance of the Department.
   (C)   The Water Clerk shall each month or more often if required, cause to
be prepared and transmitted to the Treasurer a detailed statement of such
costs, charges and expenses, other than for billing, collecting and accounting
of sewer revenue, as are properly chargeable to the Sewerage Department and
which were incurred and paid by the city during the previous calendar month.
Payment to reimburse the city shall be made by the Treasurer in accordance with
such statement received from the Water Clerk and shall be paid out of the
Waterworks and Sewer Fund of the city.
   (D)   The Manager and other officers and employees of the Sewerage
Department shall receive as compensation for their services amounts to be fixed
by the Mayor and Council from time to time.
(Prior Code, § 53.02)
§ 53.03 RATES AND CHARGES FOR USE AND SERVICE OF SYSTEM.
   The charge for the use of water supplied by the city and of the sewer system
shall be as follows:
   (A)   Water service:
      (1)   (a)   First 4,000 gallons: $46.57 minimum; and
         (b)   Additional use per 1,000 gallons: $11.65
      (2)   These charges apply to each single-family home, each individual
dwelling unit of a multiple-family residential structure and each public
building, school, business or any other structure that receives water from the
city.
   (B)   Sewer service:
      (1)   (a)   First 4,000 gallons: $5.25; and
         (b)   Additional use per 1,000 gallons: $1.50.
      (2)   Monthly commercial or industrial charge:
         (a)   First 4,000 gallons: $10.25.
         (b)   Additional use per 1,000 gallons: $1.50.
(Prior Code, § 53.03) (Ord. 76-O-912, passed 2-16-1976; Ord. 85-O-1180, passed
6-19-1985; Ord. 90-O-1368, passed 4-18-1990; Ord. 92-O-1422, passed 2-5-1992;
Ord. 06-O-1845, passed 2-1-2006; Ord. 08-O-1906, passed 2-6-2008; Ord. 12-O-
2019, passed 5-2-2012; Ord. 13-O-2072, passed 12-18-2013; Ord. 19-O-2233,
passed 6-19-2019; Ord. 23-O-2360, passed 5-17-2023; Ord. 23-O-2366, passed 6-
21-2023; Ord. 25-O-2414, passed 9-3-2025)
BILLING
§ 53.15 LIABILITY FOR CHARGES.
   The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service
shall be jointly and severally liable for the charges attributable to the
provision of service to the premises. Service to any and all premises by the
city is conditioned upon the joint covenants of the owner of the premises,
occupier thereof, and consumer of service to be jointly and severally liable
for such charges. Application for service or consent to the provision of such
service shall be deemed to constitute such covenant.
(Prior Code, § 53.15) (Ord. 76-O-912, passed 2-16-1976)
§ 53.16 PAYMENT OF BILLS.
   (A)   All charges for water, sewer, garbage and refuse service shall be
combined and payable on a quarterly basis. The owner of the premises, the
occupants thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally
liable to pay for the service to such premises and the service is furnished to
the premises by the city only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally liable to
the city. The city shall send a quarterly bill which will include charges for
water, sewer, garbage and refuse service. Each quarterly bill must be paid in
full by the due date. Partial payments may not be made.
   (B)   Bills for service shall be payable at the office of the City Clerk,
and/or such other locations as may from time to time be designated by the
corporate authorities, not more than 15 days next following the date of their
mailing. Where the fifteenth day following the mailing of bills falls on a
Sunday or legal holiday, the bill shall be payable not later than the next
regular business day following such Sunday or legal holiday, without penalty.
In all other cases, a penalty charge of 10% of the face amount of the bill
shall be added thereto on any and all bills remaining unpaid on or after the
fifteenth day following the mailing thereof.
(Prior Code, § 53.16) (Ord. 76-O-912, passed 2-16-1976; Ord. 99-O-1677, passed
6-2-1999)
§ 53.17 DELINQUENT CHARGES; NOTICE; RECONNECTION FEE.
   (A)   In the event that charges for service are not paid within 30 days next
following the mailing of the bill therefore, the charges are deemed to be
delinquent and such delinquencies shall be deemed to constitute a lien upon the
real estate to which such service was supplied. The City Clerk is authorized
and directed to prepare and file with the office of the Recorder of Deeds or
Registrar of Titles, as in a given case may be appropriate, a detailed
statement enumerating such delinquency. The filing of such statement is deemed
to constitute a notice of lien for payment of the charges for the services
rendered. The terms and provisions of this section shall be operative in
addition to and not in contravention of any and all rights of the city, to
pursue judicial remedies with respect to any such delinquent bill.
   (B)   (1)   In the event that the charges for service become delinquent as
defined in division (A) above, the city may, in addition to any other remedy,
cause written notice of such delinquency to be served upon the owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof, and the consumer of the service. Such notice
shall be prepared by the Clerk and shall contain the admonition that service
shall be discontinued without further notice. No service disconnected following
the issuance of such notice shall be reinstated, except upon settlement of the
delinquent account, including applicable late penalties as provided in division
(A) above, plus an additional reinstatement charge of $5.
      (2)   Upon the disconnecting of any services, a charge of $25 shall be
made for reconnecting the same, after settlement of the current bill, as well
as the delinquent account. However, where reconnection is requested other than
during normal working hours of 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday,
the reconnection charge shall be $35.
(Prior Code, § 53.17) (Ord. 76-O-912, passed 2-16-1976; Ord. 02-O-1740, passed
9-18-2002)
§ 53.18 MULTIPLE SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   No more than one single-family dwelling unit shall be served by each
connection. Any person, firm, corporation, association or entity suffering,
permitting, making or allowing an additional unmetered connection is guilty of
a violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 53.18) (Ord. 76-O-912, passed 2-16-1976)
§ 53.19 FILING CLAIMS FOR CITY WITH COUNTY OFFICERS.
   (A)   The City Clerk is authorized and directed to cause to be filed in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county, and in the office of the
Registrar of Titles, a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this
chapter.
   (B)   Such filings are deemed public notice to all owners of real estate
which are serviced by either the waterworks or sewerage systems of the city, or
both, of the liability established in this chapter for the cost of such
service.
   (C)   The Clerk is authorized and directed to undertake any and all actions
necessary under the laws of the state, for the filing and prosecution of claims
on behalf of the city arising from the provision of service.
(Prior Code, § 53.19) (Ord. 76-O-912, passed 2-16-1976)
PRIVATE WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS
§ 53.30 PRIVATE SEWER SYSTEMS RESTRICTED.
   No person having his or her residence or place of business within the
territorial limits of the city sewer system shall be permitted to dispose of
sewage of such residence, or place of business located in the city, otherwise
than through the sewer mains of the city, whenever the sewer mains of the
sewage system of the city are adjacent to, or within 60 feet of any subdivided
lot, or parcel of real estate.
(Prior Code, § 53.30) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.31 SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED; DISCONTINUATION OF SEPTIC TANKS WHEN SEWER
MAIN BECOMES AVAILABLE.
   (A)   Septic tanks or private sewage disposal systems shall not be installed
in the city after 7-3-1968.
   (B)   When such public sewer main becomes available, as provided in this
chapter, any such septic tank, outhouse, privy, privy vault, cesspool or other
private sewage disposal system theretofore used shall be discontinued and a
direct connection shall be made to the municipal sewerage system in compliance
with this chapter, and any septic tanks, or similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. No septic tank
or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be permitted to discharge
into any public sewer main, storm sewer or natural outlet.
(Prior Code, § 53.31) (Ord. 68-O-687, passed - -1968) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.32 INSPECTOR OF SANITARY FACILITIES AND PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.
   The Director of Building and Housing of the city, or such other official as
the Mayor and City Council may designate, shall be the Inspector of Sanitary
Facilities and Private Water Supply Systems. The Inspector of Sanitary
Facilities and Private Water Supply Systems shall be a licensed plumber and
shall be under the supervision and direction of the Superintendent of Public
Works. The Inspector of Sanitary Facilities and Private Water Supply Systems
shall supervise all house sewer connections and excavations for the purpose of
installing or repairing the same and shall have such further duties and
authority as the Mayor and Council may from time to time direct.
(Prior Code, § 53.32)
§ 53.33 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; INFORMATION TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION.
   (A)   No person shall install or repair any private sanitary facilities or
private water supply systems without a permit from the city. Application for
such permit shall be on a form provided for that purpose. The application shall
be submitted to the Inspector and a permit issued by him or her prior to start
of construction.
   (B)   Information accompanying the application for a permit under this
chapter shall conform to the following regulations.
      (1)   All sketches shall be clear and concise, and contain all necessary
information. The layout sketch shall also show all wells, sewers, drains,
septic tanks and seepage systems within 100 feet of the property on which
construction is planned. If none of these are located inside this area, a
statement to that effect should be included.
      (2)   Data on soil composition and ground slopes should be carefully
determined by tests and observations made directly on the property. Directions
for seepage tests may be obtained from the Inspector.
      (3)   All questions on the application form shall be answered completely.
The following information shall also be provided:
         (a)   Approximate distance to nearest city sewer and city water
system;
         (b)   Information on disposal of both basement drainage and roof
drainage;
         (c)   Complete details of foundation footing drains, if installed, and
method of disposal of drainage from such drains;
         (d)   Construction details of basement sump and sump pump;
         (e)   Type of well pump and name of manufacturer;
         (f)   Details of well seal; the use of the term “sanitary seal” shall
not be adequate. The applicant shall give the name of the manufacturer and
supply descriptive literature if possible;
         (g)   Statement as to depth of the soil and if reasonably dry during
wet (spring) months; and
         (h)   Information regarding surface water drainage as affected by
nearby creeks, drainage ditches, sloughs, dry-runs or other low areas in the
vicinity.
(Prior Code, § 53.33) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.34 SPECIFICATIONS FOR PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY.
   Every person contemplating the installation of a private water supply system
shall comply with the following specifications.
   (A)   (1)   There shall be no sewers or drains of any kind within ten feet
of any well.
      (2)   Sewers or drains within 50 feet, but further than ten feet from any
well, shall be constructed of cast iron pipe with leaded joints and shall be
tested under water pressure.
      (3)   Sewers or drains further than 50 feet from any well shall be
constructed of cast iron pipe having leaded joints, or pipe of equal quality
root-proof joints, sections no less than five feet in length, except for
terminal sections.
   (B)   Private wells must be at least:
      (1)   Twenty feet from any lot line which is adjacent to a street if
possible;
      (2)   Fifty feet from any septic tank, catch basin or grease trap
constructed of water-tight monolithic concrete or 12 gauge steel, otherwise 75
feet;
      (3)   Seventy-five feet from any disposal field tile; and
      (4)   One hundred feet from any cesspool.
   (C)   When the water pump is located in a basement or building apart from
the well, the pipe from the pump to the well shall be considered the same as
the well, and shall not be located nearer to sources of pollution than the
minimum distances specified for wells.
   (D)   Well casings must be iron or steel, with threaded joints and
couplings, and must be accessible at the place where the suction pipe leaves
the casing. Vent pipes, if used, shall extend at least 18 inches above the
ground surface, be turned down and screened with 24 mesh non-corrosive screen.
   (E)   Top of well casings shall be at least 18 inches above concrete floor
of basement or pit; otherwise, at least eight inches above the floor of the
utility room.
   (F)   The annular opening between the well casing top and the drop pipe
should be sealed in a water-tight manner, either by the casing extending up
into a solid base pump (this can be used only if pump is above ground level) or
by sealing with an oakum and lead seal, flanged and bolted fittings, threaded
fittings or by a manufactured seal approved by the county’s Department of
Public Health.
   (G)   Pump platform must be of concrete and shall fit tightly around the
well casing.
   (H)   Pits shall not be used on new wells. Frost protection can be provided
by using insulated pump house or commercial pitless discharge unit (preferable
to use of buried seal).
   (I)   When the distance to limestone formations in any area is less than 50
feet, equipment must be provided for adequate and continuous chlorination of
all water pumped. Such equipment shall be approved prior to installation.
Information supplied by the State Geological Survey, Urbana, Illinois, shall
determine depth to the limestone formation.
   (J)   Newly constructed wells must be disinfected with a chlorine solution
of at least 100 parts per million. Detailed instructions shall be obtained from
the county’s Department of Public Health or such other agency as the city’s
Health Officer designates.
   (K)   A well shall not be approved until an analysis of a sample collected
after disinfection and pumping shows the water safe for drinking. Analysis
shall be made by the state’s Department of Public Health, Springfield, or the
county’s Board of Health.
   (L)   No well shall be dug, drilled or approved for use for human
consumption where the city water mains are reasonably accessible for tapping
thereto. No interconnection shall be made between a well water supply and the
city water supply. An appropriate warning plate shall be attached to a well
which has not had the water approved for human consumption.
(Prior Code, § 53.34) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not less than $25, nor exceeding $500. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation, association or entity violating §§
53.15 through
53.19 of this chapter any of the terms or provisions or this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $5 and not more than $200. Each
calendar day during which such violation exists constitutes a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 53.99) (Ord. 76-O-912, passed 2-16-1976)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
71.   PARKING SCHEDULES
      
72.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
73.   MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Stop intersections
      
II.   Fire Department emergency vehicle crossings
SCHEDULE I. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   The following intersections shall be designated as four-way stop
intersections.
 
Intersection                                           Ord. No.  Date Passed
155th Street and Millard Avenue                        84-O-1149 5-7-1984
East and West Sunset and Lawndale                      92-O-1456 10-21-1992
North and South Lawndale and Arthur Terrace            92-O-1455 10-21-1992
Northbound Central Park at 162nd Street and southbound 95-O-1528 4-19-1995
Central Park at Arthur Terrace
Spaulding and 164th Street                             92-O-1460 12-2-1992
Turner Avenue and 165th Street                         95-O-1529 4-19-1995
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 70 Schd. I)
SCHEDULE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT EMERGENCY VEHICLE CROSSINGS.
   The following intersections shall be designated as Fire Department emergency
vehicle crossings.
 
Intersection                         Ord. No.  Date Passed
157th Street and Kedzie Avenue       86-O-1245 9-17-1986
157th Street and Central Park Avenue 86-O-1245 9-17-1986
159th Street and Central Park Avenue 86-O-1245 9-17-1986
163rd Street and Dixie Highway       86-O-1245 9-17-1986
163rd Street and Kedzie Avenue       86-O-1245 9-17-1986
163rd Street and Wood Street         86-O-1245 9-17-1986
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 70 Schd. II)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Prohibited parking
SCHEDULE I. PROHIBITED PARKING.
   (A)   On-street parking shall be prohibited on the side of each street or
roadway within the city which has fire hydrants installed thereon at all times;
except that, parking shall be allowed between 161st Street and 162nd Street on
both sides of Wolcott Street and Honore Street.
   (B)   Parking is prohibited at all times or at the times specified on the
following streets.
Street Description Side(s) Ord. No. Date Passed
Street          Description        Side(s) Ord. No.         Date Passed
                Between the hours
All streets     of 3:00 a.m. and   Both    86-O-1218        4-16-1986
                5:00 a.m.
159th Street    From Station 0+463 Both    86-O-1218; 09-O- 4-16-1986; 5-6-2009
                to Station 10+999          1942
                Between Dixie
163rd Place     Highway and Oakley Both    04-O-1816        11-17-2004
                Avenue
164th Street    At Kedzie Parkway  Both    13-O-2013        8-21-2013
167th Street                      North   86-O-1218        4-16-1986
Central Park                      Both    86-O-1218        4-16-1986
Crawford Avenue                   Both    86-O-1218        4-16-1986
Kedzie Avenue                     Both    86-O-1218        4-16-1986
                Between 164th and
Kedzie Parkway  166th Streets      Both    89-O-1351; 95-O- 8-4-1989; 9-6-1995
                (Designated as a           1547
                fire lane)
Wood Street                       Both    03-O-1747        1-2-2003
 
   (C)   When there is an accumulation of two inches or more of snow on city
streets, parking is prohibited on both sides of all streets, (except Wolcott
and Honore between 161st and 162nd Streets). Parking in violation of this
provision is declared to be a public hazard and motor vehicles may be towed
pursuant to Ord. 85-O-1183.
   (D)   On-street parking shall be permitted in front of the property owners’
homes on the streets and roadways indicated below in this division (D) for one
passenger vehicles where the official city records indicate that the property
owner has purchased vehicle registration permits for three vehicles registered
to his or her city address by the Illinois Secretary of State:
      (1)   On the west side only of the following north-south streets:
 
Albany (south of 163rd Street)
Birch Road
California
Cherry Lane
Cyprus
Lawndale
Springfield
 
      (2)   On the east side only of the following north-south streets:
Albany (north of 163rd Street)
Ashland
Clifton Park
Hermitage
Homan
Honore (only between 162nd and 167th Streets)
Justine
Laflin
Marshfield
Millard
Oxford Drive
Paulina
Plymouth
Richmond
Ridgeway
Sawyer
Spaulding
St. Louis
Troy
Trumbull
Turner
Washtenaw
Whipple
Winchester
Wolcott (only between 162nd and 167th Streets)
 
      (3)   On the south side only of the following east-west streets:
151st Street
153rd Street
155th Street
156th Street
157th Street
159th Place
160th Street
162nd Street
162nd Place
163rd Street
164th Street
165th Street
166th Street
167th Street
Afton
Arthur Terrace
Belleplaine
Blackstone
Heather Drive
Hillcrest (between Central Park and Trumbull)
Magnolia
Nottingham
Oxford Drive
Parkside
Rockett
Roesner Drive
Rose Manor
Springfield
Stafford
Sunset Avenue
Sussex
Wedgewood
Willow
Wilshire
 
      (4)   On the north side only of the following east-west streets:
 
156th Place
157th Place
161st Street
Plainview
Wedgewood
 
      (5)   On both the east and west sides of Honore and Wolcott Streets
between 161st and 162nd Streets.
   (E)   There shall be no vehicle parking, standing, stopping, waiting or
unloading at any time at the City Hall, Public Library and Bremen Township
Building for individuals attending the Circuit Court of the county - Sixth
District Building. Violators parking, standing, stopping, waiting or unloading
at these locations shall be cited for a violation of this division (E) and may
have the offending vehicle towed at the expense of the owner/driver. The
Department of Public Works shall post signs at all entrances containing this
information.
   (F)   Off-street parking shall be prohibited on the north side of 159th
Street between St. Louis and Spaulding Avenues between 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
This location is also designated a tow-away zone during the period of
prohibited parking.
   (G)   The parking of vehicles commonly designated and defined by state
statutes as 18-wheel trucks, semi-trucks, tractors, semi-trailers, tow trucks
or similar vehicles or parts thereof shall be prohibited at the following
locations throughout the city:
      (1)   Both sides of the street on Richmond Avenue from 158th Street to
159th Street;
      (2)   Both sides of the street on Richmond Avenue from 166th Street to
the dead-end of Richmond Avenue;
      (3)   All municipal streets, parking lots, private yards and driveways,
vacant lots, abandoned property or access ways located within residential
zoning districts within the city. It shall not be a violation of this division
(G)(3) to park such vehicle for less than two hours for the purpose of making a
delivery or picking up a load or performing emergency services to or
transporting disabled vehicles. Additionally, it shall not be a violation of
this division (G)(3) to park such vehicle for the purpose of performing
emergency repair or maintenance work on any public utility facility, sewer
mains and appurtenances thereto, or on any street, road or public or private
property requiring such emergency repair or maintenance work, or for the
purpose of saving life, limb or property or fighting fire. However, no vehicle
shall be driven more than the minimum distance necessary for the aforementioned
purposes;
      (4)   The off-street west parking lot at the business establishment
located at 15860 S. Dixie Highway;
      (5)   The off-street parking lot at the business establishment located at
2206 W. 159th Street, except where expressly permitted by signs indicating such
permission;
      (6)   Within 100 feet of any entrance from a public street or highway to
the off-street parking lots of the area bounded by Richmond Avenue on the east,
159th Street on the north and Kedzie Avenue on the west, commonly known as the
Canterbury Shopping Center parking lot; and
      (7)   The off-street parking lots at the business establishment located
at 3525 W. 159th Street.
   (H)   All locations mentioned above shall be and are hereby designated tow-
away zones in accordance with this schedule.
   (I)   All locations indicated above shall be, where appropriate, designated
by signs erected by the Department of Public Works, stating: “No Parking of
Semi-Trucks, Tractors or Trailers at any time. This is a Tow Away Zone.”
   (J)   (1)   The Police Department of the city or its designee are hereby
authorized to tow-away any and all vehicles which have been duly cited for a
violation of divisions (A), (B), (C), (D) and (E) above to a secure spot for
storage and impoundment until and after the owner shall have paid all costs,
fees, fines and penalties set forth in this schedule and/or other ordinances;
further that, such vehicle so impounded shall not be released until the owner
thereof shall have demonstrated to the satisfaction of the officer or designee,
his or her right to possession of said vehicle.
      (2)   The penalty for the violation of this schedule shall be a fine,
after conviction, of not less than $50, nor more than $100, for each day that
such violation persists. Further, that should said vehicle be towed, then such
vehicle shall not be released until and after the owner has paid all costs,
fees, fines and penalties set forth in this schedule and/or other ordinances.
(Prior Code, Ch. 71 Schd. I) (Ord. 76-O-931, passed - -1976; Ord. 86-O-1218,
passed 4-16-1986; Ord. 89-O-1351, passed 8-2-1989; Ord. 92-O-1443, passed 6-3-
1992; Ord. 94-O-1506, passed 9-7-1994; Ord. 03-O-1747, passed 1-2-2003; Ord.
03-O-1758, passed 7-16-2003; Ord. 09-O-1942, passed 5-6-2009; Ord. 13-O-2062,
passed 8-7-2013; Ord. 13-O-2063, passed 8-21-2013; Ord. 16-O-2144, passed 9-7-
2016)
CHAPTER 72: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Alternative penalties, compliance tickets
   
72.02   Weight restrictions
   
72.03   Motor-driven scooters
Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System
   
72.15   Definitions
   
72.16   Violations
   
72.17   Defenses
   
72.18   Notice of violation
   
72.19   Hearing
   
72.20   Non-residents
   
72.21   Final determination
   
72.22   Notice of determination of liability
   
72.23   Notice of final determination
   
72.24   Petition to set aside determination
   
72.25   Notice of impending driver’s license suspension
   
72.26   Driver’s license suspension
Unscheduled Intercity Buses and the Discharge of Passengers
   
72.30   Definitions
   
72.31   Applicability
   
72.32   Notice and application required
   
72.33   Processing and approval of application
   
72.34   Passenger loading and unloading day and hour restriction
   
72.35   Passenger loading and unloading location
   
72.36   Punctuality of passenger loading and unloading
   
72.37   Proof of approved application to load or unload a passenger
 
   
72.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Vehicle license fees, see §
37.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 ALTERNATIVE PENALTIES, COMPLIANCE TICKETS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any person accused
of a violation of any provision of the code of ordinances of the city or the
Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS, in relation to which the violation can be
rectified by correction of the violation alleged, or failing to purchase,
obtain and/or display any permit or license required pursuant to any other
provision of this code which requires the purchase of a license or permit, or
failing to wear a seat belt when required to do so, pursuant to the issuance of
a compliance ticket, except a traffic offense for which a court appearance is
required pursuant to the state’s Supreme Court rules and except any provision
of this code which requires a mandatory court appearance, may settle and
compromise that ticket by paying to the city a fee of $20 and showing proof of
the correction of the violation (that is, replacement of the faulty equipment,
purchase of the required license or permit) within ten days from the date of
such alleged violation was committed or by paying to the city the sum of $40,
subsequent to the said ten-day period and prior to 30 days from the date such
alleged violation was committed, and showing proof of the correction of the
violation.
   (B)   (1)   Compliance tickets shall be issued as a courtesy in lieu of
instituting a prosecution for the alleged offense.
      (2)   If the person accused of the violation does not settle the claim,
the compliance ticket will be converted to a complaint, or a uniform traffic
complaint or notice to appear will be issued for that violation, and that
person shall be subject to the general penalties set forth in this code or the
appropriate statute under which he or she is charged.
(Prior Code, § 72.01) (Ord. 92-O-1461, passed 12-16-1992)
§ 72.02 WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to drive on any street any motor vehicle with a weight,
including load and/or trailer, in excess of that set forth in the Overweight
Bond Schedule on file in the City Clerk’s office or in violation of special
weight limits provided for by ordinance and signs posted.
(Prior Code, § 72.02) (Ord. 04-O-1791, passed 3-17-2004) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 MOTOR-DRIVEN SCOOTERS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      MOTOR-DRIVEN SCOOTER. Any electric or gas-driven scooter, motor-driven
cycle or other similar motor-driven vehicle for which the state does not issue
a title document and does not issue license plates or registration documents.
   (B)   Operation restricted. No person shall operate a motor-driven scooter
upon any public street, alley, sidewalk, parking lot, hike path, park or on any
other public property.
   (C)   Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the prohibitions
contained in this section:
      (1)   Any police vehicle, fire vehicle, municipal vehicle, special
district vehicle, state vehicle, county vehicle or forest preserve vehicle
operated by an employee in the course of his or her normal duties;
      (2)   Motorized wheelchairs. For purposes of this section, a MOTORIZED
WHEELCHAIR means any motorized vehicle designed for use by a person with
disabilities; and
      (3)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices, as defined in 625
ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 72.03) (Ord. 04-O-1806, passed 7-7-2004; Ord. 04-O-1815, passed
10-6-2004)
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM
§ 72.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM. A device withing the city with one
or more motor vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to
produce recorded images of motor vehicle entering an intersection against a
steady or flashing red signal indication in violation of § 11-306 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (“Code”), 625 ILCS 5/11-306, or similar violation of the
city’s municipal code.
   DISREGARDING A TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. Failure to stop and remain stopped
before an intersection that is controlled by a red signal as provided for in §
11-306 of the Code.
   NO TURN ON RED. Failure to stop and remain stopped, and not proceeding to
turn right at an intersection controlled by both a sign indicating “No turn on
red” or other similar language, and a red signal as provided for in § 11-306 of
the Code.
   RECORDED IMAGES. Images produced by the automated traffic law enforcement
system, which consist of either two or more photographs; two or more
microphotographs; two or more electronic images; or, a video recording showing
the motor vehicle and, on at least one image or portion of the recording,
clearly identifying the registration plate number of the motor vehicle.
   TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR. The person appointed as such through Art.
25 of the Code and shall have the following additional powers: adopt,
distribute and process automated traffic law violation notice and other notices
required by this subchapter, collect money paid as fines and penalties, operate
the automated traffic law enforcement system, and make certified reports to the
Secretary of State as required by this subchapter.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007)
§ 72.16 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for a vehicle to disregard a
traffic-control device or turn on red in violation of § 11-306 of the Code. A
police officer for the city must review and determine that a violation of the
Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-306, occurred before a written notice of violation
is issued.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007; Ord. 11-O-1994, passed 6-15-2011)
§ 72.17 DEFENSES.
   (A)   The following may be considered defenses by the Hearing Officer for a
violation of §
72.16 of this chapter:
      (1)   The motor vehicle or registration plates of the motor vehicle were
stolen before the violation occurred, and not under the control of or in the
possession of the owner at the time of the violation; or
      (2)   The driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection when the
light was red either:
         (a)   In order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle; or
         (b)   As part of a funeral procession.
   (B)   To demonstrate that the motor vehicle or the registration plates were
stolen before the violation occurred and were not under the control or
possession of the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit
proof that a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates
was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007)
§ 72.18 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor
vehicle entering an intersection in violation of §
72.16 of this chapter, the city shall issue a written notice of violation to
the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, which shall be delivered by U.S.
mail within 30 days after the Illinois Secretary of State notifies the city of
the identity of the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, and in no event
later than 90 days following the violation. The city shall only be required to
notify a lessee if the leasing company/lessor provides the lessee’s name by an
affidavit and a copy of the lease within 60 days of the notice’s issuance. If
the driver information is not provided within 60 days, the leasing company/
lessor may be found liable. If any notice to an address is returned as
undeliverable, a second notice shall be sent to the last known address recorded
in a United States post office approved database of the owner or lessee of the
cited vehicle. The second notice shall be made by first class mail postage
prepaid.
   (B)   A notice of violation associated with an automated traffic law
violation shall require a review of the associated recorded image by the
Traffic Compliance Administrator, who shall inspect the image and determine
whether the motor vehicle was being operated in violation of §
72.16 of this chapter, or whether one of the defenses enumerated in § 
72.17 of this chapter is visibly applicable upon inspection. Upon determination
that the recorded image captures a violation and that no defense applies, the
notice of violation shall be served upon the registered vehicle owner in the
manner provided for above. The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall retain a
copy of all violation notices, recorded images and other correspondence mailed
to the owner of the vehicle. Each notice of violation shall constitute evidence
of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding
alleging a violation of the above-noted statutory and local provisions and
shall be prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis
of the defenses established in this subchapter.
   (C)   The notice of violations shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State or, if such
information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address in a
United States post office approved database;
      (2)   The make (only if discernable) and registration number of the motor
vehicle involved in the violation;
      (3)   The violation charged;
      (4)   The location where the violation occurred;
      (5)   The date and time of the violation;
      (6)   A copy of the recorded images;
      (7)   The amount of the civil penalty and the date by which the penalty
should be paid 14 days from the date of issuance, if a hearing is not
requested, and a statement that the payment of the fine shall operated as a
final disposition of the violation;
      (8)   A statement that a failure to pay the civil penalty by the date
noted may result in an additional late fee being assessed against the owner or
lessee;
      (9)   The amount of the late fee;
      (10)   A statement that the failure to pay by the date specified will
result in a final determination of liability and may result in the suspension
of driving privileges for the registered owner of the vehicle;
      (11)   A statement that the recorded images constitute prima facie
evidence of a violation;
      (12)   A statement that the person may elect to proceed by paying the
fine or challenging the charge in court, by mail or by administrative hearing;
and
      (13)   A statement of how an administrative hearing may be requested.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007; Ord. 11-O-1994, passed 6-15-2011)
§ 72.19 HEARING.
   (A)   The owner of a vehicle being operated in violation of §
72.16 of this chapter may request a hearing by the respond-by-date on the
notice of violation (14 days from the date of issuance) to challenge the
evidence or set forth an applicable defense. The notice of violation shall
constitute evidence of the facts contained in the notice and is admissible in
any proceeding alleging a violation of §
72.16 of this chapter. The notice of violation shall be prima facie evidence of
a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the defenses established in §
72.17 of this chapter.
   (B)   The owner’s failure to appear at the hearing will result in a finding
of liability. In the event of a failure to appear, a “findings, decision and
order” letter will be sent to the owner. The owner’s failure to pay the amount
by the date specified in that letter will result in a final determination.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007; Ord. 11-O-1994, passed 6-15-2011)
§ 72.20 NON-RESIDENTS.
   Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle is not a resident
of the city, but seeks to contest the merits of the alleged violation, such
person may contest the charges using the same available defenses as stated
above, but rather than attend the administrative hearing, they may submit any
and all documentary evidence to the Traffic Compliance Administrator no later
that the hearing date, together with a written statement reflecting that they
are non-residents of the city. The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall
forward all timely-submitted materials to the Hearing Officer for the review
and determination.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007)
§ 72.21 FINAL DETERMINATION.
   (A)   A final determination of violation liability shall occur following
failure to pay the fine, a failure to request a hearing by the respond-by date,
after a hearing officer’s determination of violation liability and the
exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures
provided by the city’s municipal code. Where a person fails to appear at a
hearing to contest the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a
prior mailed notice, the Hearing Officer’s determination shall become final
upon a failure to pay the amount owed on date provided in the “findings,
decision and order” letter.
   (B)   Appeal may be made to the Circuit Court of the county on any final
determination as provided for by the Administrative Review Act, being 735 ILCS
5/3-101.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007)
§ 72.22 NOTICE OF DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY.
   If the registered owner fails to pay or contest the notice of violation
within 14 days, a notice of determination of liability will be sent to the
owner indicating that a fine in the amount of $100 is due to the city. The
notice will also state that the owner can petition the city to set aside the
determination of liability before it becomes final. If the owner does not pay
the $100 as specified in the notice or petition, the city to set aside the
determination, within 14 days, a notice of final determination will be sent to
the owner indicating that the owner has exhausted all challenge options and the
$100 fine is a debt due and owing to the city and must be paid within 14 days.
The owner will also be notified that the failure to pay the $100 fine within 14
days will result in a late fee of $100 added to the original fine.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007; Ord. 11-O-1994, passed 6-15-2011)
§ 72.23 NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION.
   (A)   A notice of final determination shall be sent following the final
determination of automated traffic law violation liability and the conclusion
of judicial review.
   (B)   The notice of final determination shall include the following
information:
      (1)   A statement that the unpaid fine is a debt due and owing to the
city; and
      (2)   A warning that a failure to pay any fine due and owing to the city
within 14 days may result in a petition to the Circuit Court of the county to
have the unpaid fine rendered as a judgment or may result in the suspension of
the person’s driver’s license for failure to pay fines or penalties for five or
more violations under this subchapter.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007; Ord. 11-O-1994, passed 6-15-2011)
§ 72.24 PETITION TO SET ASIDE DETERMINATION.
   (A)   A petition to set aside determination of an automated traffic law
violation must be filed with or mailed to the Traffic Control Administrator
within 14 days of the date of mailing of the notice of determination of
liability. The grounds for the petition are limited to:
      (1)   The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the
date of the violation notice was issued;
      (2)   The person having already paid the fine for the violation in
question; and
      (3)   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a timely petition to set aside the determination of
liability, the Hearing Officer shall review the petition to determine if cause
has been shown to set aside the determination. If cause has been shown, the
city shall forward the petitioner a new hearing date on which the petitioner
must appear to present his or her case. The city shall notify the petitioner of
the Hearing Officer’s decision to grant a hearing or deny the petition within
14 days of the city’s receipt.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007)
§ 72.25 NOTICE OF IMPENDING DRIVER’S LICENSE SUSPENSION.
   (A)   A notice of impending drivers license suspension shall be sent to the
person liable for any fine or penalty that remains due and owing on five or
more violations of this subchapter. The notice of impending driver’s license
suspension shall state the following information:
      (1)   The failure to pay the fine owing within 45 days of the notice’s
date will result in the city notifying the Secretary of State that the person
is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under § 6-306.5 of the
Code; and
      (2)   A statement that the person may obtain a copy of the original
ticket imposing a fine by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the
city along with a request for the copy.
   (B)   The notice of impending driver’s license suspension shall be sent by
first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary
of State or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the
last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007)
§ 72.26 DRIVER’S LICENSE SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator, by certified report, may request
that the Secretary of State suspend the driving privileges of an owner of a
registered vehicle who has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing as a
result of five automated traffic violations. The report shall be certified and
contain the following:
      (1)   The name, last known address as recorded with the Secretary of
State, as provided by the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease, or
as recorded in a United States post office approved database if any notice sent
under this subchapter is returned as undeliverable, and driver’s license number
of the person who failed to pay the fine or penalty and the registration number
of any vehicle known to be registered to such person in a state;
      (2)   The name of the municipality making the report pursuant to this
section; and
      (3)   A statement that a notice of impending driver’s license suspension
has been sent to the person named in the report at the address recorded with
the Secretary of State or at the last address known to the lessor of the cited
vehicle at the time of the lease or, if any notice sent under this subchapter
is returned as undeliverable at the last known address recorded at a United
States post office approved database; the date on which such notice was sent;
and address to which such notice was sent.
   (B)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall notify the Secretary of
State whenever a person named in the certified report has paid the previously
recorded fine or penalty or whenever the municipality determines that the
original report was in error. A certified copy of such notification shall also
be given upon request and at no additional charge to the person named therein.
   (C)   (1)   Any person receiving notice from the Secretary of State that his
or her driving privileges may be suspended at the end of a specified period may
challenge the accuracy of the certified report prepared by the Traffic
Compliance Administrator. The person shall, within seven days after having
received notice form the Secretary of State, request an opportunity to speak
with the Traffic Compliance Administrator to challenge the accuracy of the
certified report.
      (2)   If the Traffic Compliance Administrator determines that the
original report was in error due to the fact that the person challenging the
report was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle or that the person has
already paid his or her fine for the five or more automated traffic violations,
the Traffic Compliance Administrator shall immediately notify the Secretary of
State of such error in a subsequent certified report.
(Ord. 07-O-1893, passed 8-15-2007)
UNSCHEDULED INTERCITY BUSES
AND THE DISCHARGE OF PASSENGERS
§ 72.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The
singular or plural is included in any circumstances.
   APPLICATION. A form that the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police makes
available for receiving and reviewing proposed intercity bus operations.
   CITY. The City of Markham, Cook County, Illinois.
   APPROVAL. A written notice that the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of
Police has received, reviewed, and determined that an application satisfies the
requirements of the city and this subchapter.
   DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE. The City of Markham Deputy Chief of Police or
designee.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The City of Markham Chief of Police, or designee.
   REGULARLY SCHEDULED INTERCITY BUS. Any intercity bus that operates trips on
a predictable and recurring basis between two or more designated and authorized
locations or established routes, following a fixed schedule that is published
in advance and available to the general public, and provides transportation
service in exchange for payment of a fare.
   UNSCHEDULED INTERCITY BUS. Any intercity bus used for the transportation of
passengers originating from a location outside of the Chicago-Naperville-Joliet
area that is not a regularly scheduled intercity bus and operating pursuant to
written authorization of the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police
approving a specific schedule to pick-up or drop-off passengers at an approved
location in the city.
(Ord. 24-O-2382, passed 1-3-2024)
§ 72.31 APPLICABILITY.
   The application, review, and approval process pursuant to the limitations
and requirements of this subchapter for unscheduled intercity buses shall apply
to all operators seeking an unscheduled intercity bus service for a specified
date, time and location for the loading or unloading of passengers in
accordance with approved written authorization as herein required.
(Ord. 24-O-2382, passed 1-3-2024)
§ 72.32 NOTICE AND APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   The operator of any unscheduled intercity bus must make an application for
approval to arrive and load or unload passengers in the city on the appropriate
application form made available by the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of
Police. All applications for unscheduled intercity bus service must be received
by the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police a minimum of five full
business days prior to the requested date of arrival identified in the
application. All applications shall include a proposed passenger list, and the
operator shall be required to perform background checks on each passenger over
the age of 18 and shall provide copies of the same to the Chief of Police or
Deputy Chief of Police as part of the application process. Each application for
an unscheduled intercity bus for the unloading of passengers must include an
order authorizing such unscheduled intercity bus for the unloading of
passengers executed by the head of the public body originating the transfer of
or loading of passengers.
(Ord. 24-O-2382, passed 1-3-2024)
§ 72.33 PROCESSING AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATION.
   Applications for unscheduled intercity buses will be reviewed on a first-
come, first-serve basis. No more than one application, regardless of operator,
shall be approved by the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police for a
specific date or location.
(Ord. 24-O-2382, passed 1-3-2024)
§ 72.34 PASSENGER LOADING AND UNLOADING DAY AND HOUR RESTRICTION.
   Unscheduled intercity buses shall load or unload passengers within the city
only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and
not at any time on a Saturday, Sunday, or designated federal, state or city
legal holiday.
(Ord. 24-O-2382, passed 1-3-2024)
§ 72.35 PASSENGER LOADING AND UNLOADING LOCATION.
   Unscheduled intercity buses shall only load or unload passengers at a
location authorized by the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police, which
shall be listed on the approved application.
(Ord. 24-O-2382, passed 1-3-2024)
§ 72.36 PUNCTUALITY OF PASSENGER LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   For any given written approval, unscheduled intercity buses must arrive no
sooner than 15 minutes before, and no later than 30 minutes after, the approved
arrival time, otherwise the application shall be considered invalid. Any
loading or unloading of passengers outside of the aforesaid schedule window
shall result in a $750 fine per passenger upon the intercity bus operator.
(Ord. 24-O-2382, passed 1-3-2024)
§ 72.37 PROOF OF APPROVED APPLICATION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD A PASSENGER.
   Every operator of unscheduled intercity buses must carry a physical or
electronic copy of an approved application and present it for inspection at the
location of loading or unloading passengers at the request of any employee of
the city.
(Ord. 24-O-2382, passed 1-3-2024)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §
72.02 of this chapter shall be fined $750 per violation.
(Prior Code, § 72.99)
   (C)   Any person 18 years of age or older who violates any of the provisions
of §
72.03 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200, nor
more than $500, for each offense. An offense committed by a minor under the
direct control or with the consent of a parent or guardian may subject the
parent or guardian to the penalties provided herein.
(Prior Code, § 72.03)
CHAPTER 73: MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
Section
   
73.01   Soliciting unlawful business or rides
   
73.02   Attempt to solicit drugs
   
73.03   Driving while intoxicated; vehicle impoundment
   
73.04   Unlawful drugs in motor vehicle; vehicle impoundment
   
73.05   Unlawful firearm in motor vehicle; impoundment
   
73.06   Illegal dumping; nuisance; violation; penalty; costs recoverable;
impoundment
   
73.07   Sound device restrictions; violation and impoundment
   
73.08   Unlawful fireworks in motor vehicle; impoundment
   
73.09   False, stolen or altered temporary registration permits
   
73.10   Driving while license, permit or privilege to operate suspended or
revoked; impoundment
   
73.11   Fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer; vehicle impoundment
   
73.12   Impoundment for certain Criminal Code offenses
   
73.13   Impoundment for certain ILCS offenses
   
73.14   Illinois Vehicle Code adopted by reference
 
   
73.99   Penalty
§ 73.01 SOLICITING UNLAWFUL BUSINESS OR RIDES.
   (A)   No person may:
      (1)   Stand upon, use or occupy the public way to solicit any unlawful
business, employment or an unlawful contribution;
      (2)   Interfere with or impede any pedestrian or anyone in a vehicle on
the public way, for the purpose of soliciting any unlawful business, employment
or an unlawful contribution; or
      (3)   Stand upon, use or occupy the public way to solicit a ride from the
driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      UNLAWFUL BUSINESS. Any exchange of goods or services for money or
anything of value, where the nature of the goods or services, or the exchange
thereof, is unlawful. UNLAWFUL BUSINESS includes, but is not limited to,
prostitution or the illegal sale of narcotics. For purposes of this section,
“soliciting” may be by words, gestures, symbols or any similar means.
(Prior Code, § 73.01) (Ord. 05-O-1837, passed 7-3-2005) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.02 ATTEMPT TO SOLICIT DRUGS.
   It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to obtain cannabis, as
defined in the state’s Cannabis Control Act being 720 ILCS 550 and except as
authorized in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1 et seq., or a
controlled substance, as defined by the state’s Controlled Substance Act being
720 ILCS 570, with an intent to possess by request, contract, agreement,
command or understanding.
(Prior Code, § 73.02) (Ord. 05-O-1837, passed 7-3-2005; Ord. 20-O-2262, passed
4-15-2020; Ord. 20-O-2279, passed 8-19-2020) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.03 DRIVING WHILE INTOXICATED; VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   No person shall drive or be in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle within the city while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or
drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof, as
defined in 625 ILCS 5/11-501.
   (B)   Any vehicle used in a violation of division (A) above shall be subject
to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section.
   (C)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a preliminary hearing to be
conducted under this chapter.
   (D)   This section shall not apply if:
      (1)   The vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the
theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; or
      (2)   The alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been
sold to another person prior to the violation.
(Prior Code, § 73.03) (Ord. 05-O-1837, passed 7-3-2005) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.04 UNLAWFUL DRUGS IN MOTOR VEHICLE; VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The owner of record of any motor vehicle that contains unlawful
cannabis, as defined by the state’s Cannabis Act, being 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.,
and the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1 et seq., or a
controlled substance, as defined by the state’s Controlled Substances Act,
being 720 ILCS 570/100 et seq., or that is used in the purchase, attempt to
purchase, sale or attempt to sell such controlled substances or unlawful
cannabis shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a preliminary hearing to be
conducted under this chapter.
   (C)   This section shall not apply if:
      (1)   The vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the
theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
      (2)   The vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle;
      (3)   The alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been
sold to another person prior to the violation; or
      (4)   The owner proves that the presence of the controlled substance or
cannabis was authorized under the Controlled Substances Act or the Cannabis
Control Act or the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act or the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act.
(Prior Code, § 73.04) (Ord. 05-O-1837, passed 7-3-2005; Ord. 20-O-2262, passed
4-15-2020; Ord. 20-O-2279, passed 8-19-2020) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.05 UNLAWFUL FIREARM IN MOTOR VEHICLE; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The owner of record of any motor vehicle that is used in connection
with a violation of 720 ILCS 5/34-1 et seq. or 720 ILCS 5/30-101 through 5/30-
105; or that contains a firearm or ammunition for which a firearm owner’s
identification card is required under the state’s Owner’s Identification Card
Act, being 430 ILCS 65/0.01 et seq., and one is not presented; or an
unregistered firearm; or a firearm that is not broken down in a non-
functioning state shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this
section.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a preliminary hearing to be
conducted under this chapter.
   (C)   This section shall not apply if:
      (1)   The vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the
theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
      (2)   The vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or
      (3)   The alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been
sold to another person prior to the violation.
(Prior Code, § 73.05) (Ord. 05-O-1837, passed 7-3-2005) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.06 ILLEGAL DUMPING; NUISANCE; VIOLATION; PENALTY; COSTS RECOVERABLE;
IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   No person shall dump, deposit or place or cause to be dumped,
deposited or placed on any lot or parcel of improved or unimproved real estate
within the city the following materials: abandoned vehicles; ashes;
construction or demolition debris; garbage; litter; manure; miscellaneous
waste; refuse; trash; untrimmed tires; or any other substance that may contain
disease and germs or may be scattered by the wind, or be decomposed, or become
filthy, noxious or unhealthful; except when a permit is properly issued
pursuant to the provisions of this code. Such dumping without a permit hereby
is declared a nuisance.
   (B)   A motor vehicle that is used in the violation of this chapter or in
violation of any paragraph of the state’s Environmental Protection Act, being
415 ILCS 5/1 et seq., and the Illinois Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5/4-200 et
seq., shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to state law.
   (C)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a preliminary hearing to be
conducted under this chapter.
   (D)   This section shall not apply if:
      (1)   The vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the
theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
      (2)   The vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or
      (3)   The alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been
sold to another person prior to the violation.
(Prior Code, § 73.06) (Ord. 05-O-1837, passed 7-3-2005) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.07 SOUND DEVICE RESTRICTIONS; VIOLATION AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or
operated, any radio, tape recorder, cassette player or any other device for
receiving broadcast sound or reproducing recorded sound if the device is
located on the public way; or in any motor vehicle on the public way; and if
the sound generated by the device is clearly audible to a person with normal
hearing at a distance greater than 75 feet. This division (A) shall not apply
to any person participating in a parade or public assembly for which a permit
has been obtained pursuant to the applicable provisions of this code.
   (B)   A motor vehicle that is used in violation of division (A) above shall
be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section.
   (C)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a preliminary hearing to be
conducted under this chapter.
   (D)   This section shall not apply if:
      (1)   The vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the
theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
      (2)   The vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or
      (3)   The alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been
sold to another person prior to the violation.
(Prior Code, § 73.07) (Ord. 05-O-1837, passed 7-3-2005) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.08 UNLAWFUL FIREWORKS IN MOTOR VEHICLE; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The owner of record of any motor vehicle that contains any illegal
fireworks shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the city or its agents when the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a preliminary hearing to be
conducted under this chapter.
   (C)   This section shall not apply if:
      (1)   The vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the
theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
      (2)   The vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle;
      (3)   The alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been
sold to another person prior to the violation; or
      (4)   The owner proves that the presence of the fireworks was permissible
pursuant to division (F) below.
   (D)   The provisions of this section shall apply whenever a motor vehicle is
seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter.
   (E)   As used in this section, the OWNER OF RECORD of a vehicle means the
record titleholder.
   (F)   Nothing contained in this section dealing with fireworks shall be
construed as applying to the transportation of any article or thing shipped in
conformity with the regulations prescribed by the Interstate Commerce
Commission, nor as applying to the military or naval forces of the United
States.
(Prior Code, § 73.08) (Ord. 05-O-1837, passed 7-3-2005) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.09 FALSE, STOLEN OR ALTERED TEMPORARY REGISTRATION PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or park on the public way any vehicle bearing
a false, stolen or altered state temporary registration permit. A vehicle
operated or parked in violation of this section shall be subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the city or its agents when the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a preliminary hearing to be
conducted under this chapter.
   (C)   If the vehicle is unattended, notice shall be sent to the last
registered owner of the vehicle at the address indicated in the last valid
registration of the vehicle. The notice provisions of this section shall apply
whenever a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section.
   (D)   This section shall not apply if:
      (1)   The vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the
theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
      (2)   The vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or
      (3)   The alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been
sold to another person prior to the violation.
(Prior Code, § 73.09) (Ord. 05-O-1837, passed 7-3-2005)
§ 73.10 DRIVING WHILE LICENSE, PERMIT OR PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE SUSPENDED OR
REVOKED; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   No person shall drive or be in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle within the city while his or her driver’s license, permit or privilege
to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, as defined in 625 ILCS 5/6-
303, as amended.
   (B)   Any vehicle used in a violation of division (A) above shall be subject
to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section.
   (C)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a preliminary hearing to be
conducted under this chapter.
   (D)   This section shall not apply if:
      (1)   The vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the
theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
      (2)   The vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle;
      (3)   The alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been
sold to another person prior to the violation; or
      (4)   The driver’s license or permit of the vehicle operator was
suspended only for violations of vehicle emissions testing under 625 ILCS 5/
13B.
(Prior Code, § 73.10) (Ord. 06-O-1859, passed 6-7-2006) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.11 FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE A PEACE OFFICER; VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   No person shall drive or be in actual physical control of a motor
vehicle within the city which flees or attempts to elude a peace officer, as
defined in 625 ILCS 5/11-204.1.
   (B)   Any vehicle used in a violation of division (A) above shall be subject
to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section.
   (C)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the city or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a preliminary hearing to be
conducted under this chapter.
   (D)   This section shall not apply if:
      (1)   The vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the
theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered;
      (2)   The vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or
      (3)   The alleged owner provides adequate proof that the vehicle had been
sold to another person prior to the violation.
(Prior Code, § 73.11) (Ord. 06-O-1859, passed 6-7-2006) Penalty, see §
73.99
§ 73.12 IMPOUNDMENT FOR CERTAIN CRIMINAL CODE OFFENSES.
   Vehicles may be impounded for the following offenses as described in the
state’s Criminal Code § 3.961 (720 ILCS 5/2-8) and amended through public acts:
   (A)   720 ILCS 5/11-14, Prostitution;
   (B)   720 ILCS 5/11-18, Patronizing a prostitute;
   (C)   720 ILCS 5/11-18.1, Patronizing a juvenile prostitute;
   (D)   720 ILCS 5/11-19, Pimping;
   (E)   720 ILCS 5/11-19.1, Juvenile pimping;
   (F)   720 ILCS 5/11-19.2, Exploitation of a child;
   (G)   720 ILCS 5/20-2, Possession of explosives or incendiary device;
   (H)   720 ILCS 550/4, Possession of cannabis;
   (I)   720 ILCS 550/5, Manufacture, delivery, possession, intent to deliver
cannabis;
   (J)   720 ILCS 550/5.1, Cannabis trafficking;
   (K)   720 ILCS 550/5.2, Delivery of cannabis on school grounds;
   (L)   720 ILCS 550/8, Possession of cannabis sativa plant;
   (M)   720 ILCS 570, Controlled Substances Act (paragraphs 401 through 413);
and
   (N)   720 ILCS 600/3.5, Possession of drug paraphernalia.
(Ord. 06-O-1859, passed 6-7-2006; Ord. 09-O-1958, passed 8-5-2009; Ord. 12-O-
2047, passed 12-19-2012)
§ 73.13 IMPOUNDMENT FOR CERTAIN ILCS OFFENSES.
   Vehicles may be impounded for the following offenses, as described in the
state’s Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS:
   (A)   625 ILCS 5/6-101, Operating a motor vehicle with no valid driver’s
license. This does not include expired driver’s license;
   (B)   625 ILCS 5/6-303(a)(1), Operating a motor vehicle with a suspended
driver’s license;
   (C)   625 ILCS 5/6-303(a)(2), Operating a motor vehicle with a revoked
driver’s license. NOTE: mandatory tow under 625 ILCS 5/6-303(c) if driver’s
license suspended/revoked and no insurance;
   (D)   625 ILCS 5/11-501, D.O.I. alcohol, intoxicating compounds and/or other
drugs. NOTE: maximum 12 hour tow and hold under 625 ILCS 4-203(e);
   (E)   625 ILCS 5/3-702, Operation when registration cancelled, suspended or
revoked;
   (F)   625 ILCS 5/3-703, Operation with false, fraudulent, stolen or altered
registration;
   (G)   625 ILCS 5/3-708, Operation while registration, suspended for
mandatory insurance;
   (H)   625 ILCS 5/3-710, Presenting or displaying a false or fraudulent
insurance card; and
   (I)   625 ILCS 5/5-502, Transportation or possession of open alcoholic
liquor in a vehicle.
(Ord. 06-O-1859, passed 6-7-2006; Ord. 09-O-1958, passed 8-5-2009; Ord. 12-O-
2047, passed 12-19-2012)
§ 73.14 ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., as amended from time to
time, is hereby adopted by reference. For purposes of writing citations under
the city code based upon the adoption of the Illinois Vehicle Code as stated
herein, the officer shall provide a reference to this section followed by a
slash and the section number from the Illinois Vehicle Code.
(Ord. 20-O-2289, passed 10-21-2020)
§ 73.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The general fines and penalties which shall be imposed shall be as
follows.
      (1)   For the violation of any city ordinance other than a violation of
the traffic codes of the city, fines and penalties shall be as established from
time to time by action of the City Council.
      (2)   For violations of any provisions generally of this traffic code or
any compliance violations; or violation of any other city ordinance regulation
restricting or prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles along the
streets, byways, alleyways, regulating parking lots or such other location as
may be controlled by off- street parking agreements located within the
geographical boundaries of the city, other than for handicapped parking, the
fine shall be:
         (a)   Twenty-five dollars on or before the date set for hearing as
assigned on the notice of violation;
         (b)   Fifty dollars if paid after the first hearing date after failure
to appear, but prior to the second hearing date; and
         (c)   One hundred-fifty dollars after failure to attend the first or
second hearing date.
      (3)   For violation of any city ordinance regulating, restricting or
prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles along the streets,
byways, alleyways, regulating parking lots or such other location as may be
controlled by off-street parking agreements located within the geographical
boundaries of the city for areas specifically designated for handicapped
parking, the fine shall be:
         (a)   One hundred dollars if paid before the date set for the hearing
as assigned in the notice of violation;
         (b)   One hundred-fifty dollars if paid after the first hearing date
after failure to appear, but prior to a second hearing; and
         (c)   Two hundred-fifty dollars for failure to pay fine or attend
second meeting.
(Prior Code, § 73.99)
   (B)   A person who violates §
73.01 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.
(Prior Code, § 73.01)
   (C)   A person who violates §
73.02 of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500.
(Prior Code, § 73.02)
   (D)   Any person violating §
73.06(A) of this chapter will be fined not less than $500 and not more than
$1,000. Offenses may also be punishable as a misdemeanor by incarceration in
the county jail for a term not to exceed six months under the procedure set
forth in Illinois Municipal Code § 1-2-1.1, as amended, and in a separate
proceeding.
(Prior Code, § 73.06)
(Ord. 05-O-1837, passed 7-3-2005)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   NUISANCE VEHICLES
      
91.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
92.   ANIMALS
      
93.   FAIR HOUSING
      
94.   FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS
      
95.   HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
96.   LITTERING AND DEBRIS
      
97.   NUISANCES
      
98.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
CHAPTER 90: NUISANCE VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Inoperable motor vehicles on private property in view of general public
a nuisance
Repair and Maintenance of Vehicles
   
90.05   Definitions
   
90.06   Repair or maintenance of vehicles on the right-of-way
   
90.07   Repair or maintenance of vehicles on residential property
   
90.08   Repair or maintenance of vehicles in Canterbury shopping center
Removal of Abandoned Motor Vehicles
   
90.15   Definition
   
90.16   Abandonment of motor vehicle on vacant lot or private property
prohibited; authorization for removal
   
90.17   Notification; towing service
Towing Hazardous, Unlawful and Abandoned Vehicles
   
90.30   Definitions
   
90.31   Authorization for towing
   
90.32   Pre-tow notice for abandoned vehicles
   
90.33   Pre-tow hearing procedures
   
90.34   Post-tow notice for hazardous and unlawful vehicles
   
90.35   Post-tow hearing procedures
   
90.36   Towing service operator fees
   
90.37   Fee for release of impounded vehicle
 
   
90.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Forms for Towing and Notices
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY IN VIEW OF GENERAL PUBLIC
A NUISANCE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of
at least seven days or any greater period fixed by ordinance, the engine,
wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or
other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle
is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. INOPERABLE MOTOR
VEHICLE shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily
incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform
ordinary service or repair operations.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept
within a building when not in use, to historic vehicles over 25 years of age,
or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the
wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
   (C)   All inoperable motor vehicles on private property and in view of the
general public are hereby declared to be a public nuisance.
   (D)   Any person having a vehicle described in division (C) above, upon
reasonable notice received from the municipality, must dispose of any
inoperable motor vehicle under his or her control.
(Prior Code, § 90.01) (Ord. 86-O-1222, passed - -1986) Penalty, see §
90.99
REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES
§ 90.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REPAIR OR MAINTENANCE. Body work, engine work, washing engines, lubricant
changes and parts changes or installation but does not include washing and
waxing the exterior or interior of a vehicle.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Private residential property, including all property
used, in whole or part, for residential purposes and shall include a garage
located on such properties.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Means public right-of-way including streets, alleys, parkways,
sidewalks and property owned by the city.
(Ord. 22-O-2339, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 90.06 REPAIR OR MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES ON THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   Repair or maintenance of a vehicle is prohibited on the right-of-way, unless
immediate repair or maintenance is necessary to make the vehicle operable but
no later than 24 hours after said vehicle has stopped working at the respective
location. No vehicle shall be towed or driven to any right-of-way for the
purpose of repair and maintenance.
(Ord. 22-O-2339, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 90.07 REPAIR OR MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES ON RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   Repair or maintenance of a vehicle is prohibited on residential property,
except on a vehicle owned by the occupant of the residential property and
bearing valid state of Illinois registration plates and current city vehicle
sticker evidencing that the vehicle is registered at the residential property
address in question. No person may repair or maintain a vehicle of others on
their residential property whether for compensation or not.
(Ord. 22-O-2339, passed 9-7-2022)
§ 90.08 REPAIR OR MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES IN CANTERBURY SHOPPING CENTER.
   (A)   Any and all mechanical, servicing or repair work on motor vehicles is
prohibited at all times in the public parking areas of the Canterbury shopping
center, being the area generally bounded by 159th Street on the north, Richmond
Avenue on the east, 162nd Street on the south and Kedzie Parkway on the west.
   (B)   Persons liable pursuant to this schedule shall be the person
performing the mechanical, servicing or repair work and the registered owner of
the motor vehicle involved.
   (C)   The Police Department of the city or its designee are hereby
authorized to tow away any and all vehicles which shall have been duly cited
for a violation of this schedule to secure spot for storage and impounding
until and after the owner or other person liable under this schedule shall have
paid all costs, fines and penalties as set forth in this section. Further, such
vehicle so impounded shall not be released until the registered owner thereof
shall have appeared and personally demonstrated his or her right to possession
of said vehicle through a current and valid state automobile registration card
or title document issued by the office of the Illinois Secretary of State.
   (D)   The penalty for the violation of this schedule shall be a fine, after
conviction, of not less than $50, nor more than $500, for each day that such a
violation persists. Further, that should said vehicle have been towed, then
such vehicle shall not be released as provided in division (C) above until and
after the owner of the vehicle shall have paid a reasonable fee for towing in
the amount of $100 to the city.
(Ord. 22-O-2339, passed 9-7-2022)
REMOVAL OF ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 90.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. All motor vehicles or other vehicles in a state of
disrepair rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven in its condition; or
any other motor vehicle or other vehicle that has not been moved or used for
seven consecutive days or more and is apparently deserted; or any motor vehicle
on which no current state registration or city sticker, or either is displayed;
unless:
      (1)   Such vehicle is kept completely within an enclosed building; or
      (2)   Such non-residential property is specifically zoned to allow such
storage.
(Prior Code, § 90.10) (Ord. 85-O-1184, passed 7-3-1985)
§ 90.16 ABANDONMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLE ON VACANT LOT OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
PROHIBITED; AUTHORIZATION FOR REMOVAL.
   The abandonment of a motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part thereof on a
vacant lot or private property in the municipality is unlawful and subject to
penalties as set forth herein. A motor vehicle or other vehicle or any part
thereof so abandoned on private property may be authorized for removal after
notice and per the procedures set forth in §§
90.30 through
90.35 of this chapter, which notice and towing procedures are fully
incorporated herein.
(Prior Code, § 90.11) (Ord. 85-O-1184, passed 7-3-1985) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 NOTIFICATION; TOWING SERVICE.
   When an abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle
comes into the temporary possession or custody of a person in the city who is
not the owner of the vehicle, such person shall immediately notify the Police
Department when the vehicle is within the corporate limits of the city. Upon
receipt of such notification, the Police Department shall authorize a towing
service to remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen or
unclaimed motor vehicle or other vehicle. The towing service will safely keep
the towed vehicle and its contents, maintain a record of the tow until the
vehicle is claimed by the owner or any other person legally entitled to
possession thereof, or until it is disposed of as provided in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.12) (Ord. 85-O-1184, passed 7-3-1985)
TOWING HAZARDOUS, UNLAWFUL AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
§ 90.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle parked or otherwise located on the public way and in such
a state of disrepair that it is incapable of being driven; or that has been
unmoved for a period of at least 24 hours and from its condition, the period
during which it has not been moved or some other circumstance appears to have
been, and will be presumed to have been, abandoned by its owner;
      (2)   Vehicles parked in a public parking lot or on private property
without the consent of the lot owner, proprietor or agent of the property,
which person has requested that the vehicle be towed; or
      (3)   A vehicle defined as abandoned, or capable of being towed, by any
other ordinances of the municipality, and which does not fall into the
categories of “hazardous” or “unlawful” vehicles and, therefore, is not subject
to an immediate tow.
   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or
cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of the vehicle;
      (2)   A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or
welfare of the members of the public;
      (3)   A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street, way or alley
that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to
pedestrians and other operators of vehicles; or
      (4)   A vehicle that must be moved to allow for proper municipal snow
removal from a public street, way or alley.
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title to the vehicle, or the right of
possession of the vehicle.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, highway or any public way, except devices
moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks
and snowmobiles.
   UNLAWFUL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject of a
search and seizure by the Police Department; or
      (2)   A vehicle parked in violation of state statutes or ordinances of
the municipality which prohibit parking at the location in question or for the
period of time for which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the
statute or the ordinance authorize the vehicle to be towed and the signs posted
at the general location note that fact.
(Prior Code, § 90.25) (Ord. 85-O-1183, passed 7-3-1985)
§ 90.31 AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING.
   (A)   The towing of vehicles by the municipality, or by its approved towing
service operators on behalf of the municipality, shall be authorized only by
the Police Department and only under the circumstances herein provided. Towed
vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated by the Police Department
until lawfully claimed or disposed of pursuant to state law, 625 ILCS.
   (B)   Hazardous or unlawful vehicles may be towed without prior notice;
except that, when an unlawful vehicle is only one that has been reported as
stolen and is not towable for some other specific reason, the owner should be,
when practicable, notified by telephone or other means and given the
opportunity to claim or move the vehicle, if he or she so wishes, to avoid
incurring the expenses of a police-ordered tow. However, the vehicle may be
towed if the owner permitted the tow to be made when the vehicle was reported
stolen or at any time thereafter, in the form provided in Appendix A, § 4, of
this chapter. Within 24 hours after towing a vehicle pursuant to this chapter,
a notice shall be sent to or personally delivered to the owner of the vehicle
affording the opportunity for a hearing as provided in §§
90.34 and
90.35 of this chapter.
   (C)   Abandoned vehicles may be towed after the mailing or delivery of prior
notice and the affording of an opportunity for a hearing as provided in §§
90.32 and
90.33 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 90.26) (Ord. 85-O-1183, passed 7-3-1985)
§ 90.32 PRE-TOW NOTICE FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Notice pursuant to this section shall be personally delivered to the
owner or shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, to the address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most
current registration list of the Secretary of State. The notice shall be in the
form provided in
Appendix A, § 2, of this chapter. In the event that an out-of-state vehicle is
proposed to be towed, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made of
the Secretary of State of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the
most current registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and
notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address furnished, though in
no case will the municipality be required to delay towing more than seven days
after the date of the mailing or personal delivery of the notice if no request
for a hearing has been received within that seven-day period.
   (B)   A notice of intent to tow sticker with the earliest date upon which
the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the Police
Department shall be placed on the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 90.27) (Ord. 85-O-1183, passed 7-3-1985)
§ 90.33 PRE-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner or person entitled to possession of
a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven days after the
date of mailing or personal delivery of the notice to request, in writing, a
pre-tow hearing. Subsequent to this seven-day period, the vehicle may be towed,
if the owner has not filed a written hearing request within the seven-day
period, and any hearing rights under the provisions of this subchapter will be
deemed waived.
   (B)   Schedule of pre-tow hearings. The pre-tow hearing shall be scheduled
for a date within 14 days of the mailing or personal delivery of the pre-tow
notice. The municipality shall not be required to delay towing longer than such
a 14-day period.
   (C)   Request for pre-tow hearings. Requests for a pre-tow hearing are to be
made in person to the office indicated on the notice. Requests for hearing by
persons who reside more than 50 miles from the municipality may be made by
mail. Forms for such requests shall be made available at the Police Department.
At the time of making the request, the owner will be provided a hearing date
and time by mail or in person, as the circumstances require.
   (D)   Appointment of Hearing Officer. The municipality shall choose an
officer or employee of the municipality to serve as Hearing Officer. In no case
shall that Hearing Officer be an individual who was involved in the initial
decision to tow the vehicle. The Hearing Officer shall have the authority to
require the presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the proposed tow
or any other municipal personnel.
   (E)   Nature of hearing. The hearing shall be informal in nature, and the
rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing will not be determinative of, or
adjudicate, any citation relative to any vehicle. After receiving all relevant
evidence, the Hearing Officer shall make a written decision based upon a
preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of the vehicle is authorized
by the laws of the state or the code or any applicable ordinances of the
municipality, with a specific statutory, code or ordinance section cited in the
decision. The owner shall be provided a copy of such pre-tow hearing decision.
   (F)   Decision to tow and rates to be charged. If the preponderance of the
evidence supports towing and compliance with the provisions of this subchapter,
the Hearing Officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed, with any towing and
storage costs to then be imposed upon the owner thereof. The fees to be charged
for towing and storage services shall be no more than the maximum rates set by
the Chief of Police pursuant to the provisions of §
90.34 of this chapter. The owner of said vehicle having had such a hearing may
avoid the towing by immediately removing the vehicle from the improper location
to a proper, lawful location and correcting any unlawful condition of the
vehicle.
   (G)   Decision not to tow. If the preponderance of the evidence fails to
support towing of the vehicle, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the
vehicle shall not be towed. The municipality shall furnish a copy of such
decision to the owner, who may place it inside the vehicle in a location
plainly visible from the outside, such as the dashboard or rear window. No
vehicle about which such a decision has been rendered shall be towed by the
municipality unless the circumstances under which the decision was rendered
have changed. If, at some subsequent time, the municipality should wish to tow
the vehicle from the same location, it shall follow the same procedures
required for the towing of any other similarly situated vehicle.
   (H)   Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions. Originals
or copies of all notices, pre-tow hearing decisions, towing reports and any
associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Police
Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or after
each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The municipality or the owner may
contest the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 90.28) (Ord. 85-O-1183, passed 7-3-1985)
§ 90.34 POST-TOW NOTICE FOR HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Mailing or delivery of notice. Notice pursuant to this section shall
be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the
address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current
registration list of the Secretary of State, unless the notice is personally
delivered to the owner, in which case, the date and time of the delivery and
the name of the police officer making the delivery shall be noted in the Police
Department records or reports. The notice shall be in the forms provided in
Appendix A, § 1(A) and (B), of this chapter and shall be mailed or delivered
within 24 hours of the tow, as provided in §
90.31(B) of this chapter. In the event that the municipality has towed an out-
of-state hazardous or unlawful vehicle, inquiry by computer, telephone or
letter shall be made of the Secretary of State of the particular jurisdiction
for the furnishing of the most current registered name and address of the owner
of the vehicle, and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address
furnished.
   (B)   Posting of signs showing hearing rights. All approved towing service
operators shall prominently post at least one sign, with dimensions of at least
12 inches by 18 inches, indicating the opportunity and procedures for a hearing
to contest the validity of a towed vehicle. The sign, the form for which is set
out in
Appendix A, § 1(A), of this chapter, shall be placed in locations readily
visible to the public transacting business at any towing facility. If a towing
service operator performs services for more than one municipality, the
information for contacting the various appropriate municipal offices can be
listed in one such sign, the format for which shall be substantially similar to
the form set out in
Appendix A, § 1(A), of this chapter.
   (C)   Requests for post-tow hearings. Requests for hearings may be made in
person at the office indicated on the notice within 15 days of the mailing or
personal delivery of the notification of tow, or release of the vehicle,
whichever occurs first otherwise, the right to a hearing shall be deemed
waived. Requests for hearings by persons who reside more than 50 miles from the
municipality may be made in person or by mail received by the municipality
within the 15-day period.
   (D)   Release of motor vehicles. Before the owner or person entitled to
possession of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove same, the
owner or other person entitled to possession shall furnish evidence of his or
her identity, ownership of the vehicle or his or her right to possession, sign
a receipt for the vehicle, and pay the amount currently owed for towing and
storage fees to the towing service operator. The Police Chief is authorized to
promulgate regulations as to the documents or other proof necessary to
establish these facts.
   (E)   Establishment of maximum towing and storage rates. The owner shall pay
fees to the towing service operator for towing and storage on police-ordered
tows at rates that do not exceed maximum amounts to be administratively
established by the Chief of Police and which may be revised from time to time.
      (1)   The basic rates for such fees shall be shown in the form and sign
concerning vehicle release requirements set forth in
Appendix A, § 1(A), of this chapter. However, nothing in this subchapter is
intended to prevent a competitive towing service operator from charging less
than the established maximum rates for police-ordered or any other tows.
      (2)   In arriving at the maximum rates for various services, the Chief
shall consider such matters as the prevalent market rates in the area for the
different types of vehicles, the types of storage and area requirements for
categories such as large trucks and commercial vehicles, and the relative
difficulties and amount of work required to perform various types of towing
operations.
      (3)   For particularly difficult or unusual towing jobs, such as large or
serious accidents, the Chief is authorized to allow towing operators to charge
rates above those established for normal situations, which special charges must
be based upon the cost of services provided, taking into account such matters
as the man-hours and equipment time required for the job.
      (4)   A towing service operator must fully itemize in writing the details
of such a billing at special rates for a particularly difficult or unusual tow,
and supply a copy of the itemized bill to the owner and to the Police
Department. Any such special rates charged must be customary in the towing
industry in the area for the nature and extent of the services provided.
      (5)   Every towing service operator and the Police Department shall have
available a copy of the complete current rate schedule and any special rate
policy established by the Chief, for vehicle owners to view upon request.
(Prior Code, § 90.29) (Ord. 85-O-1183, passed 7-3-1985)
§ 90.35 POST-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner of a vehicle towed as an immediate
tow, by or pursuant to the authority of the Police Department as set forth
herein, shall be provided the opportunity for a post-tow hearing to determine
the validity of such tow and any towing or storage charges. The hearing will
not be determinative of, or adjudicate, any citation issued relative to any
towed vehicle.
   (B)   Nature of the hearing and hearing officer. The nature of the hearing
and the appointment of the hearing officer shall be the same as set forth above
in §
90.33(D) and (E) of this chapter.
   (C)   Schedule of post-tow hearings. Hearings shall take place as follows.
      (1)   In those instances where the vehicle has been released upon the
deposit of the full payment currently owed for towing and storage charges, and
the owner has properly requested a hearing, the hearing shall take place within
15 days after the release of such vehicle, unless the owner requests a later
date convenient to all parties.
      (2)   In those instances where the vehicle remains impounded, the hearing
shall take place, at the option of the owner:
         (a)   On the next day after an owner’s demand for such hearing,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; if such demand is made after 1500
hours (3:00 p.m.), or if the unavailability of a necessary witness or evidence
creates a particular difficulty in conducting the hearing on the next calendar
day, then a hearing shall be held on the second day following the request,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; or
         (b)   If acceptable to the owner, within 15 days of said request on a
date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   Conduct of post-tow hearing. The Hearing Officer shall review all
evidence presented by the vehicle owner and the Police Department or other
municipal employees, and shall make a finding based upon the preponderance of
the evidence presented, as to the lawful authority for the towing and storage
of the vehicle. The municipality must establish such authority by a
preponderance of the evidence.
   (E)   Post-tow hearing decision. For each hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
complete a post-tow hearing decision and attach such decision to the Police
Department’s original vehicle towing report, and supply a copy of the decision
to the owner by personal delivery if the owner is present, otherwise by mail.
The decision and findings shall be substantially as stated in the form for the
post-tow hearing decision, set forth in
Appendix A, § 3, of this chapter.
   (F)   Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions. All
originals or copies of the notices, post- tow hearing decisions, towing reports
and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Police
Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing or after each
tow if no hearing was requested or held. The municipality or the owner may
contest the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.
   (G)   Towing services subject to this subchapter. Notwithstanding any other
ordinance or statutory provisions to the contrary, any towing service operator
authorized to perform tows on behalf of the municipality must perform its
services subject to the provisions of this subchapter. If a tow or the charge
for a tow is found by a court to be illegal and the towing service operator is
required to return the charge for the tow to the owner of the vehicle, the
municipality shall not be liable to reimburse the operator for the towing
charges.
(Prior Code, § 90.30) (Ord. 85-O-1183, passed 7-3-1985)
§ 90.36 TOWING SERVICE OPERATOR FEES.
   Towing service operators who perform tows on behalf of the city shall
collect a fee of $5 for each vehicle towed. The fees collected by the towing
service operators each month shall be paid to the City Clerk by the tenth day
of the following month and become part of the corporate fund.
(Prior Code, § 90.31) (Ord. 99-O-1685, passed 10-6-1999)
§ 90.37 FEE FOR RELEASE OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Before a person or firm entitled to possession of any legally
impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove the vehicle from the custody of
the city’s Police Department or any towing or storage service acting as agent
of the Police Department, he or she shall furnish evidence of his or her
identity and ownership of the vehicle and right of possession thereof, shall
sign a receipt for the vehicle and shall pay a fee for the release at the rate
of $25 for citizens of the city, $50 for non-residents and $50 for insurance
companies or other third parties entitled to possession of the vehicle. The
fees are calculated to cover administrative expenses associated with the
handling of the impounded vehicle.
   (B)   There shall be no charge for residents where the towing or impoundment
charges are related to a vehicle involved in the commission of a violent crime,
as defined in 720 ILCS, and is being held for use as evidence in the trial of
that matter; provided, however, that, where the resident is the person charged
with such crime, then this waiver of charges shall not apply.
(Prior Code, § 90.32) (Ord. 03-O-1779, passed 12-3-2003)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not less than $25, nor exceeding $500. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, § 90.99)
APPENDIX A: FORMS FOR TOWING AND NOTICES
Section
   
1.   Form for post-tow notice and signs
   
2.   Form for pre-tow notice
   
3.   Form for post-tow hearing
   
4.   Form for owner’s permission to tow stolen vehicle
§ 1. FORM FOR POST-TOW NOTICE AND SIGNS.
   (A)   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
90.34 and
90.35 of this chapter, for posting in towing establishments and mailing or
delivering to owners.
 
Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any impounded vehicle shall be
permitted to remove the same from custody of the Police Department or towing service
operator, he or she shall furnish evidence of his or her identity and ownership of the
vehicle and right of possession thereto, shall sign a receipt for the vehicle, and
shall pay a fee not exceeding $          for a passenger vehicle of not more than seven
passengers, and $           for a truck or commercial vehicle to cover the cost of
towing or removal to a vehicle pound or authorized garage, and in addition thereto, the
cost of storage not exceeding $          per day for a passenger vehicle of not more
than seven passengers, and $          per day for a truck or commercial vehicle.
However, higher fees may necessarily be charged in particularly difficult or unusual
towing or storage circumstances, for which rate information is available upon request
at the Police Department or towing business location. If the owner or person entitled
to possession wishes to contest the validity of the tow, he or she may obtain a hearing
under the conditions of either division (A) or (B) stated below:
 
 
TO OBTAIN HEARING
 
(A)   If the vehicle has been released, he or she may, within 15 days of the release of
the vehicle or the mailing or personal delivery to him or her of the notification of
the tow, whichever occurs first, request a hearing by contacting in person the office
of  (Name of office, address and phone number)  . Anyone residing more than 50 miles
away from the municipality may make a request for hearing by mail. The right to any
hearing will be deemed waived unless a written request for hearing is received by the
above office within the applicable 15-day period.
 
(B)   If the vehicle is still impounded, he or she may contact the above office and
obtain a hearing within the next day after the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays, unless the request is made after 3:00 p.m., or unless there are
particular difficulties in having the hearing on the next day, in which case the
hearing will take place on the second day thereafter, excluding weekends and holidays.
 
 
NATURE OF HEARING
 
The hearing shall be conducted according to municipal code or any applicable municipal
ordinance provisions, and shall determine the validity of the impounding of the vehicle
and the imposition or refund of any towing or storage charges, but the hearing will not
determine or adjudicate any citations issued. If the Hearing Officer sustains the
validity of the tow and storage, the owner or person entitled to possession will be
required to pay all unpaid towing and storage fees before obtaining the release of the
vehicle.
 
 
   (B)   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
90.34 and
90.35 of this chapter for the mailing or delivery of post-tow notice to owners,
including the form set forth in division (A) above:
 
Post-Tow Incident Report
No.                         
 
 
TO:    (Name)
    (Address)       Date of Certified or Registered Mailing:                            
or
                        Date and Time of and Name of Person Making Personal Delivery:
                                                   
                                                   
 
POST-TOW NOTICE
 
You are listed as the Registered Owner or person entitled to possession of the following-described vehicle:  (make) ,  (model/year)  ,  (other identifying features)  ,  (license plate number and state) which is impounded at:
 
    (name and address of towing service operator
    or municipal auto pound)
 
 
The vehicle was towed from  (location)  on  (date)  by the authority of the municipality of  (name of municipality) , as an unlawful or hazardous vehicle, to wit:
 
    (facts forming basis of tow)
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                
as defined in  (code, ordinance or statutory section)  .
 
 
The towing was authorized by  (code, ordinance or statutory section)  which provides that:
                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                 
 
You have the rights and payment obligations as set forth in the enclosed notice of vehicle release requirements and hearing rights.
 
 
§ 2. FORM FOR PRE-TOW NOTICE.
   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
90.32 and
90.33 of this chapter for the mailing or delivery of pre-tow notices to owners:
 
Pre-Tow Incident Report
No.                             
 
 
   TO:    (Name)
       (Address)       Date of Certified or Registered Mailing:                            
                                 or
                           Date and Time of and Name of Person Making Personal Delivery:
                                                                                     
                                                   
 
POST-TOW NOTICE
 
You are listed as the registered Owner or person entitled to possession of the following-described vehicle:  (make) ,  (model/year)  ,  (other identifying features)  ,  (license plate number and state)  , which is impounded at:  (location)  in an apparently abandoned or unusable condition,
to wit:
 
    (facts forming basis of proposed tow)
                                                                                                                                                 
as defined in  (code, ordinance or statutory section)  .
 
 
The municipality of  (name of municipality)  will tow the vehicle or cause it to be towed after seven days from he or she above date of mailing or personal delivery unless you move the vehicle to a lawful location or request a hearing as set forth below. Any such hearing will only concern
the proposed towing, and will not be determinative of or adjudicate any parking ticket or other citation concerning the vehicle. If the vehicle is towed, you will required to pay all towing and storage charges before the vehicle is released.
 
 
The towing is authorized by  (code, ordinance or statutory section) , which provides that:
                                                                                     
                                                                                                                                            
 
If you wish to request a hearing on the legality of the present location and condition of your vehicle, you must contact the office listed below and file in person a request for such hearing within seven days of the above date of mailing or personal delivery, unless you live more than 50
miles from the municipality, in which case you may mail a request for hearing that must be received by the office listed below within seven days from the mailing or personal delivery of this notice:  (name of office, address and phone number)  .
 
 
§ 3. FORM FOR POST-TOW HEARING.
   The following form shall be utilized by the Hearing Officer for post-tow
hearing decisions as required in §
90.35 of this chapter:
 
Post-Tow Incident Report
No.                       
 
POST-TOW HEARING DECISION
 
Following a hearing held after the towing of the vehicle as identified in post-tow notice bearing the same number as the report number stated above concerning the vehicle owned by or under the control of  (name of owner)  , the following findings and order are hereby entered, as checked in the appropriate box and
entered on the appropriate lines:
 
         Amount Previously Paid by Owner for Towing and Storage: $                
 
   1.   Tow Authorized; Owner Responsible for All Charges. The towing an storage of the vehicle was authorized by the following law of the State of Illinois:                     ; or Municipal Code Section or Ordinance No.                  , and the owner is liable for the full amount of towing and storage fees
incurred to date, in the amount of: $             
   2.   Tow Not Authorized. There was no authorization in law for the towing and storage, or the municipal employee causing the vehicle to be towed did not comply with the requirements of the applicable statute, code section or ordinance, as follows:
                                                                                                                                                                . The owner will not be charged for towing and storage and any amount previously paid will be refunded by the municipality as shown here: $              
   3.   Tow Authorized; Storage Partially Reimbursable. The towing of the vehicle was authorized by state law:                                        , or Municipal Code Section or Ordinance No.                        , but the owner was caused to incur additional improper storage charges because of improperly late
notification of towing or other reasons for which the municipality or towing company are responsible, as follows:                                                                                                       .
 
      Storage Amount to be Excused or Reimbursed to Owner: $           
      Towing and Storage Balance for Which Owner is Responsible:   $           
 
   4.   Owner Failed to Appear; No Continuance Requested. This finding constitutes a default against the Owner on the matters stated in the Post-Tow Notice. The Owner is responsible for all towing and storage charges incurred to date, in the amount of: $           
 
After making the appropriate computations with the amounts stated above in the right-hand column for any amount previously paid by owner, and adding or subtracting the appropriate amounts listed under Paragraphs 1, 2, 3 or 4, the final amount either owed by the owner to date or to be refunded to the owner IS HEREBY
ORDERED AS FOLLOWS:
 
      Amount Currently Owed by Owner:      $           
                        or
      Amount to be Refunded to Owner      $           
 
IMPORTANT FURTHER INFORMATION
 
If the vehicle is presently still impounded, an order for the release of the vehicle is attached to this decision. The owner must take possession of the vehicle within 24 hours of the entry of this decision, or he or she may be responsible for further storage charges.
 
         ENTERED:  (date and time)
         SIGNATURE:                                                                                 
          Hearing Officer
                                                                             
          Star Number
 
 
§ 4. FORM FOR OWNER’S PERMISSION TO TOW STOLEN VEHICLE.
   The following form shall be used by police officers when obtaining
permission from vehicle owner to tow stolen vehicles that are recovered:
 
PERMISSION TO TOW STOLEN VEHICLE FORM
 
I,  (name of owner)  am the owner of a motor vehicle which I have reported to the                                Police Department as
having been stolen. The vehicle is described as follows:  (description of the vehicle)  . I understand that the
                              Police Department may transmit notice of this vehicle theft to other police agencies which may attempt to
recover the vehicle. I understand that if the vehicle is recovered, I have the option of requesting that the vehicle be towed to a
vehicle pound location or left at the place where the vehicle has been found. While not requiring the law enforcement agency which finds
the vehicle to do so, I do hereby grant my permission to have the vehicle towed. I understand that if the vehicle is towed, I will be
required to pay reasonable towing and storage charges.
 
   DATED:                                     , 20         .
 
                                                                    
       Owner of Vehicle
 
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 90, App. A) (Ord. 85-O-1183, passed 7-3-1985)
CHAPTER 91: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Testing of equipment
   
91.03   Local alarms
   
91.04   Emergency information
   
91.05   False alarms
   
91.06   Certain signal transmissions prohibited
   
91.07   Implied acceptance
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM. Any system or signaling device which is designed to detect and signal
a fire or an unauthorized intrusion into a protected area, or to detect or
signal an attempted robbery by the transmission of an electrical impulse, or
any signal of any kind to a bell, siren, horn, tone or which causes any audible
annunciation on the premises or to a remote monitoring system.
   ALARM USER. Any person, including the current lessee, on whose premises an
alarm system is utilized with the city.
   AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE. An alarm system which automatically sends over
regular telephone lines, or by radio waves, a signal or pre-recorded voice
message indicating the existence of an emergency situation such as a fire,
burglary or robbery.
   EMERGENCY CALL OUT LIST. A list supplied to the Police or Fire Department by
the alarm user that contains current names, addresses and telephone numbers of
a minimum of two persons who can respond to the premises when there is an alarm
activation.
   FALSE ALARM. The activation of an alarm system, by any cause, that alerts
the Police or Fire Department, by any means, that a fire, burglary or robbery
is occurring in a protected premises and no evidence of a burglary or robbery
is detected by responding police, or evidence of a possible fire, by the Fire
Chief.
   FIRE CHIEF. The Chief of the City of Markham Fire Department, or the Chief’s
representative.
   LOCAL ALARM. An electrically-operated instrument composed of sensory
apparatus and related hardware which automatically emits an alarm (such as a
siren, bell, horn or tone), which is audible beyond the premises being
protected, upon receipt of a stimulus from a sensor that has detected a
physical force or condition characteristic of an unauthorized entry, or
detection of smoke or heat.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   POLICE CHIEF. The Chief of the City of Markham Police Department, or the
Chief’s representative.
   PRIMARY TRUNK LINE. A telephone line leading directly into the communication
center of the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 91.01) (Ord. 85-O-1186, passed 7-17-1985)
§ 91.02 TESTING OF EQUIPMENT.
   No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to the Fire
or Police Department shall be tested or demonstrated by any person without
first obtaining permission from the Police or Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 91.02) (Ord. 85-O-1186, passed 7-17-1985) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 LOCAL ALARMS.
   A local alarm which is audible beyond the premises being served may be
installed with the city; provided that, the alarm is controlled by an automatic
timing device which will shut off the audible device after a period not to
exceed 30 minutes. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or
control any audible alarm system when such system once activated remains
activated continuously for more than 30 minutes.
(Prior Code, § 91.03) (Ord. 85-O-1186, passed 7-17-1985) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 EMERGENCY INFORMATION.
   An alarm user shall furnish the Police or Fire Department the name, address
and telephone numbers of not less than two persons who shall have access to the
alarm and premises upon which such alarm is located so that the alarm can be
deactivated after the alarm has been activated and the premises has been
investigated by the Police or Fire Department. The alarm user shall also
furnish the Police or Fire Department the name of the alarm system equipment
supplier responsible for maintenance of the alarm system.
(Prior Code, § 91.04) (Ord. 85-O-1186, passed 7-17-1985)
§ 91.05 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   During the course of a calendar year, an alarm user will be allowed
four false alarms without penalty. Each false alarm in excess of four during a
calendar year shall subject the alarm user to the penalties of this chapter;
however, no penalty shall be imposed for false alarms for 30 days from the date
of installation of a new alarm system or date of major alteration to an
existing system, nor shall there be a penalty for a false alarm when upon an
investigation of the Police or Fire Department it is determined that the false
alarm was caused by an uncontrollable extraordinary circumstance.
   (B)   In the event the Police or Fire Department receives 11 or more false
alarms within any calendar year, the alarm user shall be charged twice the
normal cost for each false alarm.
   (C)   A fee of $150 for each false alarm shall be charged to any alarm user
who has more than four, but less than 11, false alarms within a calendar year.
A fee of $300 for each false alarm shall be charged to any alarm user who has
11 or more false alarms during a calendar year. Each and every occurrence which
is in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a
separate and distinct violation.
(Prior Code, § 91.05) (Ord. 85-O-1186, passed 7-17-1985; Ord. 20-O-2276, passed
7-15-2020) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 CERTAIN SIGNAL TRANSMISSIONS PROHIBITED.
   Burglar alarm systems shall only emit signals indicating unauthorized
intrusion or attack of a protected area. Robbery alarm systems shall only emit
signals indicating a robbery in a protected area. No other signals shall be
transmitted over burglar or robbery systems. No person shall use or cause or
permit to be used, an alarm system utilizing signaling devices that
automatically select a public trunkline of the Police or Fire Department and
then reproduce any prerecorded message to report any robbery, burglary, fire,
hazard or other emergency.
(Prior Code, § 91.06) (Ord. 85-O-1186, passed 7-17-1985) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.07 IMPLIED ACCEPTANCE.
   Any person who uses a fire, burglary or robbery alarm system in the city
shall be deemed to accept and agree to be governed by the terms of this chapter
and to pay any fees assessed against such alarm user as provided for in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 91.07) (Ord. 85-O-1186, passed 7-17-1985)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who fails to pay the fee for a false alarm
herein provided for, or who otherwise violates or fails to comply with any
provision of this chapter, shall be, upon conviction, fined not less than $25,
nor more than $500. Except for the non-payment of fees, as provided for in §
91.05 of this chapter, a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each
day during or on which a violation occurs of continues.
(Prior Code, § 91.99) (Ord. 85-O-1186, passed 7-17-1985)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Animals running at-large
   
92.02   Disturbing the peace
   
92.03   Housing of animals
   
92.04   Unsanitary conditions prohibited
   
92.05   Cruelty to animals
Dogs
   
92.20   Definitions
   
92.21   Owner to be responsible for dog
   
92.22   Registration; payment of tax; procedure
   
92.23   Delinquent registration fees
   
92.24   Tags to be attached to collars; duplicate tags
   
92.25   Removal of dog tag or muzzle
   
92.26   Muzzling and leashing; running at-large
   
92.27   Resisting officer while impounding dog
   
92.28   Poundkeeper; records to be kept; redemption of dog; fee
   
92.29   Disposition of unredeemed dogs
   
92.30   Care of impounded animals
   
92.31   Inoculation against rabies
   
92.32   Symptoms of rabies
   
92.33   Biting dogs
   
92.34   Responsibility for accident or disease
   
92.35   Dog fights
Dangerous and Diseased Animals
   
92.50   Dangerous animals prohibited at-large
   
92.51   Killing dangerous animals
   
92.52   Dangerous animals declared nuisance; certain dogs prohibited
   
92.53   Diseased animals
Enforcement; Citations and Payment of Fines
   
92.65   Enforcement of provisions
   
92.66   When citation issued
   
92.67   Serving notice to appear
   
92.68   Payment by violator; fee; non-payment of fine
 
   
92.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 ANIMALS RUNNING AT-LARGE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to permit any cattle, horse, swine, sheep, goats or
poultry to run at-large in the city.
   (B)   Any such animal running at-large in any public place in the city shall
be impounded in the manner provided in this chapter.
   (C)   It is further unlawful to picket or tie any such animal in the streets
of the city for the purpose of grazing or feeding.
(Prior Code, § 92.01) (Ord. 594, passed - -1965) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.02 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   It is unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by loud
noises at any time of the day or night. It shall be unlawful for any owner to
permit any dog to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood by barking or
making loud or unusual noises or by running through or across cultivated
gardens, fields, lawns and shrubbery of others.
(Prior Code, § 92.02) (Ord. 594, passed - -1965; Ord. 647, passed - -1967; Ord.
90-O-1373, passed 8-1-1990) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 HOUSING OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall cause or allow any stable or place where any animal is
or may be kept to become unclean, or unwholesome, and it is unlawful to keep
any live, wild or domestic animals other than household pets and horses.
   (B)   Horses shall not be kept on a lot or parcel of land less than five
acres.
(Prior Code, § 92.03) (Ord. 594, passed - -1965) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 UNSANITARY CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful to keep or suffer to be kept in foul, offensive, nauseous or
filthy condition, any kennels, yard or premises; to so negligently use any
premises as to create an offensive smell and render the air unwholesome or
disagreeable to the neighborhood; and to cause or permit any animal offal or
noisome substance of any kind to be collected, deposited or remain in any place
in the city, on public or private property, to the prejudice of others. It is
further the responsibility of the owner to correct any unsanitary conditions
created by the animal in violation of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 92.04) (Ord. 647, passed - -1967) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   No person shall do any of the following:
   (A)   Cruelly treat any animal in the city in any way;
   (B)   Overwork, cruelly beat, torture, torment, mutilate or cruelly kill any
animal or cause or knowingly allow the same to be done;
   (C)   Unnecessarily fail to provide any animal in his or her charge or
custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink, shelter and air;
   (D)   Abandon any animal; or
   (E)   Carry, keep or cause to be kept any animal chained or tied to a fixed
object in such a manner that the animal cannot freely stand or move without
restriction.
(Prior Code, § 92.05) (Ord. 594, passed - -1965; Ord. 647, passed - -1967)
Penalty, see §
92.99
DOGS
§ 92.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOG. Any animal of the canine species, either male or female, when not
otherwise indicated.
   INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES. The injection subcutaneously or otherwise, as
approved by the state’s Department of Agriculture of canine anti-rabies vaccine
approved by the Department of Agriculture and by the United States Department
of Agriculture.
   OWNER. Any person having a right of property in a dog, or who keeps or
harbors a dog, or who has it in his or her care, or acts as its custodian, or
who knowingly permits a dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him
or her.
(Prior Code, § 92.15)
§ 92.21 OWNER TO BE RESPONSIBLE FOR DOG.
   The person in whose name any dog is licensed or registered shall be
responsible for the dog.
(Prior Code, § 92.16) (Ord. 647, passed - -1967)
§ 92.22 REGISTRATION; PAYMENT OF TAX; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   No person shall have, keep or harbor in his or her possession, within
the city, any dog until it is registered, the registration tax thereon paid and
the dog checked or tagged as required by this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   The owner of a dog shall cause such dog to be registered each
year for the calendar year, in a register to be kept in the office of the City
Clerk. Each dog shall be registered by its name, if any, its general
description, the serial number of the most recent rabies inoculation
certificate, the name of the person having administered the vaccine, the date
of such inoculation and the name and address of the owner or keeper of such
dog.
      (2)   Each dog must have been inoculated against rabies within the 12-
month period immediately preceding registration and a properly completed
certificate must be presented to the Clerk as proof of such inoculation.
      (3)   At the time of registration for each year, or any portion thereof,
there shall be paid to the Clerk a fee of $15 for each dog registered. All
owners of vicious dogs, as defined in §
92.52(A) of this chapter, including Rottweilers, Pit Bulls, German Shepherds or
other such dogs identified as dangerous and vicious dogs by the statutes of the
state or the ordinances of the county, shall also deposit evidence of a
liability policy of insurance issued to the owners of the dog in question,
specifically identifying the dog, with liability limits of $50,000 per incident
and normal medical and other coverage as contained in the standard liability
insurance policy. A certified copy of the face page of the insurance policy,
showing the extent of coverage, shall be delivered to the Clerk at the time of
registration.
      (4)   This section does not apply to any dog which is less than 90 days
of age.
      (5)   The registration fees required by this section shall not apply to
dogs which are exercised or trained within city limits by non-residents of the
city. Each dog which is exercised or trained within the city limits and either
owned or under the direction of a non-resident of the city must have been
inoculated, registered and tagged. The periods to be covered by registration
shall be the same as in division (A) above. The fee for each such registration
shall be $1 for each dog, regardless of sex or age.
(Prior Code, § 92.17) (Ord. 647, passed - -1967; Ord. 01-O-1713, passed 5-16-
2001) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.23 DELINQUENT REGISTRATION FEES.
   (A)   Application for registration of dogs subject to registration shall be
considered delinquent on March 1 of each year and the registration fee shall
increase $0.50 on the first day of each succeeding month thereafter during the
registration period.
   (B)   (1)   Newly acquired dogs are subject to registration without
delinquent registration fees increase if application for registration is made
within ten days after acquisition of such dog.
      (2)   Failure to register such newly acquired dog as provided in this
chapter shall subject applicants to the full registration fee, plus accumulated
increases.
   (C)   No increase for delinquent registration shall apply to the
registration of dogs exercised or trained within city limits by non-residents
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 92.18)
§ 92.24 TAGS TO BE ATTACHED TO COLLARS; DUPLICATE TAGS.
   (A)   (1)   The City Clerk shall, at the time of registration fee payment,
deliver, as a receipt therefor to each person paying the fee, a metallic, fiber
or other approved type of check, plate or tag having inscribed thereon the dog
registration number and year of issuance in figures, for the purpose of
signifying that the city dog fee is paid for the calendar year indicated. The
keeper or possessor of any dog upon which the fee is paid shall place and keep
around the neck of such dog a collar, to which shall be attached and kept the
check, plate or tag so furnished by the Clerk and to which also will be
attached and kept the rabies inoculation tag which is issued at the time of
inoculation. The Clerk shall provide such checks, plates or tags in such manner
and of such description as the City Council may direct.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to the dogs of non-residents of the
city who are temporarily in the city for a period not to exceed 15 days, where
the owner or keeper of such dog is known to the Clerk to be a non- resident and
where the dogs are not permitted to run at-large or be exercised or trained
within city limits.
      (3)   No person shall allow or cause a dog tag to be attached to any dog
within the city if the dog tag has not been issued by the Clerk according to
the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Any person who has previously registered a dog for which a tag has
been issued may, if the tag is lost, secure a duplicate thereof by reporting
such loss to the Clerk and paying the sum of $0.10 for a duplicate tag.
(Prior Code, § 92.19) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.25 REMOVAL OF DOG TAG OR MUZZLE.
   No person shall, without the consent of the owner or keeper, take away or
remove the collar, registration or inoculation tag, or muzzle from any dog for
which the city dog tax has been paid. No person shall entice or take any such
dog out of an enclosure or off the premises of its owner or keeper or bring
into the city any dog for the purpose of impounding it without the consent of
the owner or keeper.
(Prior Code, § 92.20) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.26 MUZZLING AND LEASHING; RUNNING AT-LARGE.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall permit any dog, whether registered, inoculated
for rabies, or not, or having the proper check, plate or tag attached or not,
to run at-large in the city at any time.
      (2)   Every dog shall be kept in an enclosure or chained or securely
tied, so as to prevent his or her running at-large, and no dog shall be taken
out of such enclosure unless securely tied or fastened to a leash or under the
control of the owner, keeper or possessor of such dog.
      (3)   Dogs are deemed to be running at-large when they are on any street,
alley or sidewalk or any other public place or property not owned, leased or
otherwise controlled or supervised by their owners, unless such dogs are
properly leashed and are wearing correct registration and rabies inoculation
checks, plates or tags.
   (B)   All dogs found running at-large contrary to the provisions of this
chapter are declared to be a public menace and nuisance and shall be disposed
of in accordance with this chapter.
   (C)   There shall be provided at some suitable place or by some suitable
agency, to be designated by the Mayor, a dog pound for the impounding of all
dogs found running at-large within the city limits.
(Prior Code, § 92.21) (Ord. 647, passed - -1967) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.27 RESISTING OFFICER WHILE IMPOUNDING DOG.
   No person shall willfully hinder, obstruct or resist any officer or person
lawfully impounding a dog.
(Prior Code, § 92.22) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.28 POUNDKEEPER; RECORDS TO BE KEPT; REDEMPTION OF DOG; FEE.
   (A)   (1)   The Poundkeeper, or designated agency with similar function,
immediately upon receiving a licensed dog at the pound, shall report the same
by its name, if known, and the number of the tag, if any, to the City Clerk or
Chief of Police of the city and to the owner or keeper of the dog.
      (2)   A dog taken and impounded which has not been inoculated as
prescribed in this chapter shall be released in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter; except that, any dog fee due will be deposited by
the owner with the Clerk for registration upon later presentation of the proper
rabies inoculation certificates. Presentation of a certificate must take place
within a five-day period beginning immediately upon the release of the dog. If
no presentation and registration are made within this period, the owner is
subject to penalty and shall be fined in accordance with the penalty provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   Every dog taken and impounded, as provided in this chapter, shall be
released upon payment to the Clerk, within three days of the time of
impounding, the sum of $2 for the first day, plus $1 for each additional day
thereafter, as a redemption and impounding fee. A proper and sufficient release
and receipt shall be given therefor. No dog which has been inoculated shall be
released from the pound unless the city dog fee also has been paid and the tag
attached as provided in this chapter. Dogs shall be redeemed from the pound
daily between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. or by appointment.
(Prior Code, § 92.23)
§ 92.29 DISPOSITION OF UNREDEEMED DOGS.
   If any dog impounded as provided in this chapter is not redeemed within
three days of the time of impounding, the Poundkeeper or agency so designated
may cause the same to be sold or killed, and the disposition of the dog shall
be at the discretion of the Poundkeeper or other agency so designated.
(Prior Code, § 92.24)
§ 92.30 CARE OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   Animals kept in the municipal pound or by an authorized agency shall be
humanely treated and properly fed.
(Prior Code, § 92.25)
§ 92.31 INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES.
   Within the period of January 1 to June 30 of each year, every owner of a dog
shall cause the dog to be inoculated against rabies by the Rabies Inspector of
the state or by his or her deputy, or by any licensed veterinarian. Evidence of
such inoculation shall consist of a certificate signed by the person
administering the vaccine, and a serially numbered tag bearing the same number
and year as the certificate bears, which tag shall at all times be attached to
the collar or harness worn by the dog for which certificate and tag have been
issued. Such tags shall have been approved by the state’s Department of
Agriculture.
(Prior Code, § 92.26)
§ 92.32 SYMPTOMS OF RABIES.
   The owner of any dog which exhibits symptoms of rabies, whether or not such
dog has been vaccinated, shall immediately notify the Health Inspector and
shall promptly confine such dog, or have it confined, under suitable
observation, for a period of at least 14 days, unless officially authorized by
the Health Inspector, in writing, to release it sooner.
(Prior Code, § 92.27) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.33 BITING DOGS.
   Whenever the Health Inspector receives information that any person has been
bitten by a dog, the Rabies Inspector shall confine the dog for a period of 14
days. No person having knowledge that any person has been bitten by a dog shall
refuse to notify the Health Inspector promptly. The owner of a dog shall not
refuse or fail to comply with the written orders of the Health Inspector, and
any expense incurred in the handling of any dog under this and other sections
of this chapter shall be borne by the owner.
(Prior Code, § 92.28) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.34 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACCIDENT OR DISEASE.
   The Health Inspector or anyone enforcing the provisions of this chapter
shall not be held responsible for any disease incurred by or any accident that
may happen to any dog.
(Prior Code, § 92.29)
§ 92.35 DOG FIGHTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to train a dog for or to permit a
dog to engage in an organized dog fight.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, an ORGANIZED DOG FIGHT shall mean an
event held demonstrating the dogs’ strength or skill in combat against another
dog or animal.
(Prior Code, § 92.30) (Ord. 90-O-1373, passed 8-1-1990) Penalty, see §
92.99
DANGEROUS AND DISEASED ANIMALS
§ 92.50 DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED AT-LARGE.
   It is unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to run
at-large in the city; exhibitions or parades of animals which are ferae naturae
in the eyes of the law may be conducted only upon securing a permit from the
Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 92.40) (Ord. 594, passed - -1965) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.51 KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   Any commissioned officer of the Police Department is authorized to kill any
dangerous animal when it is necessary for the protection of any person or
property.
(Prior Code, § 92.41) (Ord. 594, passed - -1965)
§ 92.52 DANGEROUS ANIMALS DECLARED NUISANCE; CERTAIN DOGS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DANGEROUS DOG. Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed
or unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner’s family, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks or any public grounds or places.
      VICIOUS DOG.
         (a)   Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites or
attacks a human being or other animal either on public or private property;
         (b)   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or
disposition to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise
endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; and, whether or not
provoked, those dogs known as Rottweiler, Pit Bull, German Shepherd or other
such dogs identified as dangerous and vicious dogs by the statutes of the state
or the ordinances of the county;
         (c)   Any individual dog which attacks a human being or domestic
animal without provocation;
         (d)   Any individual dog which has been found to be a “DANGEROUS DOG”
on three separate occasions; or
         (e)   No dog shall be deemed “VICIOUS” if it bites, attacks or menaces
a trespasser on the property of its owner or harms or menaces anyone who has
tormented or abused it or is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement
or guard duties.
(510 ILCS 5/15)
   (B)   Any dangerous, fierce or vicious dog running at-large in the public
ways or public places of the city or upon private premises of any person other
than the owner or keeper, and any dog which may in any manner disturb the quiet
of any person or neighborhood, or which bites a person or so injures a person
as to cause an abrasion of the skin, is declared to be a nuisance and such dog
shall immediately be placed in a duly licensed veterinary hospital or taken up
and impounded in the manner provided by this chapter.
   (C)   Any animal which, in the estimation of any officer or inspector of the
Board of Health, appears to be injured, diseased past recovery for any useful
purpose or dangerous to the inhabitants of the city may be deprived of life by
such officer or inspector as he or she may direct.
   (D)   No breed of dog which has a propensity to attack human beings without
provocation including, but not limited to, the breed commonly known as the Pit
Bull dog, and no dog trained as an attack dog may be kept within the city.
(Prior Code, § 92.42) (Ord. 647, passed - -1967; Ord. 90-O-1373, passed 8-1-
1990; Ord. 01-O-1713, passed 5-16-2001) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.53 DISEASED ANIMALS.
   (A)   No domestic animals afflicted with a contagious disease or an
infectious disease shall be allowed to run at-large, or to be exposed in any
public place whereby the health of humans or beast may be affected; nor shall
any diseased animal be shipped or removed from the premises of the owner
thereof, except under the supervision of the Health Inspector.
   (B)   The Health Inspector shall secure such disposition of any diseased
animal and such treatment of affected premises as to prevent the communication
or spread of contagious disease or infection, except in cases where the state
veterinarian is empowered to act.
(Prior Code, § 92.43) (Ord. 594, passed - -1965)
ENFORCEMENT; CITATIONS AND PAYMENT OF FINES
§ 92.65 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.
   This chapter shall be enforced by the city health officials or any duly
authorized agent of the city.
(Prior Code, § 92.55) (Ord. 647, passed - -1967)
§ 92.66 WHEN CITATION ISSUED.
   Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest a person without warrant
because of a violation of any code section or any applicable ordinance, in
respect to any of the following subjects, the police officer may, in lieu of
the filing of a complaint in court, in the first instance issue to such alleged
violator a citation, advising the person that he or she has violated a
specified ordinance; requesting him or her to make payment in an amount
applicable to the violation as set forth in §
92.68(B) of this chapter as settlement of the violation claim; and informing
him or her that, upon failure to so settle, a complaint will be filed in the
Circuit Court of the county charging him or her with such violation:
   (A)   Violation of nuisances; and
   (B)   Regulating and licensing dog.
(Prior Code, § 92.56) (Ord. 613, passed - -1966)
§ 92.67 SERVING NOTICE TO APPEAR.
   In the event that the person to whom the citation is issued fails to settle
and pay the violation claim within the prescribed time, or within a period of
time specified in a final notice, if one is served upon him or her, then the
peace officer is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be served upon the
alleged violator and is authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the
same in the Circuit Court of the county.
(Prior Code, § 92.57) (Ord. 613, passed - -1966)
§ 92.68 PAYMENT BY VIOLATOR; FEE; NON-PAYMENT OF FINE.
   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to the citation, the person so accused of the violation
may settle and compromise the violation claim in respect to the code or
ordinance violation by paying the municipality the applicable amount as shown
in the schedule set forth in division (B) below, within a period to be
specified in the citation, not more than seven days after the time the alleged
offense was committed.
      (2)   Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions
contained in the citation, at the office of the Police Department, which shall
issue a receipt for the money so received and promptly remit the amount to the
City Treasurer to be credited to the proper municipal fund.
   (B)   The violation claim described in the citation to be issued pursuant to
the terms of this chapter may be settled, compromised and paid in the
respective amounts set forth in the following schedule.
      (1)   In the event that the payment is made prior to the mailing by the
municipality or by the peace officer of a final notice, the following amounts
shall be accepted as settlement:
         (a)   Violation of nuisance: $5; and
         (b)   Regulating and licensing dogs: $5.
      (2)   In the event that payment has not be paid prior to the mailing of a
final notice and in fact, final notice has been mailed, the following amounts
shall be accepted as settlement:
         (a)   Violation of nuisance: $7; and
         (b)   Regulating and licensing dogs: $7.
      (3)   In the event that payment is not made within the time prescribed in
the final notice, and a notice to appear has been served and a complaint filed
in the Circuit Court of the county, payment of any fine and costs shall be in
such amounts as may be determined and established by the Circuit Court of the
county.
(Prior Code, § 92.58) (Ord. 613, passed - -1966; Ord. 69-O-705, passed - -1969)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not less than $25, nor exceeding $500. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
92.01 through
92.04, 92.21 and 92.50 through 92.53 of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $1, nor more than $200, for each offense; and a separate offense is deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 92.99) (Ord. 594, passed - -1965)
CHAPTER 93: FAIR HOUSING
Section
   
93.01   Regulations adopted by reference
§ 93.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s provisions concerning fair housing, along with the county’s
recognized protected classes, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 09-O-1957, passed 8-5-2009)
CHAPTER 94: FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Burning combustible material
   
94.02   Keeping of ashes
   
94.03   Certificate of fire inspection
Fire Prevention Code
   
94.15   Fire Prevention Code adopted by reference
   
94.16   Storage of flammable liquids in aboveground tanks
   
94.17   Bulk storage of liquified petroleum gases
   
94.18   Installation of “Knox Box” systems
Fireworks
   
94.30   Definition
   
94.31   Possession and discharge
   
94.32   Permits; application and issuance
   
94.33   Permit requirements
   
94.34   Display conditions
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 BURNING COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this chapter.
      CHIMNEAS. Those outdoor fireplaces, usually made from clay, intended to
confine and control outdoor wood fires.
      FIRE PITS. Outdoor fireplaces usually constructed of steel, concrete and/
or stone and constructed above ground with a heavy steel screen cover.
      OUTDOOR FIREPLACES. Shall include fire pits, portable fire pits and
chimneas. These residential outdoor fireplaces use wood as a fuel and are used
for containing recreational fires located at a private residence for the
purpose of outdoor cooking and personal enjoyment. Outdoor fireplaces do not
include barbeque grills that use propane or charcoal as a fuel and are used
primarily for outdoor cooking.
      PORTABLE FIRE PITS. Those outdoor fireplaces commercially designed and
intended to confine and control outdoor wood fires.
   (B)   Outdoor fireplaces shall not be used within ten feet of any property
line or structure.
   (C)   Outdoor fireplaces shall only burn untreated wood or approved
fireplace starter logs, petroleum products, rubbish, grass, leaves, landscape
waster, cardboard, plastics, construction debris or materials, rubber or any
material that may flow out of the containment or cause excessive heat, smoke or
offensive smell shall not be permitted.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any abatement costs that may be incurred by a person
or entity pursuant to this chapter, any person violating any provision of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense.
Every day that a violation exists constitutes a separate offense. Proceedings
to enforce violations of this chapter may be initiated and conducted in
accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of this code providing for
administrative adjudication of code violations or by any other means provided
by law.
(Prior Code, § 94.01) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 22-O-2338, passed 9-
7-2022) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 KEEPING OF ASHES.
   No person shall keep ashes in any barrel, box or other combustible vessel
within 20 feet of any dwelling house or store or business house.
(Prior Code, § 94.02) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 CERTIFICATE OF FIRE INSPECTION.
   (A)   Every business operating within the city or falling under the fire
protection of the city’s Fire Department shall be required to obtain an annual
certificate of fire inspection for its business.
   (B)   The certificate of fire inspection for the business shall be effective
from May 1 through April 30 of each calendar year and shall be obtained or
renewed under the following provisions.
      (1)   A business registration packet shall be obtained and completed by
the business during the month of March from the Fire Department.
      (2)   An inspection of the business shall be made by the Fire Department
during the month of April.
      (3)   Upon completion of the inspection, the registration packet and
payment of a $75 fee, payable to the city, a certificate of safety and fire
inspection shall be issued.
   (C)   Any business entering the city during the fiscal year shall be
required to obtain the certificate of fire inspection for business prior to
opening. The fee shall not be prorated.
   (D)   The certificate of fire inspection for business shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at the business.
   (E)   The certificate of fire inspection for business does not prevent the
business from having periodic fire inspections by the city’s Fire Department,
nor does it relieve the business from complying with city fire codes during the
course of the year for which the certificate is issued.
   (F)   If a certificate of fire inspection has not been applied for by April
30 of each year, the business shall be charged a late fee of $25 which will be
over and above the fee for the fire inspection itself.
(Prior Code, § 94.03) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 95-O-1525, passed 2-
15-1995; Ord. 04-O-1785, passed 1-17-2004; Ord. 05-O-1826, passed 2-16-2005)
Penalty, see §
94.99
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 94.15 FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   There is adopted and incorporated by reference by the city the 2015 National
Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Life Safety Code 101, as amended. The code
is adopted and made part of this chapter by reference as though set forth in
this subchapter verbatim.
(Prior Code, § 94.10) (Ord. 565, passed - -1965; Ord. 20-O-2265, passed 5-6-
2020; Ord. 20-O-2269, passed 5-20-2020)
§ 94.16 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS IN ABOVEGROUND TANKS.
   (A)   The limits referred to in § 16.22a of the Fire Prevention Code, in
which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited,
are established as follows: Those areas which are now or in the future shall be
zoned as residential and/or business districts.
   (B)   The limits referred to in § 16.51 of the Fire Prevention Code in which
new bulk plants for flammable liquids are prohibited, are established as
follows: those areas which are now or in the future shall be zoned as
residential and/or business districts.
(Prior Code, § 94.11) (Ord. 565, passed - -1965)
§ 94.17 BULK STORAGE OF LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM GASES.
   The limits referred to in § 21.06 of the Fire Prevention Code, in which bulk
storage of liquified petroleum gas is restricted, are established as follows:
those areas which are now or in the future shall be zoned as residential and/or
business districts.
(Prior Code, § 94.12) (Ord. 565, passed - -1965)
§ 94.18 INSTALLATION OF “KNOX BOX” SYSTEMS.
   (A)   A keyed "Knox box" shall be installed on all commercial buildings as
required by the City of Markham Code of Ordinances. All keys shall be inside a
locked knox box on Markham Fire Department apparatuses. All locked boxes shall
have codes and the information, when the box is opened, will be sent to
dispatch alerting that the box is open.
      (1)   All structures located within the City of Markham, except for some
residential (request) structures that are secured in a manner that restricts
access during an emergency shall be equipped with a key lock box at or near the
main entrance or such other location authorized by the Fire Chief.
      (2)   The Fire Chief shall be authorized to implement rules and
regulations for the use of the locked knox box system.
   (B)   The knox box shall be mounted between the immediate surrounding grades
in which a person can stand on without any assistance. Installation shall be
for a specific structure for security reasons and only approved by the Fire
Chief.
   (C)   All knox box applications must be signed and authorized by a
representative on file with the knox box company.
(Ord. 19-O-2237, passed 9-4-2019)
FIREWORKS
§ 94.30 DEFINITION.
   Any explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or
article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible affect of a
temporary nature by explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation; blank
cartridges, toy pistols, toy guns, toy cannons in which explosives are used;
balloons that require fire underneath for propulsion; firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, rockets, spin wheels, detonating candles,
ammunition or other fireworks of like construction; any fireworks containing
any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects; or
any substance or article of any explosive nature designed or intended to be
used as FIREWORKS.
(Ord. 12-O-2025, passed 7-18-2012)
§ 94.31 POSSESSION AND DISCHARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to knowingly
possess, sell, keep, store, manufacture, give away, discharge, set off or
detonate any fireworks, as defined in §
94.30 of this chapter, within the city.
(Ord. 12-O-2025, passed 7-18-2012) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.32 PERMITS; APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The City Council may issue a permit for pyrotechnic displays in
accordance with the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing Act, 225
ILCS 227/1 et seq. and the Pyrotechnic Use Act, 425 ILCS 35/0.01 et seq.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct a
pyrotechnic display within the city without obtaining a permit issued by the
City Clerk after approval by the City Council and inspection by the Fire Chief
as set forth in §
94.33 of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation
to conduct a pyrotechnic display within the city in a manner at variance with
the terms and conditions of any permit issued for such display.
   (C)   Permit applications shall be made not less than 15 days in advance of
the date of the display on a form provided by the City Clerk.
   (D)   A fee in an amount determined by the City Council from time to time
shall be paid by the applicant when the permit application is filed with the
City Clerk.
   (E)   No permit issued shall be transferable.
(Ord. 12-O-2025, passed 7-18-2012) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.33 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A permit for a pyrotechnic display may be issued only after the Fire
Chief or his or her designee has inspected the site and determined that the
display can be performed in full compliance with the rules adopted by the
state’s Fire Marshal and that the display shall not be hazardous to property or
endanger any person.
   (B)   The applicant shall have in place when the application is filed, and
during the time of the display, liability coverage for bodily injury in an
amount of no less than $1,000,00000 and property damage in an amount of no less
than $500,000 and shall furnish the city at the time of filing the application,
a certificate of insurance stating that such coverage is in force and naming
the city, its officers, employees and agents, as additional insureds covered by
such insurance, and that such policy may not be cancelled or amended without 14
days’ prior written notice having been given to the city.
   (C)   Every pyrotechnic display shall be conducted by a licensed lead
pyrotechnic operator who is specified in the permit application, and the
applicant shall provide the City Clerk with a copy of his or her license
pursuant to the Pyrotechnic Distributor and Operator Licensing Act, 225 ILCS
227/1 et seq.
(Ord. 12-O-2025, passed 7-18-2012) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.34 DISPLAY CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Fire protection equipment is required to be at the site. Fire
protection and extinguishing equipment shall be provided as required by the
Fire Chief.
   (B)   Fire Department personnel are required to be at the site. The
permittee is responsible for all costs. The person to whom a permit has been
issued shall arrange for two members of the Fire Department or such larger
number as may be deemed necessary by the Fire Chief. Fire Department personnel
shall be on duty from the time the fireworks are delivered at the site until
the termination of the display and the removal of all fireworks and debris from
the site. The expense for such Fire Department personnel shall be paid by the
permittee prior to the issuance of a permit.
(Ord. 12-O-2025, passed 7-18-2012)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter, for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not less than $25, nor exceeding $500. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§
94.15 through
94.17 of this chapter, or any person who violates any of the provisions of the
Fire Prevention Code or fails to comply therewith, or who violates or fails to
comply with any order made thereunder, or who builds any order made thereunder,
or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans
submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued
thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken or who fails to comply with
such an order as affirmed or modified by the City Council or by a court of
competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed in this chapter, shall severally
for each and every violation and non-compliance respectively, be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and punishable by a fine of not less than $10, nor more than $200.
      (2)   The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse
the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required
to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and,
when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are
maintained shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the penalty
shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Prior Code, § 94.99)
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation that violates or fails to comply with
any provision of §§
94.30 through
94.34 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $250, nor more than $1,000,
for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as having
been committed each day any person, firm or corporation shall continue any such
violation.
(Prior Code, § 94.12) (Ord. 565, passed - -; Ord. 12-O-2025, passed 7-18-2012)
CHAPTER 95: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Mosquito and Pollen Control
   
95.01   Screening of containers or other water-holding devices
   
95.02   Spraying of weeds and underbrush
   
95.03   Compliance with Health Inspector
Excavations and Other Openings
   
95.15   Open excavations or removal of topsoils; conditions to be met;
exceptions
   
95.16   Ditches and culverts
   
95.17   Septic tanks and seepage systems; installation
   
95.18   Artificial impoundments; construction
   
95.19   Permit required from Health Inspector
Clean Indoor Air
   
95.30   Definitions
   
95.31   Prohibition of smoking in public places
   
95.32   Reasonable distance
   
95.33   Where smoking is not regulated
   
95.34   Bar areas
   
95.35   Declaration of non-smoking establishment
   
95.36   Posting signs
   
95.37   Non-retaliation
   
95.38   Enforcement
   
95.39   Other applicable laws
 
   
95.99   Penalty
MOSQUITO AND POLLEN CONTROL
§ 95.01 SCREENING OF CONTAINERS OR OTHER WATER-HOLDING DEVICES.
   All artificial containers and water-holding devices so placed that they may
hold water for a period of five days or longer, unless such containers or
devices are tightly covered or screened to prevent the entry of mosquitoes,
constitute a public nuisance. No person shall maintain on his or her premises
unscreened or un covered containers or other water-holding devices under
conditions that permit mosquito larvae or pupae to develop. All uncovered or
unscreened containers or other water-holding devices shall be completely
drained or the water therein changed at intervals of not more than five days
between April 1 and October 25, or effective insecticides must be applied to
all exposed water surfaces at intervals of not more than five days during that
period.
(Prior Code, § 95.01) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 SPRAYING OF WEEDS AND UNDERBRUSH.
   All weeds and underbrush are declared to be a public nuisance. All such
plants shall be cut, pulled, destroyed or chemically sprayed with an effective
chemical weed killer by the owner or person in control of the plot of ground at
least twice a year, once between May 15 and June 15, and once between July 1
and August 1, of each year.
(Prior Code, § 95.02) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH INSPECTOR.
   When the owner or person in control of any property fails to comply with the
provisions of this subchapter, the Health Inspector shall immediately serve
written notice upon such owner or person to obtain compliance therewith. The
notice shall stipulate the time allowed for full and complete compliance.
(Prior Code, § 95.03)
EXCAVATIONS AND OTHER OPENINGS
§ 95.15 OPEN EXCAVATIONS OR REMOVAL OF TOPSOILS; CONDITIONS TO BE MET;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   All open excavations, including the removal of topsoil, except those
excavations or topsoil removals that are referred to in §§
95.15(B), 95.16 and 95.17 of this chapter, shall provide for complete self-
drainage, or if self-drainage is not provided, then the following conditions
must be met.
      (1)   A minimum water depth of four feet shall be maintained at all
times.
      (2)   All shorelines, within the zone of water level fluctuation, shall
be constructed and maintained on a slope of four feet (horizontal) to one foot
(vertical), or steeper, and where such sloping may result in the creation of a
hazardous or dangerous condition, the provision of fencing, exit ramps or
stairs, ladders or other safety devices may be required.
      (3)   The topmost berm around the excavation shall be constructed and
maintained to permit ready access of, and shall be continuously available to,
light vehicles for purposes of mosquito control.
      (4)   Provision shall be made for prompt and adequate control of all
aquatic and semi-aquatic vegetation and the removal of debris and floatage
below the topmost berm.
   (B)   Those open excavations or removal of topsoil necessary or incidental
to the construction or installation of building, structures or other fixed
works shall be excluded from the provisions of division (A) above. In the event
the necessary or incidental excavations or areas of topsoil removal are not
completely covered within a period of one year after commencing the excavation
or removal of topsoil, the excavations shall be made self- draining or shall be
back-filled within 30 days after notification.
(Prior Code, § 95.15)
§ 95.16 DITCHES AND CULVERTS.
   All ditches and culverts shall be constructed so that they are completely
self-draining, and all ditches, culverts and natural watercourses shall be
maintained free of debris and other obstructions.
(Prior Code, § 95.16) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.17 SEPTIC TANKS AND SEEPAGE SYSTEMS; INSTALLATION.
   All septic tanks and seepage systems shall be installed in accordance with
the specifications of the city current at the time of installation.
(Prior Code, § 95.17) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.18 ARTIFICIAL IMPOUNDMENTS; CONSTRUCTION.
   All ponds, lakes or other artificial impoundments shall be constructed and
maintained in a manner to conform with the provisions of §
95.15(A) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 95.18)
§ 95.19 PERMIT REQUIRED FROM HEALTH INSPECTOR.
   A permit shall be obtained from the Health Inspector for each excavation,
construction or installation referred to in this subchapter. Drawings and other
information pertaining to compliance with requirements hereinbefore stipulated
may be required in the application for the permit. The fee for issuance of this
permit shall be determined by the Health Inspector and shall be not less than
$10, nor more than $50.
(Prior Code, § 95.19)
CLEAN INDOOR AIR
§ 95.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARCADE. A place of amusement, which contains four or more automatic
amusement devices and is not licensed to serve alcoholic liquor.
   BAR AREA. An enclosed area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of
food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. A restaurant may
contain a bar which is not physically separated from the dining area. BAR AREA,
therefore, shall also mean an area in a restaurant containing a bar which is
not physically separated from the dining area, but is limited to, the area
immediately adjacent to the bar adequate to accommodate persons either “seated”
or standing at the bar. Tables around or near a bar will be considered as being
part of a BAR AREA.
   BUSINESS. Any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation,
limited liability company or other business entity formed for profit making
purposes, including without limitation retail establishments where goods or
services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where
legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional
services are delivered.
   COFFEE SHOP. An establishment primarily engaged in the sale of coffee and
tea products. A COFFEE SHOP has a limited menu which is not considered a meal,
has little or no table service, sells products which are for consumption on or
off premises and paid for at a cash register before the patrons eat. The sale
of other food, beverages or merchandise at a COFFEE SHOP must be incidental to
the sale of coffee and tea products.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or
her services for a non-profit entity.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, business, partnership, association, corporation,
including without limitation, a municipal corporation, trust or non-profit
entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons.
   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling, that is enclosed or
semi-enclosed with:
      (1)   Solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways); or
      (2)   Solid walls with half wall petitions and no windows (exclusive of
doorways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, without limitation to
lobbies corridors.
   ENCLOSED OR SEMI-ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA OR RECREATIONAL AREA. Any sports
pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller
and ice rink and other similar places where members of the general public
assemble either to engage in physical exercise, or participate in athletic
competition or recreational activity, to witness sports, cultural, recreational
or other events.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Any office or institution providing care or treatment
of diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical,
physiological or psychological conditions, including without limitation
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, clinics, nursing homes, homes for the
aging or chronically ill, laboratories, offices of surgeons, chiropractors,
physical therapists, physicians, dentists and all specialists within these
professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private
rooms, semi-private rooms and wards within HEALTH CARE FACILITIES.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area under the control of a public or
private employer that employees frequent during the course of employment,
including without limitation work areas, employee lounges, restrooms,
conference rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways and vehicles. A
private residence is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT unless it is used as a
childcare, adult day care, health care facility or home based business of any
kind open to the public.
   PRIVATE CLUB OR LODGE.
      (1)   Any not-for-profit association that:
         (a)   Has been in active and continuous existence for at least three
years; and
         (b)   Has a membership roll of more than 50 bona fide members who pay
membership dues on an annual or other periodic basis.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, “bona fide members” do not include
members who pay membership dues at the time of an amusement produced, presented
or conducted by the club or lodge or in conjunction with contracting for
production, presentation or conduct of an amusement by the club, as a condition
to entering the premises where the amusement is produced, presented or
conducted.
   PRIVATE FUNCTION. A gathering of persons for the purpose of deliberation,
education, instruction, entertainment, amusement or dining where membership or
specific invitation is a prerequisite to entry and where the event is not
intended to be open to the public.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which
the public is permitted, including without limitation banks, educational
facilities, government buildings, health care facilities, laundromats, museums,
public transportation facilities, reception areas, retail stores, shopping
malls, sports arenas, theaters and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a
PUBLIC PLACE unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, health care
facility or home based business of any kind open to the public.
   RESTAURANT. Any eating establishment, including, without limitation,
cafeterias, sandwich shops and private and public school cafeterias that gives
or offers for sale, food to the public, guests or employees, as well as
kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for
serving elsewhere. Any bar area on the premises shall be excluded from the term
RESTAURANT; provided that, air from the area is not drawn in or across any non-
smoking areas.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. Any retail store utilized primarily for the sale of
tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is
merely incidental and where no one under 18 is permitted.
   SECONDHAND SMOKE or INVOLUNTARY SMOKING. A mixture of the smoke given off by
the burning ends of a cigarette, pipe, cigar, bidis and kreteks (sidestream
smoke) and the smoke emitted at the mouthpiece and exhaled from the lungs of
smokers (mainstream smoke).
   SERVICE LINE. Any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for
or receiving services of any kind, whether or not the service involves the
exchange of money.
   SHOPPING MALL. Any enclosed walkway or hall area that serves to connect
retail or professional establishments.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted, cigar,
cigarette, pipe, weed, hookah or other lighted tobacco product in any matter or
in any form.
(Ord. 07-O-1886, passed 3-21-2007)
§ 95.31 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places and places of
employment within the city including, without limitation, the following places:
   (A)   Arcades;
   (B)   Aquariums, galleries, libraries and museums;
   (C)   Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, state,
drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance;
   (D)   Health care facilities, adult care facilities and nursing homes;
   (E)   Day care centers, nursery schools, elementary schools, high schools,
community colleges, technical training establishments, specialty schools,
colleges and universities;
   (F)   Lobbies, hallways and other common areas in apartment buildings,
condominiums and enclosed common area in trailer parks;
   (G)   Polling places;
   (H)   Public transportation facilities under the authority of government
agencies, including, without limitation, buses, trains, taxicabs and limousines
and ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transit stations;
   (I)   Restaurants, except in bar areas where air from the area is not drawn
in or across any non-smoking areas;
   (J)   Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways and other enclosed
common use areas;
   (K)   Public elevators and all retail stores where merchandise is displayed
and offered for sale;
   (L)   Rooms, chambers, places of meetings or public assembly, including
without limitation school buildings, under the control of an agency, board,
commission, committee or council or a political subdivision of the state, to
the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city;
   (M)   Service lines;
   (N)   Shopping malls;
   (O)   Sports arenas or recreational areas, including without limitation,
enclosed places in outdoor areas;
   (P)   Grocery stores;
   (Q)   Public meetings;
   (R)   Gymnasiums;
   (S)   Gaming facilities; and
   (T)   Public and private school buildings.
(Ord. 07-O-1886, passed 3-21-2007)
§ 95.32 REASONABLE DISTANCE.
   Smoking is prohibited within ten feet of any entrance to an enclosed area in
which smoking is prohibited, except in outdoor dining areas licensed; provided
that, air from the area is not drawn in or across any non- smoking areas.
(Ord. 07-O-1886, passed 3-21-2007) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.33 WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter to the contrary, the
following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of this subchapter;
provided, smoking is not limited in such areas under the state’s Clean Indoor
Air Act, being 410 ILCS 82:
   (A)   Private residences, except when used as a licensed childcare, adult
day care facility, health care facility or a home based business of any kind
open to the public;
   (B)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that, not more than 25% of the
rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated;
   (C)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain, as the case may be, in
a room where smoking is permitted;
   (D)   Retail tobacco stores; provided that, air from the area is not drawn
in or across any non-smoking areas;
   (E)   Private clubs or lodges;
   (F)   Roller or ice skating facilities;
   (G)   Bingo facilities;
   (H)   Bar areas; provided that, air from the area is not drawn in or across
any non-smoking areas;
   (I)   Beer gardens; provided that, air from the area is not drawn in or
across any non-smoking areas;
   (J)   Outdoor dining areas licensed; provided that, air from the area is not
drawn in or across any non- smoking areas; and
   (K)   Coffee shops; provided that, air from the area is not drawn in or
across any non-smoking areas.
(Ord. 07-O-1886, passed 3-21-2007)
§ 95.34 BAR AREAS.
   Bar areas must be separately vented, if feasible, and be situated so that
air from the bar area is not drawn in or across any non-smoking areas.
(Ord. 07-O-1886, passed 3-21-2007) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.35 DECLARATION OF NON-SMOKING ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, an owner,
operator, manager or other person in control of an establishment, facility or
outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility or outdoor area as
a non-smoking place.
   (B)   Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to
the requirements of this subchapter is posted.
(Ord. 07-O-1886, passed 3-21-2007) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.36 POSTING SIGNS.
   (A)   Every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
by this subchapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign
clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
   (B)   The operator, manager or other person having control of an area where
smoking is prohibited by this subchapter shall remove all ashtrays and other
smoking paraphernalia intended for use where smoking is prohibited.
(Ord. 07-O-1886, passed 3-21-2007) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.37 NON-RETALIATION.
   No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner
retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment or customer because
that employee, applicant or customer exercises any rights afforded by this
subchapter or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 07-O-1886, passed 3-21-2007) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.38 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city’s Police Department, the city’s Health and Ordinance
Department and/or any other department or officer or agent which the city may
designate shall be authorized to enforce this subchapter.
   (B)   Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this subchapter
may file a complaint with the city’s Police Department, the city’s Health and
Ordinance Department and/or any other department or officer or agent which the
city may designate.
   (C)   The city’s Police Department, the city’s Health and Ordinance
Department and/or any other department or officer or agent which the city may
designate shall, while an establishment is undergoing a licensing or public
health inspection, inspect for compliance with this subchapter or upon
reasonable cause that the subchapter is being violated.
   (D)   Any owner, manager, operator or employee of an establishment regulated
by this subchapter shall inform persons violating this subchapter of the
appropriate provisions thereof.
   (E)   In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this
subchapter, the city, or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner,
operator, manager or other person in control of this subchapter, may apply for
injunctive relief to enforce these provisions in the Circuit Court of the
county.
(Ord. 07-O-1886, passed 3-21-2007)
§ 95.39 OTHER APPLICABLE LAWS.
   This subchapter shall not be interpreted or be construed to permit smoking
where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws.
(Ord. 07-O-1886, passed 3-21-2007)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not less than $25, nor exceeding $500. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 95.99)
   (B)   (1)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by §§
95.30 through
95.39 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine
not more than $100.
      (2)   A person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls a public
place who fails to comply with the provisions of §§
95.30 through
95.39 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine up
to $100.
      (3)   Each day on which a violation of §§
95.30 through
95.39 of this chapter occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct
violation.
(Ord. 07-O-1886, passed 3-21-2007)
CHAPTER 96: LITTERING AND DEBRIS
Section
   
96.01   Depositing of litter prohibited
   
96.02   Vehicles to be covered; loads spilling
   
96.03   Throwing or dropping debris or other injurious materials on street
   
96.04   Implementations of notices
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by
his or her agent, employee or servant, to cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit
in any manner in or upon any public way or other public place in the city or
any river, canal, public water, drain, sewer or receiving basin within the
jurisdiction of the city, any kind of dirt, rubbish, waste article, thing or
substance whatsoever, whether liquid or solid; nor shall any person, firm or
corporation, cast, throw, sweep, sift or deposit any of the aforementioned
items anywhere within the jurisdiction of the city in such manner that it may
be carried or deposited in whole or in part, by the action of the sun, wind,
rain or snow, into any of the aforementioned places.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the deposit of material under a permit
authorized by any ordinance of the city; or to goods, wares or merchandise
deposited upon any public way or other public place temporarily, in the
necessary course of trade, and removed therefrom within two hours after being
so deposited; or to articles or things deposited in or conducted into the city
sewer system through lawful drains in accordance with the ordinances of the
city relating thereto.
(Prior Code, § 96.01) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
21-1987) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.02 VEHICLES TO BE COVERED; LOADS SPILLING.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, in person or by his, her
or its agent, employee or servant, to use any vehicle to haul any kind of dirt,
rubbish, waste articles or things or substance, whether liquid or solid, unless
such vehicle is covered to prevent any part of its load from spilling or
dropping at all times while such vehicle is in motion on any street or alley in
the municipality. The requirements for covering such vehicles in this chapter
shall not apply to vehicles carrying brush cuttings, tree trimmings, branches,
logs and similar waste material, if such matter is securely lashed to such
vehicle to prevent spilling or dropping as set out in this section.
(Prior Code, § 96.02) (Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-
21-1987) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.03 THROWING OR DROPPING DEBRIS OR OTHER INJURIOUS MATERIALS ON STREET.
   No person shall throw, cast or put into, drop or leave in or on any street,
sidewalk or public place in the city any stone, missiles, nails, glass, ice,
iron or any other metal, or any other articles or things.
(Prior Code, § 96.03) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.04 IMPLEMENTATIONS OF NOTICES.
   Notices of any nature required by the various terms and provisions hereof to
be given to the city shall be served upon the Health Officer and the office of
the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 96.04) (Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-20-1978)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $500, for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
(Prior Code, § 96.99) (Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-21-1987)
CHAPTER 97: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Enumeration of certain nuisances
   
97.02   Abandoned shopping carts
Citations and Payment of Fines
   
97.35   When citation issued
   
97.36   Serving notice to appear
   
97.37   Payment by violator
   
97.38   Fee for violation; non-payment of fine
 
   
97.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 ENUMERATION OF CERTAIN NUISANCES.
   It is declared a nuisance for any person to do any of the following acts:
   (A)   To so negligently conduct any business or use any premises as to
create such an offensive smell as may taint the air and render it unwholesome
or disagreeable to the neighborhood;
   (B)   To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or vegetable matter,
slops, swill, suds, garbage, filth, stable drippings or offal or noisome
substance of any kind to be collected, deposited or remain in any place in the
city to the prejudice of others;
   (C)   To deposit dead animals or other filthy, offensive or noisome
substance upon or along any lot, street, alley, highway, park or other place
within the city, except the dumping or depositing in or on any place or site
designated by the city as a public dumping ground;
   (D)   To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water of any drinking
hydrant, spring, stream or pond to the injury or prejudice of others;
   (E)   To obstruct or encroach upon any public highway, private way, street
or alley;
   (F)   To permit or suffer any slops, swill, garbage, excrements, offal,
refuse, animal or vegetable matter, which is liable to become putrid, or
offensive or injurious to health, to remain on any premises used or occupied by
any person for a longer period than 24 hours at any one time;
   (G)   To keep or suffer to be kept in foul, offensive, nauseous or filthy
condition, any kennels, cellar, vault, drain, pool, sewer or sink, upon any
premises belonging to or occupied by him or her, or any building, yards, ground
and premises belonging to or occupied by him or her;
   (H)   To allow dogs and other animals to run at-large within the city;
   (I)   To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise
of any trade, employment or manufacture, which by occasioning noxious
exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise is offensive or dangerous to the
health of individuals or of the public;
   (J)   To maintain a house of ill fame or house of assignation, where men and
women resort for the purpose of prostitution;
   (K)   To slaughter or kill any cattle, hogs or sheep or keep or maintain or
use any house or place in which the business of slaughtering any of said
animals is carried on;
   (L)   To obstruct any watercourse, ravine or gutter, so as to cause water to
stagnate therein, or to permit foul or stagnant water to stand upon any
premises to the prejudice of others;
   (M)   Reserved;
   (N)   To build, maintain or suffer to permit any building or part thereof to
be or remain in an unsanitary condition by reason of the basement or cellar
being covered with stagnant water, or by reason of the presence of sewer gas,
or by reason of any portion of a building being infected with disease or being
unfit for human habitation or which by reason of any other unsanitary condition
is a source of sickness, or which endangers the public health;
   (O)   To pile or stack any hay, straw or combustible or inflammable material
within the space of 50 feet of any building within the city, except where the
same is piled by a person upon his or her own premises and 50 feet distant from
any building. This does not apply to materials to be used for building
purposes;
   (P)   To maintain any building, structure, enclosure, place or premises
perilous to life or property by reason of the construction of such building or
structure or by reason of the condition or quality of its contents, or the use
of the building or its contents, or the use of the enclosure or the
overcrowding at any time of persons therein, or where conditions exist which
would hamper the Fire Department in combating a fire in or on the building;
   (Q)   To fail to remove from any lot, building or structure, or any portion
thereof, all garbage, ashes, miscellaneous waste and manure;
   (R)   To make, or cause, permit or allow to be made, upon a public way, or
in such close proximity to a public way as to be distinctly and loudly audible
upon such public way, any noise of any kind by crying or shouting or by means
of any whistle, bell, drum, horn, mechanically operated piano, other musical
instruments, wind instrument, sound amplified or other device. Any unauthorized
or licensed parade, public gathering, carnival and the like, and any licensed
peddler, food dealer is exempt from this provision;
   (S)   To permit any building or premises to be used for any business or
employment, or for any purpose of pleasure or recreation, if such use shall
from its noise or its boisterous nature, disturb the peace of the neighborhood
or be dangerous or detrimental to health, or to permit or suffer dogs or other
animals to create any noise or noises disturbing or destroying the peace of the
neighborhood;
   (T)   To maintain or erect a privy within the corporate limits of the city;
and
   (U)   To create or maintain any thing which is known to the common law of
the land, any ordinance of this city, or the Illinois Revised Statute as a
nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 97.01) (Ord. 22-O-2337, passed 9-7-2022) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.02 ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS.
   (A)   Any shopping carts or other personal property owned by any tenant or
business owner which is found on property not owned by the landowner shall be
confiscated from such location and stored in the city’s Public Works
Department.
   (B)   Any tenant or business owner may reclaim his, her or their shopping
cart or personal property at the city’s Public Works Department upon proper
identification of the property.
   (C)   There will be a $10 fee for the return of each shopping cart and for
each item of personal property belonging to a tenant or business owner.
(Prior Code, § 97.02) (Ord. 95-O-1548, passed 9-6-1995; Ord. 06-O-1854, passed
4-19-2006) Penalty, see §
97.99
CITATIONS AND PAYMENT OF FINES
§ 97.35 WHEN CITATION ISSUED.
   Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest a person without warrant
because of a violation of any nuisances set forth in this chapter or any
applicable ordinance of the city, the police officer may, in lieu of the filing
of a complaint in court, in the first instance issue to such alleged violator a
citation, advising the person that he or she has violated a specified section
of this chapter or any applicable ordinance, requesting him or her to make
payment in an amount applicable to the violation as set forth in §
97.38 of this chapter as settlement of the violation claim, and informing him
or her that, upon failure to so settle, a complaint will be filed in the
Circuit Court of the county, charging him or her with such violation.
(Prior Code, § 97.25) (Ord. 613, passed - -1966)
§ 97.36 SERVING NOTICE TO APPEAR.
   In the event that the person to whom the citation is issued fails to settle
and pay the violation claim within the prescribed time, or within a period of
time specified in a final notice, if one is served upon him or her, then the
peace officer is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be served upon the
alleged violator and is authorized to file a complaint and to prosecute the
same in the Circuit Court of the county.
(Prior Code, § 97.26) (Ord. 613, passed - -1966)
§ 97.37 PAYMENT BY VIOLATOR.
   (A)   Pursuant to the citation, the person so accused of the violation may
settle and compromise the violation claim in respect to the code or ordinance
violation by paying the municipality the applicable amount as shown in the
schedule set forth in §
97.38 of this chapter, within a period to be specified in the citation, not
more than seven days after the time the alleged offense was committed.
   (B)   Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions
contained in the citation, at the office of the Police Department, which shall
issue a receipt for the money so received and promptly remit the amount to the
City Treasurer to be credited to the proper municipal fund.
(Prior Code, § 97.27) (Ord. 613, passed - -1966)
§ 97.38 FEE FOR VIOLATION; NON-PAYMENT OF FINE.
   The violation claim described in the citation to be issued pursuant to the
terms of this chapter may be settled, compromised and paid in the respective
amounts set forth in the following schedule.
   (A)   In the event that the payment is made prior to the mailing by the
municipality or by the peace officer of a final notice, $5 shall be accepted as
settlement.
   (B)   In the event that payment has not be paid prior to the mailing of a
final notice and, in fact, final notice has been mailed, $7 shall be accepted
as settlement.
   (C)   In the event that payment is not made within the time prescribed in
the final notice, and a notice to appear has been served and a complaint filed
in the Circuit Court of the county, payment of any fine and costs shall be in
such amounts as may be determined and established by the Circuit Court of the
county.
(Prior Code, § 97.28) (Ord. 613, passed - -1966; Ord. 69-O-705, passed - -1969)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this chapter
for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine not less than $25, nor exceeding $500. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, § 97.11)
(Ord. 73-O-841, passed - -1973; Ord. 78-O-986, passed 6-21-1978; Ord. 05-O-
1833, passed 5-18-2005; Ord. 12-O-2030, passed 10-3-2012; Ord. 22-O-2337,
passed 9-7-2022)
CHAPTER 98: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
98.001   Driving over walks and lawns
   
98.002   Utility poles
   
98.003   Awnings and projecting signs
   
98.004   Erection of scaffolds
Sidewalk Construction Permits
   
98.015   Permit required
   
98.016   Application for sidewalk permit
   
98.017   Sidewalk plans and specifications; information is to be included
   
98.018   Altering plans and specifications
   
98.019   Retention of plans by Director of Building and Housing
   
98.020   Issuance of sidewalk permits
   
98.021   Validity of permit
   
98.022   Expiration of permit
   
98.023   Sidewalk building fees
   
98.024   Inspection of construction or work
Street Excavations
   
98.035   Permit required
   
98.036   Application for permit
   
98.037   Bond; conditions
   
98.038   Fees
   
98.039   Qualifications needed to engage in work
   
98.040   Stop-work order
   
98.041   Hours of work
Culverts
   
98.055   When installation of culvert necessary
   
98.056   Permit required
   
98.057   Application for culvert permits
   
98.058   Forms
   
98.059   Establishment of grade
   
98.060   Approval of materials to be used
   
98.061   Flow of water in ditch regulated
   
98.062   Change of grade
   
98.063   Culvert to be kept free of refuse and matter
   
98.064   Notice of obstructed culverts; failure to clean
   
98.065   Existing culverts
Street and Sidewalk Obstruction and Encroachments
   
98.080   Construction or repair affecting public ways
   
98.081   Encroachments on public right-of-way during street improvements
Maintenance of Public Ways
   
98.095   Application of provisions
   
98.096   Removal of snow and ice
Street Naming and Numbering
   
98.110   Official numbering system
   
98.111   Street name signs
   
98.112   Construction specifications
   
98.113   Unauthorized erection of street signs
   
98.114   Injuries to street signs
Front Yard Area
   
98.125   Prohibited use of front yard area
Administration and Enforcement
   
98.140   Powers and duties of Director of Building and Housing
   
98.141   Zoning Board of Appeals
 
   
98.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.001 DRIVING OVER WALKS AND LAWNS.
   No person shall drive any animal or vehicle on or across any sidewalk,
boulevard or lawn, where there is no regular approach to the same. The owner or
occupant of any premises or lot shall construct sufficient approaches to the
sidewalk where the same is necessarily crossed in gaining access to such
premises or lot by any private entrance.
(Prior Code, § 98.001) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.002 UTILITY POLES.
   No person shall set or cause to be set any telegraph, telephone or electric
light pole or other pole upon any street or alley within the city or string or
hang any wire along or across any street or alley unless authorized to do so by
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 98.002) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.003 AWNINGS AND PROJECTING SIGNS.
   (A)   No person shall erect an awning or maintain it over any sidewalk in
the city at a height less than six and one-half feet above the surface of the
sidewalk.
   (B)   No person shall allow a sign to project from any store or other
building into and over any sidewalk or street unless elevated at least eight
feet above the sidewalk or street. No person shall allow any cellar door to
rise or project over the surface of the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 98.003) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.004 ERECTION OF SCAFFOLDS.
   All scaffolds erected in the city for use in the erection of stone, brick or
other buildings shall be safely supported and of sufficient width and properly
secured so as to insure the safety of persons working thereon or passing under
or by the same to prevent the falling thereof, or of any materials that may be
used, placed or deposited thereon; and scaffolds which may be otherwise erected
shall be deemed a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 98.004) Penalty, see §
98.999
SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION PERMITS
§ 98.015 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, remove, convert
or demolish any public sidewalk in the city, or cause the same to be done,
without first obtaining a sidewalk permit for each public sidewalk from the
Director of Building and Housing.
(Prior Code, § 98.020) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.016 APPLICATION FOR SIDEWALK PERMIT.
   (A)   Applicant for a permit shall file an application therefor in writing
on a form furnished for the purpose by the Director of Building and Housing or
City Clerk. Every application shall do the following:
      (1)   Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot,
block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that will
readily identify and definitely locate the proposed construction;
      (2)   Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required by this
subchapter;
      (3)   State the number of linear feet in the proposed sidewalk; and
      (4)   Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the
Inspector.
   (B)   The plans and specifications required by this subchapter for sidewalk
construction may be filed at the same time and as a part of the plans and
specifications submitted in application for a building permit for the
construction or change to a building at the immediate site of the proposed
sidewalk; provided that, the part of such total plans and specifications
relating to sidewalks shall fully meet the requirements of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 98.021)
§ 98.017 SIDEWALK PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; INFORMATION IS BE INCLUDED.
   (A)   Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by two sets of
plans and specifications; except that:
      (1)   Plans and specifications need not be submitted for small and
unimportant work when such omission is approved by the Director of Building and
Housing; and
      (2)   When an applicant makes application for volume construction wherein
each sidewalk is a variation of a basic plan or design and such basic plan or
design sets forth various elevations, and the like, the applicant may submit
two sets of basic plans and specifications for such mass or volume
construction.
   (B)   Plans and specifications shall be drawn to scale upon substantial
paper or cloth and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and
extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the
provisions of this code and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall give the location of
the work and the name and address of the owner and person who prepared them.
Plans shall include a plat plan showing the location of the proposed sidewalk.
In lieu of detailed specifications, the Inspector may approve references on the
plans to a specific section or part of this code or other ordinances or laws.
(Prior Code, § 98.022)
§ 98.018 ALTERING PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   When the Director of Building and Housing issues a permit, he or she
shall endorse in writing or stamp on both sets of plans and specifications
“approved”.
   (B)   The approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified
or altered without authorization from the Inspector and all work done shall be
done in accordance with the approved plans.
(Prior Code, § 98.023)
§ 98.019 RETENTION OF PLANS BY DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND HOUSING.
   One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained
by the Director of Building and Housing and made a part of the records of the
city by him or her after completion of the work covered therein, and one set of
approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant, which set
shall be kept on the site of the work at all times during which work authorized
thereby is in progress.
(Prior Code, § 98.024)
§ 98.020 ISSUANCE OF SIDEWALK PERMITS.
   (A)   The application, plans and specifications filed by an applicant shall
be checked by the Director of Building and Housing.
   (B)   Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the city to check
compliance with the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction.
   (C)   If the Inspector is satisfied that the work described in an
application for permit and the plans filed with such application conform to the
requirements of this subchapter and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he or
she shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 98.025)
§ 98.021 VALIDITY OF PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and
specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for or an approval of any
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of this subchapter shall be valid, insofar as the work or use which
it authorized is lawful.
   (B)   The issuance of a permit based upon plans and specifications shall not
prohibit the Director of Building and Housing from thereafter requiring the
correction of errors in the plans and specifications or from prohibiting
operations being carried on thereunder when in violation of this subchapter or
of any other ordinance of the city.
(Prior Code, § 98.026)
§ 98.022 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Every permit issued by the Director of Building and Housing under the
provisions of this subchapter shall expire by limitation and become null and
void, if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 60 days
from the date of such permit, or if the construction authorized by such permit
is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period
of 60 days.
   (B)   Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit shall first be
obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half of the amount
required for a new permit for such work; provided, no changes have been made or
will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and,
provided, the suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
(Prior Code, § 98.027)
§ 98.023 SIDEWALK BUILDING FEES.
   (A)   (1)   Before a sidewalk permit is issued, a permit fee therefor shall
be paid to the Director of Building and Housing.
      (2)   The fee shall be two and one-half cents per linear foot of
frontage; provided that, the minimum permit fee for such permit shall be $5.
      (3)   Where work for which a permit is required by this subchapter is
started or proceeded with prior to obtaining a permit, the fees provided in
this section shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not
relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this
subchapter in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalties which may
be prescribed by this code.
   (B)   (1)   Before plans and specifications are accepted for checking, a
plan checking fee in addition to the building permit fee shall be paid to the
Inspector.
      (2)   The plan checking fee shall be one-half the building permit fee.
(Prior Code, § 98.028)
§ 98.024 INSPECTION OF CONSTRUCTION OR WORK.
   All construction or work for which a sidewalk permit is required shall be
inspected by the Director of Building and Housing.
(Prior Code, § 98.029)
STREET EXCAVATIONS
§ 98.035 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall make an excavation within any street or alley in the city
for the purpose of installing water, sewer, steam or gas pipes, or electric or
telephone conduits or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit
for such excavation from the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 98.040) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.036 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Applications for such permits shall be made to the City Clerk and
shall state thereon the location of the intended improvement to be constructed
or other work to be done, the name of the person doing the actual work and the
name of the person for whom the work is being done.
   (B)   One copy of application to go to the Superintendent of Public Works
for approval.
(Prior Code, § 98.041)
§ 98.037 BOND; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued without the payment of the fee therefor.
   (B)   Any person obtaining a permit shall also give bond in such amount and
with such surety approved by the Mayor and City Council, which bond shall be in
form to meet the approval of the Corporation Counsel and shall be conditioned
as follows:
      (1)   He or she shall guarantee performance of the contract within the
time stipulated therein and according to the terms and conditions of the
contract and the plans and specifications, if any, incorporated therein;
      (2)   (a)   He or she will suitably guard and protect any excavation or
construction and defend, save, keep harmless and indemnify the city of and from
all actions, suits, costs, damages and expenses whatsoever, including
attorneys’ fees, which shall or may at any time happen to come to it for or on
account of any injuries or damages received or sustained by any party or
parties by or from acts or omissions of the applicant or his or her agents or
servants in doing such work; and
         (b)   He or she will restore such streets, sidewalks, alleys or public
improvements as may be damaged during the course of such construction to free
and complete public use as speedily as possible, and when completed to notify
the City Clerk of such fact so that the Superintendent of Public Works may see
that the same has been promptly and properly restored to its former condition
by the party receiving such permit, except insofar as the same may have been
changed by work so constructed; refilling and restoration shall be made in such
streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places and constructed in a good and
workmanlike manner and of good and proper material so that the same shall not
deteriorate, cave in or require repair or reconstruction for a period of one
year from the time of approval of such work, as herein mentioned.
      (3)   He or she will upon the receipt of notice to such effect, pay to
the Clerk for the use of the city, any and all cost and expenses to which the
city may have been put, paid or become liable for in refilling, repairing and
replacing the work if the work shall be done by the city, or it becomes
necessary for the city to do so, the costs in all cases to be certified by the
Superintendent of Public Works.
(Prior Code, § 98.042)
§ 98.038 FEES.
   Before a permit is issued, the applicant requesting the permit shall pay a
fee of $2 to the City Clerk for each location covered by the permit. Each
transverse excavation and each 300 feet or portion thereof of longitudinal
excavation shall be deemed a location.
(Prior Code, § 98.043)
§ 98.039 QUALIFICATIONS NEEDED TO ENGAGE IN WORK.
   No permit to enter upon any street, highway, alley or public place for any
of the purposes mentioned in this subchapter shall be issued or granted to any
person who shall in any respect be in violation of any provision of the city
code or city ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 98.044)
§ 98.040 STOP-WORK ORDER.
   (A)   Whenever the City Engineer or Superintendent of Public Works finds
that any work is being conducted contrary to the provisions of this subchapter,
he or she shall immediately stop all construction on the job, except such work
as may be necessary to prevent injury to persons or property; provided that, at
any time that either of the officials shall direct stoppage of any
construction, he or she shall, not later than the following day, furnish to the
holder of the permit for such construction or his or her representative,
written specification of the reasons for stopping the construction, informing
such permit holder wherein the construction is being conducted contrary to the
provisions of this subchapter, or he or she shall post the written
specification on the site.
   (B)   When such construction has been stopped, it shall not be resumed for
any other purpose, except to remedy the construction which has been carried out
contrary to this chapter until such construction has been fully remedied or
until the holder of the permit has satisfied the Engineer and Superintendent
that the improper construction is being remedied.
   (C)   When the improper construction has been remedied or when the Engineer
or Superintendent has been satisfied that it is being and will be remedied, he
or she shall release the stop order, which release shall be in writing.
(Prior Code, § 98.045)
§ 98.041 HOURS OF WORK.
   No work involving the construction of any public improvement under this
subchapter shall be engaged in before the hour of 8:00 a.m. or after the hour
of 5:00 p.m., nor at any time on Sundays without the written permission of the
Superintendent of Public Works or without notifying the Inspector assigned to
the particular improvement.
(Prior Code, § 98.046) Penalty, see §
98.999
CULVERTS
§ 98.055 WHEN INSTALLATION OF CULVERT NECESSARY.
   No person shall construct or maintain a private drive or roadway from any
public street in the city over or across any drainage ditch unless he or she
installs and maintains a culvert thereunder in accordance with the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 98.065) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.056 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No culvert shall be installed under any drive or roadway unless a permit
therefor shall first be applied for and obtained from the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 98.066) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.057 APPLICATION FOR CULVERT PERMITS.
   (A)   No culvert permit shall be issued by the City Clerk until such time as
the application for the permit has been approved by the Director of Building
and Housing.
   (B)   Upon issuance of any culvert permit, the Clerk shall see that the
permit is delivered to the applicant as soon as possible by the Police
Department or any other city official or employee.
(Prior Code, § 98.067)
§ 98.058 FORMS.
   Forms for application and permits shall be as follows:
 
CITY OF MARKHAM
COUNTY OF COOK STATE OF ILLINOIS
APPLICATION
 
This is an application (not a permit) for the installation of a culvert and a driveway in the City of Markham, Illinois.
 
Application is hereby made for the installation at                                                     , Markham, Illinois.
( )   An entrance culvert to be of corrugated galvanized steel, reinforced concrete, cast iron or of
                            
(Circle type listed above or fill in proposed type)
( )   An entrance driveway to be of stone, gravel, blacktop or of
                                                            
(Circle type listed above or fill in proposed material)
 
Date                                           Signed                                                     
 
 
 
 
 
INSPECTION AND RECOMMENDATION REPORT
TO BE FILLED IN BY AUTHORIZED INSPECTING AGENT OF THE
CITY OF MARKHAM
 
Type of culvert                                                                                            
Diameter of culvert                                                                                       
Established elevations   Inlet                                  Outlet                              
Type of driveway to be installed                                                                     
Remarks
 
 
 
Date                                             Approved                                                 
                        Inspecting Agent
 
 
 
 
 
CITY OF MARKHAM
COUNTY OF COOK STATE OF ILLINOIS
PERMIT
A permit is hereby granted to
                                                                                                                 
   Name               Address
 
To install a culvert at                                                                                          
      Address
 
As per specifications listed below
      Type of culvert to be used                                                            
      Diameter of culvert                                                                       
      Established elevations   Inlet                         Outlet                        
 
                     Signed                                                                  
                           City Clerk
   Date                                      
 
   A permit is hereby granted to
                                                                                                                 
      Name            Address
 
   To install a driveway at                                                                                        
                  Address
 
   Type of material to be used                                                                                   
 
                     Signed                                                                     
                           City Clerk
   Date                                         
 
 
 
(Prior Code, § 98.068)
§ 98.059 ESTABLISHMENT OF GRADE.
   Upon application for any culvert permit, the City Clerk shall refer it to
the Director of Building and Housing, who shall establish the grade for such
proposed culvert and prescribe the size of the culvert to be installed.
(Prior Code, § 98.069)
§ 98.060 APPROVAL OF MATERIALS TO BE USED.
   Every culvert shall be of the size determined by the Director of Building
and Housing to be adequate to permit the free flow of water in the ditch, and
shall be corrugated galvanized steel, reinforced concrete, cast iron or such
other materials that meet with the approval of the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 98.070)
§ 98.061 FLOW OF WATER IN DITCH REGULATED.
   Each culvert shall be installed conformably with the flow of the ditch and
in the manner prescribed by the Director of Building and Housing so it will not
impede the normal flow of water in the ditch, and so there will be no stagnant
water standing or retained behind it.
(Prior Code, § 98.071) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.062 CHANGE OF GRADE.
   No person doing the installation of a culvert shall change the grade of the
ditch in which the culvert is being installed from the grade established and
prescribed by the Director of Building and Housing.
(Prior Code, § 98.072) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.063 CULVERT TO BE KEPT FREE OF REFUSE AND MATTER.
   The person who maintains a private drive or roadway across any ditch into
premises owned or occupied by him or her shall keep the culvert thereunder
clean and free of all refuse and matter which may impede the free flow of water
in the ditch.
(Prior Code, § 98.073) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.064 NOTICE OF OBSTRUCTED CULVERTS; FAILURE TO CLEAN.
   (A)   If a culvert becomes plugged or clogged the owner or occupant of such
property into which such drive or roadway over the culvert leads shall be
notified to clean it, the cleaning to be done within 24 hours after
notification. The notification shall be done in writing, and may be served by
delivering the same to the owner or occupant personally or by posting it on the
premises.
   (B)   If the owner or occupant fails to clean the culvert within 24 hours
after notification, the city shall cause the culvert to be cleaned and shall
charge all expenses of such cleaning to the owner or occupant of the premises.
(Prior Code, § 98.074)
§ 98.065 EXISTING CULVERTS.
   (A)   In case any existing culvert under any private drive or roadway fails
to comply with the provisions of this subchapter, or impedes the free flow of
water in the ditch in which it is installed, the owner or occupant of the
property into which such drive or roadway leads, upon notice from the city,
shall install a proper culvert in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter at the sole expense of the owner or occupant.
   (B)   Any existing culvert which subsequently shall be ordered removed by
the city, shall be removed and replaced at the sole expense of the owner or
occupant.
(Prior Code, § 98.075) (Ord. 19-O-2230, passed 5-15-2019)
STREET AND SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION AND ENCROACHMENTS
§ 98.080 CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR AFFECTING PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   No person, firm or entity shall be allowed to engage in any
construction or repair project of any nature whatsoever where the obstruction,
destruction or repair of a public way is affected without first applying for
and receiving from the Superintendent of Public Works a permit therefor.
   (B)   No such permit as required in division (A) above shall be issued until
the person or entity applying for the same shall have first:
      (1)   Deposited with the Superintendent of Public Works a bond issued by
a surety licensed to do business in the state as such conditioned upon the
return of the public way to satisfactory condition following the completion or
substantial completion of the project; and
      (2)   Secured a policy of insurance from a reputable carrier licensed to
do business as an insurance carrier in the state insuring the city against any
claim, demand, suit or cause of action of any nature whatsoever arising from,
by reason of or in connection with the project with respect to which
application for permit is made. Application for such permit without such
insurance having been procured or falsely reporting such insurance having been
procured shall, in addition to any other penalty provided, subject the
applicant to liability to indemnify the city for any costs or expenses incurred
by reason of any such claim, demand, suit or cause of action required to be
insured against, including court costs and attorneys’ fees arising in
connection therewith.
(Prior Code, § 98.095) (Ord. 76-O-915, passed - -1976) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.081 ENCROACHMENTS ON PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY DURING STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect or cause
to be erected, to retain or cause to be retained, any encroachment within the
limits of the project right-of-way or roadway right-of-way where no project
right-of-way lines have been established.
(Prior Code, § 98.096) (Ord. 81-O-1070, passed 9-21-1981) Penalty, see §
98.999
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC WAYS
§ 98.095 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The restrictions and requirements of this chapter and §
98.080 of this chapter apply to owners and occupiers of property abutting the
public ways for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, or any portion thereof, in
the city.
(Prior Code, § 98.110) (Ord. 76-O-915, passed - -1976)
§ 98.096 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
   Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person, firm, corporation or
other entity having charge of or control over any building or lot in the city
which abuts upon any public way for pedestrian traffic, commonly referred to as
a sidewalk, shall remove the snow and ice or combination thereof from such
sidewalk. In the event that such snow or ice or combination thereof has become
frozen and is incapable of removal without damage to the pavement, the person
or entity having charge or control of such building or lot as described in this
section shall cause the accumulation to be placed in removable condition or
melted by the application thereto of salt or chemical compounds which will not
cause damage to the pavement.
(Prior Code, § 98.111) (Ord. 76-O-915, passed - -1976) Penalty, see §
98.999
STREET NAMING AND NUMBERING
§ 98.110 OFFICIAL NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   (A)   U.S. Highway #6 (159th Street) shall be the north-south baseline for
the city for the numbering of buildings. Numbers north of this base shall
decrease numerically and those south shall increase numerically. All numbers
shall carry the suffix “South”. Kedzie Avenue shall be the east-west baseline
for the city for the numbering of buildings. Numbers east of this base shall
decrease numerically and those west shall increase numerically. All numbers
shall carry the suffix “West”. Odd numbers shall be assigned on the west and
north sides of streets; even numbers shall be assigned on the west and north
sides of streets. Each assigned number shall apply for approximately 20 feet of
frontage.
   (B)   Numbers for new and proposed buildings or lots may be obtained at the
office of the Director of Building and Housing. At the time a building permit
is issued, the correct street number will be issued and recorded on the permit.
The Director of Building and Housing shall at all times keep charts and plats
furnished him or her up to date in all respects.
   (C)   The owners or occupants of each dwelling or building in the city shall
have placed thereon the assigned number of the dwelling or building. The
figures shall be at least two and one-half inches in height and be clearly
visible from the street.
   (D)   Any person failing to so number any dwelling, building or other
structure occupied by him or her or if after receiving notice to do so from the
City Clerk shall continue in his or her failure to so number any dwelling,
building or structure, shall be fined for each day during or on which a failure
to so number continues.
(Prior Code, § 98.125) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.111 STREET NAME SIGNS.
   The names of all streets in the city shall be placed on all street corners
and shall, wherever there are street lamps at the corner of the streets, be
painted on wood or metallic strips or plates firmly attached to such lamps or
lampposts.
(Prior Code, § 98.126)
§ 98.112 CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   Street name signs shall be constructed and erected in conformity with the
following specifications.
   (A)   (1)   Wood signs shall be of appropriate lengths cut from one-inch by
four-inch stock; No. 2 common or better grade or durable specie.
      (2)   Background paint shall consist of at least two coats of lead-in-oil
“outside white” paint as recommended by the manufacturer. Letters and numerals
shall be of a durable flat black paint as recommended by the manufacturer, tops
of all letters and numerals to be aligned and lettered in the following manner:
         (a)   Named streets: name in three-inch Gothic letters: “Street”,
“Avenue” and the like; abbreviations in two-inch Gothic letters; and
         (b)   Numbered streets: three-inch numerals and Gothic letters, except
two-inch Gothic letters for endings “th”, “nd” and the like.
   (B)   Metal signs shall be of heavy gauge bonderized steel. Background and
letter painting to be as recommended by the manufacturer, with size of sign and
letters in general agreement with dimensions specified in division (A) above.
   (C)   Placing and setting signs shall be as follows.
      (1)   Each street name board shall be affixed to post by means of two
three-sixteenths-inch by two and one-half-inch lag screws with washers; heads
of lag screws and washers to be painted white after being inserted.
      (2)   Mounting of metal signs shall in general conform with
specifications for wood signs. Metal sign mountings as recommended by the
manufacturer may be acceptable as alternates.
      (3)   (a)   Wood posts shall be set at least three feet six inches in the
ground. Suitable backfill material shall be placed in the hole around the post
in successive layers not to exceed 12 inches in depth measured loose. Each
layer of backfill shall be thoroughly tamped to secure the maximum density so
that the post shall be plumb and rigid.
         (b)   The post, above the creosote line, shall be given two coats of
lead-in-oil “outside white” paint as recommended by the manufacturer.
         (c)   Backfilled portion of posts shall be creosoted in conformation
with A.S.T.M. standards for such installations.
      (4)   Metal posts installed in accordance with manufacturer
recommendations may be acceptable as alternates to wood posts.
   (D)   Posts shall not be installed in frozen or thawing ground unless the
posts are imbedded in cement concrete from the bottom of the post hole to one
foot below the ground line.
(Prior Code, § 98.127) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.113 UNAUTHORIZED ERECTION OF STREET SIGNS.
   No person shall erect street name signs without first having secured
authorization, approval and consent therefor by the Mayor and City Council.
(Prior Code, § 98.128) Penalty, see §
98.999
§ 98.114 INJURIES TO STREET SIGNS.
   No person shall injure or obstruct street name signs posted under the
authorization and direction of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 98.129) Penalty, see §
98.999
FRONT YARD AREA
§ 98.125 PROHIBITED USE OF FRONT YARD AREA
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, resident, firm or corporation to
use the front yard area of any residential property or premises or any area
abutting a public street for the following types of activities:
      (1)   The operation of bicycles and other riding devices on the streets
and sidewalks which abut private property; the setting up of portable or
temporary hoops, goals or courts and the playing of basketball, hockey or other
games on the streets or sidewalks, thereby creating a nuisance as to the public
and which detracts from the quiet enjoyment of property by other residents of
the city and which detracts from the residential character of the neighborhood;
      (2)   The operation of exercise and/or jungle gym type devices;
      (3)   The open preparation, cooking and consumption of food and/or
beverages;
      (4)   The playing of music or other sounds which transmit the music being
played or the sounds being made in excess of 25 feet from the boundaries of the
premises upon which the conduct is occurring;
      (5)   Loud and raucous conversation, noise and other conduct which tends
to disturb the public within an area in excess of 25 feet from the boundaries
of the premises upon which the conversation, noise or other conduct which tends
to disturb the public is occurring;
      (6)   The leaving of ashes uncovered or any other material which is
likely to be blown about by the wind; and
      (7)   The maintaining of, or the causing of, a nuisance in the use of the
area in question.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, the term NUISANCE is defined to mean
any condition or use of the premises or of building exteriors or the adjoining
premises and/or abutting and nearby public streets or alleys which is
detrimental to the property of others, which creates a disorderly condition or
which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value of other
property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located.
(Prior Code, § 98.135) (Ord. 96-O-1586, passed 8-7-1996) Penalty, see §
98.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 98.140 POWERS AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND HOUSING.
   The Director of Building and Housing shall have the following powers and
duties:
   (A)   The Director of Building and Housing is authorized and directed to
enforce all the provisions of this chapter. For such purpose, he or she shall
have the powers of a police officer;
   (B)   The Inspector shall submit a report to the City Council not less than
once a month, covering his or her work during the preceding period. He or she
shall incorporate in the report a summary of his or her recommendations as to
desirable amendments to the law;
   (C)   The Inspector shall keep a permanent, accurate account of all fees and
other moneys collected and received under this title, the names of the persons
upon whose account the same were paid, the date and amount thereof, together
with the location of the sidewalk to which they relate; and
   (D)   Whenever any construction is being done contrary to the provisions of
this chapter, the Inspector may order the work stopped by notice in writing
served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and
any such persons forthwith shall stop the work until authorized by the
Inspector to proceed with the work.
(Prior Code, § 98.140)
§ 98.141 ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall hear and pass upon any appeal made
to it from any ruling or order or other official act of the Director of
Building and Housing.
   (B)   The Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for
conducting its investigations and shall render all its decisions and findings
in writing to the City Council, with a duplicate copy to the appellant, and may
recommend to the Council such new enactments as are consistent therewith.
(Prior Code, § 98.141)
§ 98.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter for which another penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not less than $25, nor exceeding $500. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating §
98.081 of this chapter shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $500 for each
offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed for each and every day
during which a violation continues or exists.
   (C)   Any person violating §
98.110 of this chapter, who shall continue in his or her failure to so number
any dwelling, building or structure, shall be fined $1 for each day during or
on which a failure to so number continues, the fine not to exceed $5.
(Prior Code, § 98.999) (Ord. 81-O-1070, passed 9-21-1981)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
      
111.   ADVERTISING
      
112.   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
      
113.   AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENT
      
114.   FOOD SERVICE BUSINESS
      
115.   MERCHANTS PROVIDING PRODUCTS
      
116.   MERCHANTS PROVIDING SERVICES
      
117.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
118.   AUTOMOTIVE BUSINESS
      
119.   INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS
      
120.   CONTRACTORS AND BUILDERS
      
121.   RENTAL PROPERTIES
      
122.   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
      
123.   LODGING
      
124.   HOME OCCUPATIONS
      
125.   SPECIAL EVENTS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Short title
   
110.02   Purpose; jurisdiction
   
110.03   Definitions
   
110.04   Nuisances
Licensing Provisions
   
110.15   Scope of activity requiring license
   
110.16   Qualifications of applicants
   
110.17   Applications; forms; signatures
   
110.18   Issuance of receipts
   
110.19   Investigations
   
110.20   Approval of licenses
   
110.21   Procedure when license not approved
   
110.22   Renewal of license
   
110.23   Duplicate license; fee
   
110.24   License fee; established; duration; proration; refund
   
110.25   License fee schedule
   
110.26   Contents of license
   
110.27   Posting license
   
110.28   Change of location
   
110.29   Records and books to be kept
   
110.30   Transference of license
   
110.31   Duties of licensee
   
110.32   Termination of licenses
Administration and Enforcement
   
110.45   Authority to enforce regulations
   
110.46   Investigations and inspections
   
110.47   Right of entry for inspection; reports
   
110.48   Suspension or revocation of business licenses
   
110.49   Summary action
   
110.50   Appeal procedure
   
110.51   Liability of violator
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “General Licensing
Ordinance” of the city.
(Prior Code, § 110.01) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.02 PURPOSE; JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The express purpose of this title is: to protect and safeguard the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city; to increase public
confidence in legitimate commerce; to further ensure adequate and periodic
provisions of essential governmental inspectional services; and to provide for
an accurate record of regulated commercial activities within the city.
   (B)   It is not intended by this title to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any
way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws or ordinances,
except those specifically repealed by the ordinance codified in this title.
Where this title imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises or
personal property than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of
law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this title shall control.
(Prior Code, § 110.02) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The individual or entity that operates the business seeking a
business license and, in the case of a corporation, its owners, officers,
managers and anyone owning more than a 5% interest.
   BRANCH ESTABLISHMENT. Any location of the business where a representative of
the owner or the owner's agent is typically on the premises who is authorized
to transact business for such owner or owner's agent or there is a regular
employee of the owner or the owner's agent working on the premises.
   BUSINESS. Includes all kinds of vocations, services, occupations,
professions, enterprises, establishments and all other kinds of activities and
matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles or appurtenances used
therein, any of which are conducted for profit, or benefit, either directly or
indirectly, on any premises in the city, or anywhere else within its
jurisdiction.
   INSIGNIA (or its singular number INSIGNE). Any tag, plate, badge, emblem,
sticker or any other kind of device which may be required for any use in
connection with any license.
   LICENSE or LICENSEE. The individual or entity that is issued a business
license under this chapter, and, in the case of a corporation, its owners,
officers, managers and anyone owning more than a 5% interest. Includes
respectively the words PERMIT or PERMITTEE or the holder for any use or period
of time of any similar privilege.
   NON-PROFIT ENTERPRISE. A corporation whose primary purpose is to address a
concern or provide a service rather than to make money that is registered as
such with the Illinois Secretary of State or equivalent governmental body of
another state.
   OWNER. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, trust or
any other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in a commercial
activity or establishment to maintain and manage it operations.
   PERSON. Includes individual natural persons, partnerships, joint adventures,
societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts or corporations; or any
officers, agents, employees, factors or any kind of personal representatives of
any thereof, in any capacity, acting either for himself, herself or for any
other person, under either personal appointment or pursuant to law.
   PREMISES. Includes all lands, structures, places and also the equipment and
appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any
personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in
connection with, any such business conducted on such premises.
   SERVICE. Assistance, advice skill or other intangible benefit provided to a
customer that is not incidental to the sale of goods.
(Prior Code, § 110.03) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.04 NUISANCES.
   No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount
to a nuisance in fact.
(Prior Code, § 110.04) (Ord. 92-O-1432, passed 3-18-1992; Ord. 24-O-2388,
passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 110.15 SCOPE OF ACTIVITY REQUIRING LICENSE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, to
conduct any business or non-profit enterprise, or to use in connection
therewith any premises, machine or device, in whole or in part, without a
license or permit therefor being first procured and kept in effect at all times
as required by this title or other law or ordinance of the city.
      (1)   For the purpose of this title, any person is deemed to be in
business or engaging in non-profit enterprise, and thus subject to the
requirements of this section and division (A) above, when he or she does one
act of the following:
         (a)   Selling or providing any goods or service;
         (b)   Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or
hire;
         (c)   Acquiring or using any premises in the city for business
purposes, including storage of business related items;
         (d)   Holding oneself forth as being engaged in a business or service;
         (e)   Soliciting patronage, actively or passively, for a business or
service;
         (f)   Performing or attempting to perform any part of a business or
service in the city;
         (g)   The holding of a garage or yard sale of used personal property;
or
         (h)   Renting parking spaces or storage spaces.
      (2)   A license shall be obtained in the manner prescribed in this title
for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in, as if
each such branch establishment or location were a separate business.
   (B)   Whenever in this code a license is required for the maintenance,
operation or conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or
engaging in any activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be
subject to the requirement if by himself or herself or through an agent,
employee or partner, he or she holds himself or herself forth as being engaged
in the business or occupation; or solicits patronage therefor, activity or
passively; or performs or attempts to perform any part of such business or
occupation in the city.
   (C)   The city recognizes the evolving nature of businesses and where a
business may qualify under one or more categories, the Director of Building and
Housing, in his or her sole discretion, shall determine the category or
categories of licensure the business shall require.
(Prior Code, § 110.15) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 92-O-1432, passed
3-18-1992; Ord. 97-O-1615, passed 9-3-1997; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.16 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANTS.
   (A)   The following applicants are ineligible for an initial business
license or renewal:
      (1)   Wherein the proposed activity will take place, all or in part, upon
real property within the city, there exists any past due or delinquent real
estate taxes for the property, unless an applicable exemption is proven by the
applicant. The applicant remains ineligible until it presents proof from the
Cook County Treasurer's Office that the property taxes for the property have
been paid in full.
      (2)   Wherein the proposed activity will take place, all or in part, upon
real property within the city, there exists any past due or delinquent fines or
fees for the property, whether issued to the applicant, a prior owner, tenant,
employee, family member or other person, provided the fine or fee has a
significant relationship to the subject property.
      (3)   Any applicant that is indebted or obligated in any manner to the
city, including but not limited to water bills, fines and fees.
      (4)   Any applicant that is not a citizen of the United States.
      (5)   Any applicant whose business activity or performance of any act
would involve a violation of the zoning code of the city or any applicable law
or ordinance.
   (B)   If any of the above events occur after the applicant has become
licensed, its business license is subject to suspension or revocation pursuant
to the provisions contained herein.
(Prior Code, § 110.16) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 92-O-1432, passed
3-18-1992; Ord. 24-O- 2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 110.17 APPLICATIONS; FORMS; SIGNATURES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specified by this code, applications for all new
licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be made in writing to the
Building and Housing Department, on forms provided by that office.
   (B)   Applicant information required:
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual. The name, date of birth, home
address, telephone number, email address, and a copy of a valid state
identification of the person applying for a license and anyone with a financial
interest in the business.
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership/non-corporate entity. The name,
date of birth, home address, telephone number, email address, and a copy of a
valid state identification for each partner, principal, member thereof, and
anyone with a financial interest in the business.
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation. The name, date of birth, home
address, telephone number, email address, and a copy of a valid state
identification of each principal officer, registered agent thereof, and anyone
with a financial interest in the business, a copy of the corporation or LLC's
certificate of good standing issued by the Illinois Secretary of State.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specified by this code, all application submissions
shall include:
      (1)   A signed and completed application form;
      (2)   A description of any signs or awnings that will be located on the
premises;
      (3)   Proof of ownership of the property (ie: deed);
      (4)   If the applicant is not the property owner, a signed authorization
letter from the property owner as listed in the proof of ownership authorizing
the applicant to conduct the specific business activities applied for;
      (5)   A certificate of insurance listing the city as an additional
insured;
      (6)   A business plan or statement of business activities; and
      (7)   A non-refundable license application fee as specified in the
Business License Fees Ordinance due at the time of submission of the
application for license. There shall be a fee as specified in the Business
License Fees Ordinance for each returned check, whether NSF or otherwise.
   (D)   Forms for all licenses and permits, and applications therefor, shall
be prepared and kept on file by the Building and Housing Department, in the
absence of provisions to the contrary.
   (E)   Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the Mayor
and the City Clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary.
(Prior Code, § 110.17) (Ord. 92-O-1432, passed 3-18-1992; Ord. 97-O-1615,
passed 9-3-1997; Ord. 21-O-2294, passed 3-17-2021; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-
2024)
§ 110.18 ISSUANCE OF RECEIPTS.
   At the time the application for a license is made, the City Clerk shall
issue a receipt to the applicant for the money paid in advance. Such receipt
shall not be construed as the approval for the issuance of a license, nor shall
it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary
to the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 110.18) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 97-O-1615, passed
9-3-1997; Ord. 24-O- 2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 110.19 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Upon the receipt of an application for a license or permit the
application shall be referred to the proper officer for making an inspection or
investigation. The officer charged with the duty of making the investigation or
inspection shall make a report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within ten days
after receiving the application or a copy thereof.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall make or cause to be made an inspection in
regard to such licenses in the connection of the care and handling of food and
the preventing of nuisances and the spread of disease, for the protection of
health; the Director of Building and Housing shall make or cause to be made any
such inspections relative to the construction of buildings or other structures.
All other investigations, except where otherwise provided, shall be made by the
Chief of Police or by some other officer designated by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 110.19) (Ord. 92-O-1432, passed 3-18-1992; Ord. 97-O-1615,
passed 9-3-1997; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 110.20 APPROVAL OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall present all applications for license to the City
Council. All licenses and permits authorized or required by this code, shall be
granted by the Council which shall have the power to grant applications.
   (B)   Every license, when application therefor has been approved by the
Council, shall be issued by the City Clerk; provided, the prescribed fee is
first paid, the applicant has received a certificate of occupancy from the
Building and Housing Department, and where a bond is required, that the bond is
properly approved and filed.
(Prior Code, § 110.20) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.21 PROCEDURE WHEN LICENSE NOT APPROVED.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall send written notification to the applicant of the
City Council's denial of a business license.
   (B)   When the issuance of a license is denied and any action is instituted
by the applicant to compel its issuance, such applicant shall not engage in the
business for which the license was refused unless a license be issued to him or
her pursuant to a judgment ordering the same.
(Prior Code, § 110.21) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 87-O-1271, passed
5-6-1987; Ord. 24-O- 2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 110.22 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A renewal license must be obtained prior to the start of the city's
fiscal year, which is May 1.
   (B)   The applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit an application
for such license to the Building and Housing Department.
   (C)   The renewal application submission shall include the information
required in §
110.17(C).
   (D)   Application for renewal of license must be received prior to the
expiration date of any license currently held by the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 110.22) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 97-O-1615, passed
9-3-1997; Ord. 24-O- 2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 110.23 DUPLICATE LICENSE; FEE.
   A duplicate license or special permit shall be issued by the City Clerk to
replace any license previously issued which has been lost, stolen, defaced or
destroyed for a fee as specified in the Business License Fees Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 110.23) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 21-O-2301, passed
5-19-2021; Ord. 24-O- 2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 110.24 LICENSE FEES; ESTABLISHED; DURATION; PRORATION; REFUND.
   (A)   License fees, application fees, late fees, inspection fees and non-
sufficient funds fees shall be in the amounts established in the Business
License Fees Ordinance. License fees shall include the licensure of all
approved signs and awnings described in the application.
   (B)   Each business license shall be valid until the end of the city's
fiscal year, which is April 30. The full license fee is due regardless of when
it is purchased, and will not be prorated. If the license fee is not paid prior
to May 1, a late fee as specified in the Business License Fees Ordinance will
apply.
   (C)   No rebate or refund of any license fee shall be made because of
discontinuance, failure or other occupational interruption of any business.
   (D)   All businesses under the jurisdiction of this chapter shall have a
separate license for each applicable business and shall pay the required fee.
   (E)   In the absence of provisions to the contrary all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor
is made to the City Clerk. Except as otherwise provided, all license fees shall
become a part of the corporate fund.
   (F)   For businesses requiring a health inspection before issuance of a
license, such business shall pay the inspection fee and any reinspection fees
as may be required, as specified in the Business License Fees Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 110.24) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 92-O-1432, passed
3-18-1992; Ord. 96-O-1588, passed 9-4-1996; Ord. 97-O-1615, passed 9-3-1997;
Ord. 00-O-1696, passed 6-7-2000; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see
§
110.99
§ 110.25 LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE.
   Business license fees shall be as specified in The Business License Fees
Ordinance. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prevent the city
from negotiating business license fees with business owners as part of a
redevelopment agreement, ordinance, resolution or other action.
(Prior Code, § 110.25) (Ord. 92-O-1432, passed 3-18-1992; Ord. 92-O-1437,
passed 5-6-1992; Ord. 99-O-1673, passed 4-7-1999; Ord. 00-O-1695, passed 3-15-
2000; Ord. 04-O-1797, passed 4-21-2004; Ord. 08-O-911, passed 4-2-2008; Ord.
08-O-1912, passed 4-2-2008; Ord. 21-O-2320, passed 12-1-2021; Ord. 24-O-2388,
passed 5-15-2024)
§ 110.26 CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   Each license issued under this chapter shall state upon its face the
following:
   (A)   The dates of expiration thereof; and
   (B)   The license number.
(Prior Code, § 110.26) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.27 POSTING LICENSE.
   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the
city to keep his or her license posted in a prominent place on the premises
used for such business at all times. Nothing herein shall prevent the Mayor or
his or her duly authorized representative from removing any license,
certificate, plate or sticker from the possession of a former licensee, his or
her premises, any vehicle or any machine when said license has been revoked
under the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 110.27) (Ord. 92-O-1432, passed 3-18-1992; Ord. 24-O-2388,
passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.28 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   In the absence of any provisions to the contrary, the location of any
licensed business may be changed to another location within the city if all of
the following requirements are met:
   (A)   Advanced written notice is given to the Building and Housing
Department;
   (B)   The new premises comply with this code;
   (C)   The City Council approves the change of location; and
   (D)   Any additional fees which may be required because of the change in
location are paid to the city.
(Prior Code, § 110.28) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 92-O-1432, passed
3-18-1992; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 110.29 RECORDS AND BOOKS TO BE KEPT.
   Any person licensed under this chapter shall keep all records and books
necessary to the computation of his or her license fee or any applicable taxes
and to the enforcement of this title.
(Prior Code, § 110.29) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.30 TRANSFERENCE OF LICENSE.
   No person, to whom a license or permit is issued by the city, may assign or
transfer such license. Transfer includes, but is not limited to, between
another location, another business, another owner, or another device, vehicle
or machine.
(Prior Code, § 110.30) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.31 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   Every licensee under this chapter shall do the following:
   (A)   Permit all reasonable inspections and investigations of his or her
business and business property which are reasonably necessary to secure
compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violation thereof;
   (B)   Admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any official
employee of the city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at
any reasonable time that admission is requested;
   (C)   Immediately contact law enforcement upon the discovery of potential
criminal activity upon or in the vicinity of the premises;
   (D)   Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws and regulations
applicable to such licensed business;
   (E)   Refrain from operating the licensed businesses on premises after
expiration of his license and during the period his or her license is revoked
or suspended;
   (F)   Pay all taxes, including real estate taxes, fines and fees due to any
state or local government entity;
   (G)   Comply with all applicable ordinances and regulations relating to the
conduct of the licensed business; and
   (H)   Maintain their business premises, property and goods in a sanitary
condition. Unsanitary conditions are deemed to exist if goods or food are not
securely protected from dust, dirt, flies or other injurious contamination or
if refuse, dirt, or other waste products are allowed to accumulate, or if
containers or other apparatus are not kept clean, or if adequate bathroom
facilities, soap and clean towels are not provided for employees.
(Prior Code, § 110.31) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 93-O-1478, passed
9-15-1993; Ord. 97-O-1615, passed 9-3-1997; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.32 TERMINATION OF LICENSES.
   All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal year of
the city. The Building and Housing Department shall mail to all licensees of
the city an invoice for the license held by the licensee, if annual, three
weeks prior to the date of such expiration; provided that, a failure to send
out such notice, or the failure of the licensee to receive it shall not excuse
the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor
shall it be a defense in an action for operation without a license.
(Prior Code, § 110.32) (Ord. 92-O-1432, passed 3-18-1992; Ord. 24-O-2388,
passed 5-15-2024)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 110.45 AUTHORITY TO ENFORCE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specified in this code, it shall be the duty of the
Mayor, or his or her designee, to administer and enforce the terms and
provisions of this title.
   (B)   The city may enforce the provisions of this title by filing an action
in the County Circuit Court. Without otherwise limiting the foregoing, the city
may bring an action to collect payment of unpaid fees or to compel the licensee
to take actions to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Provisions may
further be enforced through local adjudication or any other manner provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 110.40) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.46 INVESTIGATIONS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall cause to be made all investigations reasonably
necessary to the enforcement of this title.
   (B)   The Mayor shall have the authority to order the inspection of
licensees, their businesses and premises, by all city officials having duties
to perform with reference to such licensee or businesses.
   (C)   All police officers shall inspect and examine businesses located
within their respective jurisdictions or beats to enforce compliance with this
chapter.
   (D)   Any person may file a written complaint with the Building and Housing
Department regarding the conduct of any business within the city. The Director
of Building and Housing or his or her designee shall investigate all complaints
and notify the business of the complaint and may conduct a meeting on the
matter. If the Director determines that any provision of this title has been
violated, he or she shall take any further action consistent with the
provisions of this title and may also refer the matter to the Police Department
or City Council.
(Prior Code, § 110.41) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 92-O-1432, passed
3-18-1992; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.47 RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION; REPORTS.
   (A)   All persons authorized in this chapter to inspect licensees and
businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without a search warrant,
at all reasonable times, the following premises:
      (1)   Those commercial properties for which a license is required;
      (2)   Those for which a license was issued and which, at the time of
inspection, are operating under such license; and
      (3)   Those for which the license has been revoked or suspended.
   (B)   Persons inspecting licensees, their businesses or premises, shall
report all violations of this chapter or of other laws or ordinances to the
Mayor and shall submit such other reports as the Mayor shall order.
(Prior Code, § 110.42) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.48 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF BUSINESS LICENSES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall have the authority to suspend, revoke or fine a
licensee after notice and a hearing in the matter set forth herein. This
section shall apply to all licenses issued under Title XI of this code, unless
otherwise specified.
   (B)   A business license may be revoked or suspended for any of the
following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for the business license or any renewal thereof;
      (2)   Fraud, deceptive practices, misrepresentation, or false statement
made in the course of carrying on the business;
      (3)   Any violation of federal law, state law or city ordinance with
respect to the operation of the business or the condition of the business
premises;
      (4)   Conviction of the licensee, operator or manager of any crime,
felony or misdemeanor committed on the business premises, including, but not
limited to, pornography, prostitution, gambling. illegal possession or
distribution of drugs or cannabis, or bribery of a governmental official;
      (5)   Conviction of any customer of any crime, felony or misdemeanor
committed on the business premises with the sufferance or permission of the
licensee, operator or manager, including, but not limited to, pornography,
prostitution, gambling, illegal possession or distribution of drugs or
cannabis, or bribery of a governmental official;
      (6)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as
to constitute a nuisance or breach of the peace or menace to the health, safety
or general welfare of the public;
      (7)   Failure of the business licensee to pay any fine, tax or penalty
owing to the city;
      (8)   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any interference
with a duly authorized city officer or employee while in the performance of his
duties in making such inspections in the manner provided by law;
      (9)   Failure to pass any inspection or investigation, as evidenced by a
written report of the inspector or investigator;
      (10)   Engaging in a business activity without first securing a license
therefor;
      (11)   Providing false or misleading statements in any application to the
city; or
      (12)   The making of false promises through advertising, salespersons
and/or agents or other misrepresentations or deceptive practices.
   (C)   The Mayor shall provide notice in writing, setting forth the basis of
the complaint and the time and place of hearing. Notice shall be mailed to the
licensee at its last known address at least five days in advance of hearing.
   (D)   The hearing shall be held before an administrative hearing officer
appointed by the city. The burden of proof is upon the city to prove by a
preponderance of evidence that the alleged violation(s) occurred. The city
attorney shall present the case on behalf of the city.
   (E)   Parties may be represented by counsel, present witnesses and evidence
and cross examine witnesses. Parties may request the Hearing Officer to issue
subpoenas directing the attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses and the
production of relevant documents. The formal and technical rules of evidence do
not apply. Evidence may be admitted if it is of a type commonly relied upon by
reasonable prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs.
   (F)   The Hearing Officer shall issue its written findings and
recommendations, which may include a fine, suspension or revocation of the
business license.
   (G)   The Mayor shall review the recommendation of the hearing officer and
issue final action, which shall be a final order subject to administrative
review.
   (H)   The owners, managers, and affiliates of a business that has had its
license suspended or revoked, may not apply for a new business license for 12
months after the effective date of the suspension or revocation unless approval
is granted by the Mayor.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 110.49 SUMMARY ACTION.
   The Mayor shall have the authority to summarily suspend a business license
where there is reason to believe that any continued operation of any licensed
business poses a threat to the welfare of the community. The Mayor shall issue
a written notice stating the reasons for this conclusion and order a licensed
business to cease operations for not more than seven days. The notice shall be
sent to the premises and shall specify the date and time for a hearing, to be
held no more than seven days from the date of the notice.
(Prior Code, § 110.44) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.50 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Mayor shall have the right
to appeal to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk
within ten days following the effective date of the action or decision
complained of.
   (B)   Such appeal shall set out a copy of the order or decision appealed
from and shall include a statement of the facts relied upon to avoid such
order.
   (C)   The Council shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal and
shall personally serve a written notice, as provided in this chapter, upon the
appellant informing him or her thereof. The Council shall also give such notice
to the Mayor and such officer shall be entitled to appear and defend such
order.
   (D)   The findings of the Council shall be final and conclusive and shall be
personally served or mailed to the appellant as required in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 110.45) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.51 LIABILITY OF VIOLATOR.
   (A)   The amount of any unpaid fee, the payment of which is required under
this title, shall constitute a debt due to the city.
   (B)   An attorney for the city may, at the direction of the Mayor, institute
civil suit in the name of the city to recover any such unpaid fee.
   (C)   No civil judgment, or any act by a city attorney, the Mayor or the
violator shall bar or prevent a criminal prosecution.
(Prior Code, § 110.46) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise stated, the following penalties shall apply to all chapters
in this Title XI:
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this title
may be punished by imposition of a fine of not less than $50, nor more than
$750, for each offense.
   (B)   A separate offense is deemed to have been committed on each day during
which or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (C)   Persons, firms or corporations which have violated the terms and
provisions of this title by operating either directly or indirectly without
having first secured the required license, but who, prior to the institution of
judicial proceedings to enforce the provisions of this title, applies for said
license, shall be charged an administrative fee in a sum equal to the fee for
the license applied for. Said administrative fee shall be in lieu of any fine
which might have been imposed by a court of competent jurisdiction in which
enforcement of the provisions of this title may have otherwise been sought.
   (D)   The imposition of a fine as stated herein shall not foreclose the
ability of the city to revoke or suspend a business license or to seek any
other remedy allowable by law or equity.
(Prior Code, § 110.99) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 84-O-1161, passed
12-17-1984; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
CHAPTER 111: ADVERTISING
Section
   
111.01   Reserved
Billboards
   
111.15   Definition
   
111.16   License required
   
111.17   Regulations
   
111.18   Insurance requirements
§ 111.01 RESERVED.
BILLBOARDS
§ 111.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BILLBOARD. Any sign with an advertising surface measuring ten feet or more
in length, width, height or along any single dimension.
(Prior Code, § 111.10) (Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 111.16 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a billboard or freestanding
sign without obtaining an annual license from the Building and Housing
Department. The fee for billboards shall be according to square footage and
specified in the Business License Fees Ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 111.11) (Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 111.17 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Construction and erection of billboards and freestanding signs shall
require a building permit as specified in this code.
   (B)   All billboards and freestanding signs shall comply with the standards
set forth in the building code, zoning code and other applicable ordinances of
the city.
   (C)   All billboards must be maintained in a state of good repair. When the
Building and Housing Department or authorized city official believes that a
sign is dangerous, unsafe, has become a public nuisance, has been an abandoned
or has been constructed, erected or maintained in violation of provisions of
this chapter, they shall contact the owner of the sign in writing at the
address listed on the application and request that the problem be repaired or
corrected. If the owner has not appealed the official's determination to the
City Council or corrected the problem(s) set forth within 14 days of the date
of the written notice, the city shall arrange for removal of any such sign and
bill the license holder or owner of the property on which it is located for all
costs of such removal. If, however, the Building and Housing Department
believes the health, safety or welfare of the citizens is immediately
endangered by any violation of this chapter, then the Building Department may
immediately revoke any license hereunder and summarily remove the sign without
notice.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 111.18 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
maintaining a sign shall provide evidence of public liability insurance that
protects against claims or judgments in the amount of at least $100,000 and
property damage insurance in the amount of at least $20,000 with an insurance
company qualified to write such insurance under the laws of the state.
   (B)   Said insurance shall be in force once the sign has been erected. Said
person shall present evidence at least once each year that said insurance is
still in effect. The evidence of insurance shall be held by the Building and
Housing Department.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 112: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Section
General Provisions
   
112.001   Definitions
   
112.002   Liquor Control Commissioner
   
112.003   State Liquor Control Law adopted
   
112.004   Reporting incidents
   
112.005   Record review/appeal
Licensing Regulations
   
112.015   License required
   
112.016   License application
   
112.017   Persons ineligible for license
   
112.018   License classifications, sale hours and fees
   
112.019   License restrictions
   
112.020   License period
   
112.021   Hearing on new applications
   
112.022   License issuance
   
112.023   Number of licenses
   
112.024   Transfer of licenses
   
112.025   Revocation, suspension or fines
Conditions and Standards
   
112.040   Peddling
   
112.041   Sanitary conditions
   
112.042   Employees
   
112.043   Access from premises to dwelling quarters
   
112.044   Location restrictions
   
112.045   Unlawful hours of operation/sale hours
   
112.046   Sales on election day
   
112.047   Views not restricted
   
112.048   Sales restricted
   
112.049   Sales on credit; club and hotel exceptions
   
112.050   No refills
   
112.051   Displaying license
   
112.052   Motor vehicles
   
112.053   Use of certain words prohibited
   
112.054   Municipal buildings
   
112.055   Inspections
   
112.056   Minimum size containers
   
112.057   Insurance required
   
112.058   Changes to licensee’s business
   
112.059   Responsibility of owner
   
112.060   Acts of agents or employees
   
112.061   Unlawful sales
   
112.062   BASSET training programs
Video Surveillance Systems
   
112.075   Definitions
   
112.076   System required
   
112.077   System standards
   
112.078   Installation deadlines
   
112.079   Inspections
   
112.080   Violations
 
   
112.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes the four varieties of liquor hereinabove defined,
namely, "alcohol", "spirits", "wine" and "beer", and every liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and capable of being
consumed as a beverage by a human being.
   BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grains, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, larger beer, porter and the like.
   CLUB. A group of persons who have associated themselves or a corporation
organized and operated under the laws of the state, not for pecuniary profit,
solely for the promotion of some common object of national or statewide social,
patriotic, recreational, benevolent or like purpose other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquors; which has been in active and continuous
existence for at least one year and having a membership roll of members with
dues requirements; and kept, used and maintained by its members through the
payment of dues, and owning or leasing a building or space in a building for
the use of its members provided with a suitable and adequate kitchen and dining
room for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and their guests.
   ENTERTAINMENT. The offering of any music, singing, vaudeville, dramatic act
or skit, monologue, dialogue, exhibition of magic or other skill, dancing or
contest of any nature, whether by personal performance or by mechanical
reproduction, other than radio, television, record player and coin-operated
device known as a "juke box".
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead
or other receptacle or container, whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed
and labeled by the manufacturer of alcoholic liquor, to contain and to convey
any alcoholic liquor.
   RESTAURANT. A public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public as a place which primarily serves meals prepared in the kitchen
of the establishment and having a seating capacity for the service of meals at
tables or counters for not less than 25 patrons.
   RETAILER. A person who sells or offers for sale alcoholic liquor for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by any means
whatsoever for a consideration, and includes and means all sales made by any
person, whether principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
   SELL AT RETAIL and SALE AT RETAIL. Refer to and mean sales for use or
consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation mixed
with water or other substance in solution and includes brandy, rum, whiskey,
gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances.
   TO SELL. Include to keep or expose for sale and to keep with the intent to
sell.
   WINE. Any alcohol beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including such beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.002 LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor of the city shall be Liquor Control Commissioner and
shall be charged with the administration of this chapter.
      (2)   He or she shall receive an annual salary as the City Council
determines from time to time.
   (B)   The Liquor Control Commissioner shall have the power:
      (1)   To grant and revoke for cause all licenses issued pursuant to this
chapter;
      (2)   To enter, or to authorize any law enforcing official to enter, at
any time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated and at such time to examine said
premises of said licensee;
      (3)   To receive a complaint from any citizen of the city that any of the
provisions of this chapter have been or are being violated and to take such
action as to him or her shall seem necessary or advisable;
      (4)   To receive license fees and pay the same forthwith to the City
Treasurer;
      (5)   To make rules and regulations to further carry into effect the
provisions and purposes of this chapter;
      (6)   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for
a license or for a renewal thereof, and to examine, or cause to be examined,
the books and records of any such applicant or licensee; to hear testimony and
take proof for his or her information in the performance of his or her duties,
and for such purpose issue subpoenas which shall be limited to the information
desired by the Liquor Control Commissioner under this section. He or she may
authorize his or her agent to act on his or her behalf; and
      (7)   (a)   To appoint a person or persons to assist him or her in the
exercise of the powers and performance of his or her duties.
         (b)   Said persons so appointed shall make periodic inspections of
premises licensed under the terms of this chapter and shall submit to the
Liquor Control Commissioner monthly confidential reports, in writing, of their
activities.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.003 STATE LIQUOR CONTROL LAW ADOPTED.
   All provisions of the act known as the "Illinois Liquor Control Law", as
passed by the legislature and approved on 1-31-1934, and all amendments
thereto, are hereby made a part of this chapter, being specifically
incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof as though fully set
forth.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.004 REPORTING INCIDENTS.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of each licensee and each of his or her
agents and employees to promptly report to the city's Police Department any
crime or illegal activity occurring on or about the licensed premises and in
his or her knowledge or view.
      (2)   No licensee or his or her agents or employees shall withhold
information or fail to aid police in their investigation.
   (B)   Each licensee shall maintain on each licensed premises at least one
telephone in operating order which phone shall be easily accessible to
ownership, management, employees or other responsible person in charge of the
premises at all times for the purpose or reporting incidents occurring on or
about the licensed premises to the city's Police Department.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.005 RECORD REVIEW/APPEAL.
   (A)   Record review. All review or appeal of the actions or orders of the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be made by the Illinois Liquor Control
Commission on the official record made before the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
   (B)   Record costs and filing. In accordance with the Illinois Liquor
Control Act, the certified official record and required copies shall only be
filed by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner with the Illinois Liquor Control
Commission after payment is received from the licensee for the cost of the
transcript and copies.
(Ord. 19-O-2226, passed 4-3-2019; Ord. 19-O-2245, passed 12-18-2019; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15-2024)
LICENSING REGULATIONS
§ 112.015 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the city without having a retail liquor dealer's license or in
violation of the terms of such license.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.016 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   Applications for licenses required by this chapter shall be made to the
Liquor Control Commissioner, in writing, on forms provided by the city, signed
by the applicant if any individual, or if a corporation, partnership or limited
liability company, by a duly authorized agent thereof, verified by oath or
affidavit. All applications for a retail liquor license hereunder shall be
accompanied by the deposit of a check, money order, or cash in the full amount
of the application fee required to be paid for the classification of license
applied for pursuant to §
112.018 of this chapter. All applications for a liquor license must contain the
following information as well as any other information requested on the
application:
   (A)   The name, date of birth, driver’s license, and homeaddress of the
applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of co-partnership, the same
information required of individuals for all persons entitled to share in the
profits thereof; and, in the case of a corporation, for profit or a club, a
summary of its activities during the past year, and the aforesaid information
for each of the officers, directors, all persons owning directly or
beneficially more than 5% of the stock of such corporation, the general manager
(s) and the person(s) operating as liquore manager(s) of the premises; and in
the case of a limited liability company, the date of organization, the purposes
for which it was organized, a summary of its activities during the past year,
and the aforesaid information for eah of the managers and members owning
directly or beneficially more than 5% of the ownership of the company and the
person operating as manager of the premises;
   (B)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth; and, if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization;
   (C)   The character of business of the applicant; and, in the case of a
corporation, the purposes for which it was formed;
   (D)   The length of time that such applicant has been in business of that
character or, in the case of a corporation, the date of incorporation;
   (E)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license;
   (F)   A statement whether the applicant has made similar application for a
similar license on premises other than described in the application and the
disposition of such application.
   (G)   A statement that the applicant is not unqualified to receive a liquor
license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter, laws of
this state, or the ordinances of the city, and a statement as to whether the
applicant has ever been convicted of a felony;
   (H)   Whether a previous license issued by any licensing authority, has been
revoked and the reasons therefor;
   (I)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the
state or of the United States or any ordinances of the city in the conduct of
the applicant’s business; and
   (J)   A statement describing the specific procedures to be enacted by the
applicant to monitor operations to ensure no incidence of underage drinking;
   (K)   A completed fingerprint card from each general partner, sole
proprietor, general manager and liquor manager: and any officer of a
corporation or limited liability company who owns either directly or indirectly
more than 5% of the outstanding shares of any class of the capital stock of
said corporation or more than 5% ownership interest of said limited liability
company. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this subsection,
a person named herein is not required to submit a fingerprint card to the city
if the city already has a fingerprint card on file for that person:
   (L)   For Class A, D, E, F, H liquor license applications, the applicant
must provide photocopies of certificates of completion of a Basset Program for
the managers of liquor sales, security personnel, bartenders, servers and
anyone whose job description includes the checking of identification for the
purchase of alcoholic liquor for the licensed premises;
   (M)   Such other and further information as the Liquor Control Commissioner
may, by rule or regulation not inconsistent with the law, prescribe or require.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024; Ord. 24-O-
2395, passed 9-18-2024)
§ 112.017 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   No license shall be issued under this chapter to:
   (A)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community;
   (C)   A person who is indebted or obligated in any manner to the city,
except for current taxes. This includes, but is not limited to, fees, costs,
fines, penalties or back taxes;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, if the Local Liquor Commissioner determines, after investigation, that
such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public
trust;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being a keeper of, or is keeping, a
house of ill-fame;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crimes of
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   (G)   A person whose license issued pursuant to the Liquor Control Act,
being 355 ILCS 5 or this chapter has been revoked for cause;
   (H)   A person, who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon an original
application;
   (I)   A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such copartnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license;
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, director or manager thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the city;
   (K)   A corporation unless it is incorporated in the state, or unless it is
a foreign corporation which is qualified under the state's Business Corporation
Act to transact business in the state;
   (L)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless such manager of agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee;
   (M)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor
subsequent to the passage of the Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/1-1 et al., or
person who has forfeited his or her bond to appear in court to answer charges
for any such violation;
   (N)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;
   (O)   Any law enforcing public official, the Mayor or any member of the City
Council; and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly
or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
   (P)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   (Q)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
720 ILCS 5/28-1 or as proscribed by 720 ILCS 5/28-3 or as proscribed by a
statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions;
   (R)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period;
   (S)   A co-partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal Government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device
stamp or federal wagering stamp by the Federal Government for the current tax
period;
   (T)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 20% of the stock of such
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp for the current tax period; and/or
   (U)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the Federal Government for the current tax
period.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.018 LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS, SALE HOURS AND FEES.
   (A)   The license classifications, sale hours, and fees shall be as follows.
      (1)   A Class "A" license shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor to be consumed on the specified premises and shall authorize the
furnishing of entertainment on said premises. Alcoholic liquor shall only be
sold Monday through Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m and 2:00 a.m. and
Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. (Example: lounge, tavern,
bar).
      (2)   A Class "B" license shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor on the specified premises in unopened packages but shall not permit
consumption thereon or adjacent thereto and shall not authorize any
entertainment on said premises. Alcoholic liquor shall be the sole or principal
merchandise sold on said premises and shall only be sold Monday through
Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m and 12:00 a.m. the following morning and
Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and until 12:00 a.m. Monday morning.
(Example: liquor store.)
      (3)   A Class "C" license shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor on the specified premises in unopened packages, but shall not permit
consumption thereon or adjacent thereto and shall not authorize any
entertainment on said premises. Alcoholic liquor shall not be the sole or
principal merchandise sold on said premises and shall only be sold Monday
through Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m and 1:00 a.m. the following
morning and Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m. Monday morning
(Example: gas station, grocery store, or drug store).
      (4)   A Class "D" license shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor to be consumed on the specified premises only in conjunction with a duly
licensed restaurant business and shall authorize the furnishing of
entertainment on said premises. For purposes of this license, restaurant shall
have the meaning and the requirements of the Illinois Liquor Control Act 235
ILCS 5/6-25 and 235 ILCS 5/1-3.23, as amended. No Class “D” licensee shall sell
alcoholic liquor except with meals. Alcoholic liquor shall only be sold Monday
through Saturday between the hours 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. the following
morning and on Sundays from 12:00 p.m. until 1:00 a.m. Monday morning.
(Example: Restaurant, diner.)
      (5)   A Class "E" license shall authorize the sale at retail of certain
alcoholic liquors, beer and wine only to be consumed on the specified premises
only in conjunction with a video gaming business, as defined by the Illinois
Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., which has cafe/diner food service, as
licensed and approved provided by this code, and shall authorize the furnishing
of entertainment on said premises. Alcoholic liquor shall not be the sole or
principal merchandise sold on said premises and shall only be sold Monday
through Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. and Sunday
between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m. (Example: video gaming cafe or
bistro).
      (6)   A Class "F" license shall authorize the sale at retail of alcoholic
liquor to be consumed within the established location of a 501(c)(3) not for
profit charitable club by the members thereof and shall authorize the
furnishing of entertainment at said location. For said license, alcoholic
liquor shall not be the sole or principal merchandise sold on said premises and
shall only be sold Monday through Saturday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
1:00 a.m. and Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 1:00 a.m. (Example:
Veterans of Foreign Wars and American Legion Post.)
      (7)   A Class "G" license shall be a temporary permit that shall be
issued for not more than 24 hours at one time, which shall authorize the
service and/or sale at retail of alcoholic liquor to be consumed on the
specified premises only Friday and Saturday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and
10:00 p.m. and Sunday between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. No Class
“G” license shall be issued for more than seven consecutive days. The Liquor
Control Commissioner may waive payment of the Class “G” per diem fee when, in
his or her discretion, such waiver will best serve the public, charitable or
eleemosynary purpose of the sponsoring organization.
      (8)   A Class "H" license shall authorize the sale at retail of beer and
wine at a video gaming cafe/bistro inside of a licensed hotel. Beer and wine
shall only be drawn, poured, mixed at the bar located in the video gaming cafe
and consumed in the video gaming cafe or bistro which has cafe/diner food
service, as licensed and approved provided by this code and is located in a
separate room inside of the hotel. The liquor sales and consumption of same
shall only be permitted inside the room housing the video gaming business, as
defined by the Illinois Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., as licensed
and approved provided by this code. Liquor sales may occur 24 hours a day.
   (B)   License fees.
      (1)   License fees shall be specified in the Business License Fees
Ordinance. Payment of license fees required by this chapter shall be paid to
the Liquor Control Commissioner, or to such other person as he or she may
designate, who shall issue a receipt.
      (2)   An application fee as specified in the Business License Fees
Ordinance for a new license hearing shall be paid at the time of filing the
application; except that, where six months or less remain in any license year,
a new applicant for license hereunder shall pay one-half the annual fee. All
new applicants for licenses, except an applicant for a Class "G" license, shall
pay upon application for license a publication and public hearing fee in the
amount indicated in the Business License Fee Ordinance. In the event the
license applied for is denied, the license fee only shall be returned to the
applicant. If the initial hearing must be rescheduled due to the failure of the
applicant to appear, there will be an additional fee assessed in the amount
indicated in the Business License Fee Ordinance.
      (3)   An application for renewal, accompanied with the full annual fee,
must be submitted prior to the start of the fiscal year for which the license
renewal is sought.
      (4)   There shall be no rebate for the unexpired term of a license.
      (5)   All fees assessed hereunder shall be in addition to any other fee
or fees for business licenses or other licenses or permit fees required by city
ordinances.
      (6)   No license shall be issued unless all fees including outstanding
assessed fines and costs have been paid.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 19-O-2245, passed 12-18-2019; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15- 2024; Ord. 24-O-2395, passed 9-18-2024)
§ 112.019 LICENSE RESTRICTIONS.
   The licenses enumerated in §
112.018(A) of this chapter shall be subject to the following restrictions.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his or her manager, or any
other person in charge of licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is offered
for sale or consumption on the premises to engage, employ or permit any person
to solicit for regard of compensation any patron or customer thereof to
purchase alcoholic or non-alcoholic liquor for such person, such patron or
customer or any other person therein; however, nothing herein contained shall
prohibit any adult manager, waitress or bartender who shall be regularly
employed therein from accepting and serving the order of a patron or customer
in the regular course of employment as such manager, waitress or bartender.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any agent, employee, entertainer, host,
hostess, waiter, waitress or performer employed on any contractual basis
working in a licensed establishment to:
      (1)   Solicit, beg, induce or request any person, customer or visitor in
such licensed establishment to purchase any alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverage
solicited for himself, herself or any other person; and/or
      (2)   Accept from any person, customer or visitor in such licensed
establishment any alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverage solicited for himself,
herself or any other person.
   (C)   No holder of any license heretofore or hereafter issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall keep or maintain a house of ill-fame or place
for the practice of prostitution or lewdness, or to the encouragement of
idleness, gaming excessive drinking, fornication or other misbehavior or a
common, ill-governed and disorderly place of business.
   (D)   The holder of any license heretofore or hereafter issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall at all times allow representatives of the
Police, Fire, Building, Electrical, License and Health Departments to inspect
the licensed premises.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful:
      (1)   For any licensee, his or her agent, or employee, or manager
operating a licensed establishment at which alcoholic liquors are offered for
sale for consumption on the licensed premises:
         (a)   To permit any female person, while on the premises of that
establishment, to expose to public view that area of the human female breast at
or below the areola thereof;
         (b)   To permit any female person, while on the premises of that
establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the
appearance of or simulate those areas of the human female breast as described
in division (E)(l)(a) above;
         (c)   To permit any person, while on the premises of that
establishment, to expose to public view his or her genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage; and/or
         (d)   To permit any person, while on the premises of that
establishment, to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the
appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal
cleft or cleavage.
      (2)   For any female person, while on the premises of an establishment
licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, to expose to
public view that area of the human female breast at or below the areola
thereof, or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the
appearance of or simulate those areas of the human female breast as described
herein.
      (3)   For any person, while on the premises of an establishment licensed
to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises to expose to public
view his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage,
or to employ any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of
or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage.
      (4)   For any person, while on the premises of an establishment licensed
to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises to:
         (a)   Perform actual or simulated acts of sexual intercourse,
masturbation or deviant sexual conduct;
         (b)   Perform actual or simulated acts of touching, caressing, or
fondling of the genitals, buttocks or female breasts; and/or
         (c)   Display films or pictures depicting acts set forth in divisions
(E)( 4)(a) and (E)(4)(b) above.
      (5)   For any licensee, his or her agent, or employee, or manager to
suffer or permit any person or persons to perform any of the acts set forth in
this section.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.020 LICENSE PERIOD.
   All licenses issued, except Class “H”, under this chapter shall be for a
period of one year and shall expire on April 30 of each year.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.021 HEARING ON NEW APPLICATIONS.
   Upon receipt of an application for a Class "A", "B", "C", "D", "E", "F", "G"
or “H” liquor license from a new applicant or licensee changing ownership as
depicted in §
112.058(A)(1), the Liquor Control Commissioner shall immediately advise the
Clerk of such application and the Clerk shall thereupon cause to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice that application has
been made for such license stating the name of the applicant and the street
number and location of the premises covered by such application, and notifying
all persons that any objection to the granting of the license may be made to
the Liquor Control Commissioner, in writing, signed by the objector within five
days after the publication and stating specifically the grounds of his or her
objection. The notice of publication shall further set forth the date, time and
place relating to public hearing of the application for the liquor license and
such objections thereto that may be filed in conformity herewith. No license
shall be issued prior to the expiration of six days after the publication
notice. Any public hearing on license applications or on objections filed
thereto shall be presided over by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024; Ord. 24-O-
2395, passed 9-18-2024)
§ 112.022 LICENSE ISSUANCE.
   Upon approval of the Liquor Control Commissioner and the payment of the
required license fee, the City Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license to
retail intoxicating liquors under the provisions of this chapter, indicating
the classification under which such license is issued, the term for which such
license was granted, the name of the license and the location of the premises.
Said license shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City Clerk.
Licenses issued hereunder shall apply only to the premises described in the
license issued thereon and only one location shall be described in each
license.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.023 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   At no time shall the Liquor Control Commissioner issue more licenses than
indicated below for each classification:
Class Permitted Number of Liquor Licenses
Class   Permitted Number of Liquor Licenses
Class A 3
Class B 2
Class C 11
Class D 5
Class E 8
Class F 1
Class G No limit
Class H 1
 
   Once a liquor license is revoked or non-renewed, the permitted number of
licenses enumerated above will be reduced accordingly and no new liquor license
shall be issued if the total number of liquor licenses exceeds the permitted
number of liquor licenses.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 19-O-2245, passed 12-18-2019; Ord. 20-O-
2287, passed 10-21-2020; Ord. 21-O-2311, passed 9-15-2021; Ord. 22-O-2326,
passed 3-2-2022; Ord. 22-O-2335, passed 8-17-2022; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-
2024; Ord. 24-O-2395, passed 9-18-2024)
§ 112.024 TRANSFER OF LICENSES.
   (A)   A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for a period not
to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as provided in this
chapter, and shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall cease upon the death of the licensee and shall
not descend by the laws of the testate or interstate devolution; provided that,
executors or administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the
trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in
part of alcoholic liquor under the order of the appropriate court, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after
the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy, until the
expiration of such license, but not longer than six months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such license. A refund shall be made of that
portion of the license fee paid for any period in which the licensee shall be
prevented from operating under the license in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration thereof;
provided, he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for
which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and,
provided further that, the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall, in any case, prevent the City Council
from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.025 REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR FINES.
   (A)   Any license issued by the Local Liquor Control Commission may be
revoked or suspended, and any licensee may be fined, if the Local Liquor
Control Commission determines that the licensee has violated any of the
following provisions:
      (1)   The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter,
any state law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, or any applicable
rules or regulations established by the Local Liquor Control Commission or the
State Commission;
      (2)   The licensee has violated any law of the state, any ordinances of
the county or any ordinance of the city, which violation occurred as part of
the operation of the licensee's business or upon the licensed premises or
adjacent premises; and
      (3)   The licensee is more than 45 days delinquent on the payment of any
debt to the city.
   (B)   No such license shall be so revoked or suspended, and no licensee
shall be fined, except after a public hearing by the Liquor Control Commission
in the manner hereinafter provided.
   (C)   License revocation and suspension hearings provided for hereunder
shall be conducted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner. All such hearings
shall be held after not less than a three-day written notice to the licensee,
served either personally, by posting on the premises, or by electronic or U.S.
Mail, affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and defend.
   (D)   A court reporter shall be present at all hearings and shall record all
proceedings. The cost of any copies of the record as transcribed by the court
reporter which are desired by a party to the proceedings shall be paid for by
that party.
   (E)   If the Liquor Control Commission has reason to believe that any
continued operation of a particular licensed premises will immediately threaten
the welfare of the community, they may, upon the issuance of a written order
stating the reason for such conclusions and without notice or hearing, order
the licensed premises closed for not more than seven days, giving the licensee
an opportunity to be heard during that period. If such licensee shall also be
engaged in the conduct of another business or businesses on the licensed
premises, such order shall not be applicable to other business or businesses.
However, this does not prohibit the issuance of a closure order pertaining to
that conduct of the portion of the business unrelated to liquor sales where
warranted and permitted by law.
   (F)   Upon the conclusion of any hearing, the Local Liquor Control
Commission shall issue written findings and an order with respect to the
evidence presented at the hearing. A copy of said findings and order shall be
sent within five days of the termination of the hearing:
      (1)   By registered or certified mail to the licensee;
      (2)   Personally served upon the licensee; or
      (3)   If the licensee is represented by legal counsel, service may be to
the licensee's legal counsel via electronic mail. If the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner determines that the licensee is guilty of any violation charged,
the order shall state the penalty to be imposed upon the licensee.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 19-O-2245, passed 12-18-2019; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15- 2024)
CONDITIONS AND STANDARDS
§ 112.040 PEDDLING.
   It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the city.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.041 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   All premises used for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor, including all
wash and toilet rooms thereon, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.042 EMPLOYEES.
   No licensee under this chapter shall employ any person who is afflicted with
or who is a carrier of any contagious, infectious or venereal disease. It shall
be unlawful for any person who is afflicted with or is a carrier of such
disease to work in or about the licensed premises or to engage in the handling,
preparation or sale of alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.043 ACCESS FROM PREMISES TO DWELLING QUARTERS.
   Except in case of hotels, motels and clubs, no alcoholic liquor shall be
sold at retail and no license issued upon any premises which has access which
leads from such premises to any other portion of the same building or structure
used for dwelling or lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept
accessible for use by the public. This provision shall not prevent any
connection between such premises and such other portion of the building or
structure which is used only by the licensee, his or her family and personal
guests.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.044 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, home for aged or
indigent persons or for veterans, their wives, husbands or children or any
military or naval station; provided that, this prohibition shall not apply to
hotels or motels offering restaurant service, regularly organized clubs or to
restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of alcoholic liquor is not
the principal business carried on, if such place of business so exempted shall
have been established for such purposes prior to the effective date of this
chapter; and, further provided that, this prohibition shall not apply to the
renewal of a license for the sale at retail of alcoholic liquor on premises
within 100 feet of any church where such church has been established within
said 100 feet since the issuance of the original license.
   (B)   No license shall be issued to any person for the sale at retail of any
alcoholic liquor at any store or other place of business where the majority of
customers are minors of school age or where the principal business transacted
consists of school books, school supplies, food, lunches or drinks for such
minors.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.045 UNLAWFUL HOURS OF OPERATION/SALE HOURS.
   (A)   Class A and B licenses.
      (1)   No establishment or licensee issued a Class A license shall be open
to the public between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through
Saturday and 2:00 a.m. and noon on Sunday. A Class B licensee shall not be open
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Monday through Saturday and
12:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. on Sunday. In addition to being in violation of this
code, any establishment issued a Class A or B license found to be operating
during the aforementioned prohibited times shall also constitute a public
nuisance. The city may take any action authorized by law to abate the nuisance.
It is additionally unlawful for a Class A licensee to sell, offer for sale at
retail, give away, or otherwise serve or permit the consumption of alcoholic
liquor except during the liquor sale hours depicted in §
112.018.
      (2)   No Class A or B licensee shall advertise or promote in any way,
whether within or outside of the licensed premises, hours of operations
prohibited by this section.
   (B)   Class C to G licenses.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for a Class C, D, E, F, or G licensee or
licensed establishment to sell, offer for sale at retail, give away, or
otherwise serve or permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor except during the
liquor sale hours depicted in §
112.018.
      (2)   No Class C, D, E, F, or G licensee or licensed establishment shall
advertise or promote in any way, whether within or outside of the licensed
premises, liquor sale hours prohibited by this section.
   (C)   General prohibitions. It shall be unlawful to keep open for business
or to admit the publication remain within, or to permit the consumption of
alcoholic liquor in or upon any premises in which alcoholic liquor is sold at
retail during the hours within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited;
provided, that in the case of clubs, restaurants, motels and hotels, such
establishments may be kept open for business during such hours, but no
alcoholic liquor may be sold to, or consumed by the public during such hours.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 19-O-2245, passed 12-18-2019; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15- 2024) Penalty, see §
112.999
§ 112.046 SALES ON ELECTION DAY.
   It is hereby declared to be the intent of the City Council to authorize the
sale and offering for sale of alcoholic beverages on the days of any national,
state, county or municipal election, including primary elections, insofar as
same are not prohibited by state law.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.047 VIEWS NOT RESTRICTED.
   On premises where the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption thereon is
licensed (other than a restaurant, hotel or club), no screen, blind, curtain,
partition article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors
of such licensed premises, nor inside such premises, which shall prevent a
clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or
sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction,
nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the
interior of such licensed premises which shall prevent a full view of the
entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms
where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously
lighted during business hours by natural light or artificial white light so
that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In
case the view of any such licensed premises required by the foregoing
provisions shall be willfully obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such
license shall be subject to revocation.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.048 SALES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent
or employee of such licensee shall sell or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person or to any person
known by him or her to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally
ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a retail liquor dealer's
license, or his or her agent or employee, to suffer or permit any person under
the age of 21 years to be or remain in any room or compartment adjoining or
adjacent to or situated in the room or place in which such licensed premises is
located; provided that, this division shall not apply to any person under 21
years of age who is accompanied by his or her parent or legal guardian or to
any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale of
service or commodities other than alcoholic liquor.
   (C)   Every licensed tavern, club, store or other place in the city where
alcoholic beverages are sold, given or delivered, shall display at all times in
a prominent place a printed card, sign or placard which shall be issued by the
City Clerk and shall read substantially as follows:
 
WARNING TO MINORS
YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UP TO $500.00, UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF
MARKHAM, IF YOU PURCHASE ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR, AND/OR MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE
PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR OBTAINING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
 
 
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years, to buy,
accept or receive alcoholic liquor in any tavern, club, store or other place in
the city licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years, who,
for the purpose of buying, accepting or receiving alcoholic liquor from a
licensee, his or her manager, agent or employees, to represent that he or she
is 21 years of age or over.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
enter, remain on, loiter or be present in any tavern, club, store or other
place in which such licensed premises is located; or in any room or compartment
adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place of such licensed
premises; provided, however, that, this division (F) shall not apply to any
person under the age of 21 years who is accompanied by his or her parent or
legal guardian, nor to any licensed premises which derives its principal
business from the sale of service or commodities other than alcoholic liquor.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.049 SALES ON CREDIT; CLUB AND HOTEL EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail to any person on
credit or on a pass book, or order on a store, or in exchange for any goods,
wares or merchandise, or in payment for any services rendered; and, if any
person shall extend credit for such purpose, the debt thereby attempted to be
created shall not be recoverable by law; provided that, nothing herein
contained shall be construed to prevent any club from permitting checks or
statements for alcoholic liquor to be signed by members or bona fide guests of
members and charged to the account of such member or guests in accordance with
the bylaws of said club; and, provided further that, nothing herein contained
shall be construed to prevent any hotel from permitting check or statements for
liquor to be signed by regular guest residing at said hotel and charged to
accounts of said guests.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.050 NO REFILLS.
   No licensee hereunder shall fill or refill, in whole or part, any original
package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any kind of alcoholic liquor; and
it shall be unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession for sale
at retail any bottles, casks or other containers containing alcoholic liquors,
except in the original packages.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.051 DISPLAYING LICENSE.
   Every licensee shall cause his or her license or licenses to be framed and
hung in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.052 MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person shall transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in or
upon or about any motor vehicle, except in the original package and with the
seal unbroken.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.053 USE OF CERTAIN WORDS PROHIBITED.
   No person licensed to sell alcoholic liquor shall use the words "saloon" or
"bar" in any sign or advertisement.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.054 MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.
   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold, offered for sale or delivered in any
building belonging to the city, except in compliance with state law.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.055 INSPECTIONS.
   In all premises on which alcohol is sold or offered for sale in the city,
there shall be periodic inspections and each licensee shall permit such
inspections at any and all times deemed necessary by the Liquor Control
Commissioner.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.056 MINIMUM SIZE CONTAINERS.
   No unmixed whiskey, unmixed rum or unmixed gin shall be sold or offered for
sale at retail for consumption on the premises, except in a container having a
minimum capacity of at least one fluid ounce and which contains at the time of
sale not less than one fluid ounce of the beverage being sold. No person
licensed to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the premises
shall use in such sales or possess on the premises any glass or other container
so constructed as to be deceptive in appearance or to mislead the consumer as
to its true capacity.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.057 INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   No license shall be issued hereunder unless the applicant shall file with
his, her or their annual application a certificate by an insurance company
authorized to do business in the state certifying the applicant has in force
and effect the insurance required by statute. Failure on the part of the
licensee, for any cause, to keep in full force and effect such insurance for
the full period for which a license has been issued or name the city as a
certificate holder on the applicant's certificate of liability insurance shall
constitute cause for revocation of such license.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.058 CHANGES TO LICENSEE’S BUSINESS.
   (A)   Change in ownership.
      (1)   The occurrence of any one or more of the following events shall be
deemed to constitute a change in ownership of licensed businesses for which a
new license shall be required:
         (a)   With respect to any licensee that is a corporation, or limited
liability company, the replacement or addition of any shareholder owning
directly or indirectly (including ownership by members of the same household)
20% or more of the outstanding shares of any class of the capital stock of said
corporation; provided that any sale or exchange of stock which results in a
change in controlling ownership under the bylaws of the corporation shall be
deemed to be a change of ownership hereunder regardless of the percentage of
actual sale or exchange;
         (b)   With respect to any licensee that is a general partnership, the
replacement or addition of any general partner;
         (c)   With respect to any licensee that is a limited partnership, the
replacement or addition of any general partner or of any limited partner
holding directly or indirectly (including ownership by members of the same
household) 20% or more interest in the earnings of said limited partnership;
         (d)   The operation of a licensed business by an unlicensed individual
or corporation under a management agreement which permits such unlicensed
individual or corporation to control and direct the operation of the business,
to retain all or a majority of the profits derived from such business, or to
utilize the privileges of the liquor license issued to another for such
business for any period in excess of 90 days. A management agreement shall not
be deemed to include a contract for employment between a licensee and an
individual manager or managers who operate the licensed business on behalf of
or at the discretion of the licensee; and/or
         (e)   At least 90 days prior to any of the events described in
division (A)(1) of this section as constituting a change of ownership, the
licensee shall apply for a new license pursuant to the application and hearing
requirements for new applicants, complete the city’s change of ownership form,
and submit documents requested on this form. The licensee or applicant shall
not conduct its business following any change of ownership as defined herein
until a new license has been issued. No license fee shall be required for the
new license. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall
constitute a violation of this chapter subjecting the licensee to the penalties
set forth in the section of this chapter, including denial, revocation or
suspension of the license.
      (2)   The occurrence of any one or more of the following events shall
constitute a change in ownership of licensed businesses for which a new license
shall be required, but shall not be subject to the application or hearing
requirements established in this chapter. However, a criminal background check
may be required of new owners. Within five business days following any change
described below, the licensee shall notify the Commissioner in writing using
the city’s change in corporate ownership form and shall provide the documents
requested on this form.
         (a)   With respect to any licensee that is a corporation, or limited
liability company, the replacement or addition of any officer or director of
said corporation or any shareholder owning directly or indirectly (including
ownership by members of the same household) less than 20% of the outstanding
shares of any class of the capital stock of said corporation; or
         (b)   With respect to any licensee that is a limited partnership, the
replacement or addition of any limited partner holding directly or indirectly
(including ownership of members of the same household) in less than 20%
interest in the earnings of said limited partnership.
      (3)   Within ten days of any change of liquor manager, general manager or
agent conducting business for the licensee, the licensee shall report such
change to the Commissioner. The liquor manager, general manager, and agent are
subject to the eligibility requirements for owners.
      (4)   Failure to give the notice required in divisions (A)(2) and (A)(3)
of this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter subjecting the
licensee to the penalties set forth in this chapter, including revocation or
suspension of the license. No additional license fee shall be payable for a new
license required by virtue of changes described in this paragraph and so long
as an application therefor is pending and not yet acted upon by the
Commissioner, the applicant may continue to conduct its business and operations
under the license in effect immediately prior to such changes.
   (B)   Change of location. A license issued under this chapter shall permit
the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises described in the application
for the license. Such location may be changed only upon written permission to
make such change issued by the Commissioner. No change of location shall be
permitted unless the proposed new location is a proper one for the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor under the laws of the state and under ordinances of the
city.
(Ord. 24-O-2395, passed 9-18-2024)
§ 112.059 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the license
derives the right to possession of such premises, or the agent of such owner or
person, shall knowingly permit the licensee to use said licensed premises in
violation of the terms of this chapter, said owner, agent or other person shall
be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter to the same extent as said
licensee and be subject to the same punishment.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.060 ACTS OF AGENTS OR EMPLOYEES.
   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager or other
agent or employee of any licensee, shall be deemed and held to be the act of
such employer or licensee, and said employer or licensee shall be punishable in
the same manner as if said act or omission had been done or omitted by him or
her personally.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.061 UNLAWFUL SALES.
   (A)   Limitations.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale at
the licensed premises alcoholic liquor prohibited from being sold by the
Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934 as amended, including but not limited to,
Happy Hour sale prohibitions identified in Section 6-28 of the Illinois Liquor
Control Act as amended (235 ILCS 5/6-28).
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any employee or agent of
any licensee, on licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is sold or offered
for sale for consumption thereon, to engage in any of the following practices:
         (a)   Sell, offer for sale, or deliver to any person or group of
persons a bottle of spirits as defined in Section 100 definitions or the
Illinois Liquor Control Act; or
         (b)   Sell or offer for sale containers (including, but not limited to
buckets, pitchers, carafes or bottles) of alcoholic liquor which exceed: (i) 64
ounces of beer; (ii) 800 ml of wine; or (iii) no more than two types of spirits
combined with non-alcoholic beverages or mixers (i.e. margaritas) in a 64 ounce
container shall be served in the single container for on-premise consumption.
Said container shall only be delivered to two or more persons of 21 years of
age or older, at one time.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, or any employee or agent of
any licensee, on any licensed premises where alcoholic liquor is sold or
offered for sale, to sell or offer for sale at retail for consumption off the
premises:
         (a)   Spirits as defined in Section 100 definitions or the Illinois
Liquor Control Act in an original container having a capacity of less than four
ounces; or
         (b)   Individual cans of beer, malt liquor, or wine in a container
with a capacity of 16 ounces or less.
      (4)   No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within
or outside of the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this
section.
      (5)   It is intended that the service of alcohol is merely an adjunct to
the meals offered at any restaurant and that the restaurant must not be
advertised or otherwise held out to be a drinking establishment.
   (B)   B.Y.O.B. prohibited. No establishment, store, restaurant, club, or
organization located in the city shall allow or permit patrons or members to
B.Y.O.B ("Bring Your Own Bottle") of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises of the establishment, restaurant, club, or organization.
(Ord. 19-O-2245, passed 12-18-2019; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.062 BASSET TRAINING PROGRAMS.
   (A)   On-premise liquor license holders shall be required to have all
employees or agents that serve, sell or distribute alcoholic liquor or whose
duties include the checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic
beverages and all beneficial owners, partners, shareholders, LLC members, sole
proprietors, and managers successfully complete a BASSET certified training
program and maintain a current effective certification while employed by,
contracted with, own or manage the licensed establishment. Employees/agents
must complete BASSET training within 120 days of hire. Beneficial owners,
partners, sole proprietors must complete BASSET training and have a current
BASSET certification when applying for a license or prior to renewal of a
license.
   (B)   Proof of educational training compliance. Prior to license issuance or
upon application for liquor license renewal, the licensee shall supply the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner a list of all beneficial owners, partners,
shareholders, LLC members, sole proprietors, managers, employees and agents who
serve, sell or distribute alcoholic liquor or whose duties includes the
checking of identification for the purchase of alcoholic beverages and a copy
of BASSET course completion certificate(s) of the certified training program
for same.
   (C)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this section may subject the
licensee to the penalties for violation, up to and including revocation of the
license.
(Ord. 19-O-2245, passed 12-18-2019; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
VIDEO SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS
§ 112.075 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Markham, Illinois.
   LIQUOR BUSINESS. Any establishment required to obtain a license from the
city for the sale of alcoholic liquor.
   VIDEO SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM. Digital surveillance system, including one or
more cameras, cabling, monitors and one or more digital video recorders that
records the activities of employees, customers and other persons who may come
onto or around the premises of a business establishment.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.076 SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   The following type of business establishment located within the city shall
install a video surveillance system: liquor business.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.077 SYSTEM STANDARDS.
   (A)   Any liquor business, as defined above, shall maintain a video
surveillance system capable of digitally recording and retrieving video images.
The cameras of the system must be kept in proper working order, equipped with a
timestamp set to the correct date and time and activated and recording video
during all hours of operation. The cameras shall record in color during periods
of sufficient light and automatically record in black and white when
insufficient light is present to record in color; have high enough quality
capabilities to capture and record facial-quality identification in normal or
daylight areas or environments as well as in low light or dimly lit areas or
environments; be enclosed in weather-proof and tamper-proof enclosures; and be
located in a position which prevents and reduces the possibility of vandalism.
   (B)   A digital video recorder shall be positioned to continuously record
clear and unobstructed exterior images being transmitted by cameras that shall
be located at each entrance and exit door and off-street parking areas utilized
by the liquor business. The digital video recorder shall have one dedicated
channel for each camera; record at least 15 frames per second for each camera;
have a minimum resolution of 640 by 480; have sufficient memory or shall record
onto media which retains the recorded data for a period of not less than 30
days; allow the viewing and retrieving of data while the system remains in
operation; have the ability to transfer the recorded images to a DVD-R in a
format playable on a standard DVD player; be configured to permit the city's
Police Department to access the live recorded images upon initiation of access
by the business owner, operator or employees during incidents requiring police
response or intervention if the digital video recorder is capable of being
accessed through the world wide web or other accessible wired or wireless
network; have a monitor that is accessible by the city's Police Department; be
configured to download saved images to an external device; be connected to a
dedicated power supply to prevent accidental deactivation; and be located in a
locked and secure location to prevent destruction or tampering.
   (C)   These cameras must also be capable of recording and storing the video
images for a length of time or no less than 30 days. The camera system must
also have the capabilities of downloading saved images to an employee trained
in the operation and downloading features of the system and must be able to
respond to the business as needed for video or image review or downloading. In
the event of an incident involving injury or death to a patron, member of the
public or employee of the establishment, video images recorded for the day of
and at the time of the incident shall be stored for a minimum of 30 days. Each
liquor business required to have cameras pursuant to this provision shall
prominently display signs on the premises to notify patrons of the presence and
use of video surveillance cameras.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.078 INSTALLATION DEADLINES.
   Any owner or operator of a business which has a liquor license shall install
and operate on its premises a video surveillance system that complies with this
subchapter, all city Building Code requirements and the city's code of
ordinances prior to opening for business.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.079 INSPECTIONS.
   The video surveillance system shall be subject to inspection by the city for
proper operations during normal business hours.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 112.080 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a business which has a
liquor license to do the following:
   (A)   Fail to install, on or before the date established for installation, a
video surveillance system that complies with this chapter;
   (B)   Following installation, fail to maintain a video surveillance system
in compliance with this chapter;
   (C)   Fail to allow any authorized city inspector to inspect the video
surveillance system;
   (D)   Fail to provide to any law enforcement officer of the city, when
requested to do so, access to any recorded images made by any video
surveillance system or fail to deliver to any law enforcement officer of the
city, when requested to do so, any media which contains recorded video images
from any video surveillance system required to be maintained under this
chapter; and/or
   (E)   To delete or erase the recorded video images of a video surveillance
system within 30 days of the images being recorded.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
112.999
§ 112.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating any provision
of this chapter may be fined for such violations. The fine imposed shall not
exceed $1,000 for the first violation within a 12-month period, $1,500 for the
second violation within a 12-month period and $2,500 for the third or
subsequent violation within a 12-month period of the same offense. A separate
violation shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation
occurs or continues. Not more than $15,000 in fines may be imposed against the
licensee during the yearly license term, May 1 to April 30. The failure to pay
any fine for violating any provision of this chapter within 30 days of the
receipt of the Local Liquor Control Commissioner's finding, decision, and order
shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the liquor license issued.
      (2)   The suspension or revocation of a license issued shall not preclude
the assessment of a fine for a violation of any provision of this chapter. A
decision to suspend or revoke a liquor license for failure to comply with any
provision of this chapter shall not be stayed pending an appeal to the License
Appeal Commission under the state's Liquor Control Act, being 235 ILCS 5.
   (B)   Any parent or legal guardian who shall knowingly suffers or permits
any minor child under the age of 21 years, as per §
112.048 of this chapter, of which he or she may be the parent or legal guardian
to violate any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to
a fine of not less than $100, or more than $500, for each and every such
offense.
(Ord. 18-O-2200, passed 5-2-2018; Ord. 19-O-2245, passed 12-18-2019; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15- 2024)
CHAPTER 113: AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS
Section
Amusements
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   License required
   
113.03   Application for license
   
113.04   License fee
Video Gaming Terminals
   
113.10   Definitions
   
113.11   License required
   
113.12   Application requirements
   
113.13   Restrictions
Donation Containers
   
113.20   Definitions
   
113.21   License required
   
113.22   Regulations
   
113.23   Enforcement
Self Service Devices and Machines
   
113.30   Definitions
   
113.31   License required
   
113.32   Application for license
   
113.33   Eligibility for license
   
113.34   Regulation
   
113.35   Subchapter to be in addition to other provisions
 
   
113.99   Penalty
AMUSEMENTS
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT. Includes fortune telling, palmistry, astrology and theatrical
exhibitions, movie theaters, pool halls, bowling alleys, roller-skating rinks,
ice-skating rinks, shows and similar entertainment offered, operated, presented
or exhibited for gain or admission for which the public is required to a pay a
fee.
   PLACE. Theater, auditorium, hall, park, grounds, gardens, tent or other
enclosure or area within which it is intended to produce, offer or present any
amusement.
(Prior Code, § 113.01) (Ord. 71-O-787, passed - -1971; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 113.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct or
operate any amusement which is open to the public without first obtaining a
license to do so.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to those amusements or
amusement devices which are specifically licensed by any other provision of
this code.
(Prior Code, § 113.02) (Ord. 71-O-787, passed - -1971; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Applications for a license shall be in compliance with the general ordinance
provisions relating to licenses as set forth in
Ch. 110 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 113.03) (Ord. 71-O-787, passed - -1971; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 113.04 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The annual license fee for an amusement license shall be as set forth
in the Business License Fees Ordinance.
   (B)   The City Council is empowered to exempt from payment of a license fee
any charitable, school or church function wherein the proceeds of the function
are being raised for a charitable or public purpose.
(Prior Code, § 113.04) (Ord. 71-O-787, passed - -1971; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS
§ 113.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TERMINAL OPERATOR. Any individual, partnership, corporation or limited
liability company that is licensed by the State of Illinois and that owns,
services and maintains video gaming terminals for placement in licensed
establishments, licensed truck stop establishments, licensed fraternal
establishments, or licensed veterans establishments.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, electronic cards or vouchers, or any combination thereof, is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including but not
limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois
Gaming Board utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player
may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does
not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens or is for
amusement purposes only.
   LICENSED LOCATION. Any licensed establishment, licensed fraternal
establishment, licensed veterans establishment, licensed truck stop
establishment or licensed large truck stop establishment as defined by the
Video Gaming Act. Additionally, the definitions enumerated in the Video Gaming
Act, 230 ILCS 40/5, are adopted herein.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 113.11 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No business establishment shall operate, permit to be operated, keep or
maintain any video gaming terminal in the city without first having obtained a
video gaming license from the city. Each video gaming terminal shall have a
license. Each license issued shall be for a period of one calendar year
beginning May 1 and ending April 30 and is the responsibility of the business
license holder.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.12 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   A video gaming terminal license must be applied for by the owner of the
establishment so designated and licensed by the state's Gaming Board allowing
such establishment to operate video gaming terminals.
   (A)   In addition to the application requirements of Chapter 110 of this
code, applications for a video gaming license shall include:
      (1)   The name and addresses of the business establishment where the
device is to be used;
      (2)   A general description of the proposed device;
      (3)   The number of other coin operated amusement devices and/or video
gaming terminals proposed for the same address;
      (4)   The name and address of the owner of the video gaming terminals;
      (5)   A copy of the location license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board;
and
      (6)   Any other information the Director of Building and Housing deems
necessary to process the application.
   (B)   The annual license fee for each video gaming terminal shall be as
specified in the Business License Fees Ordinance and shall be split equally
between the licensed location and the terminal operator.
   (C)   The city shall have the authority to make and publish reasonable rules
and regulations consistent with this subchapter and other laws of the city and
the state for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 113.13 RESTRICTIONS.
   It is unlawful for any person or business within the city to:
   (A)   Keep, install or use a video gaming terminal without a state license.
   (B)   Keep, install or use a video gaming terminal without a city license.
   (C)   Fail to prominently display a current city license sticker with an
assigned number on each video gaming terminal.
   (D)   Keep, install or use a greater number of video gaming terminals than
that specified in the Video Gaming Act.
   (E)   Fail to comply with all provisions of the Video Gaming Act.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
113.99
DONATION CONTAINERS
§ 113.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DONATION CONTAINER. Any box, bin, trailer, vehicle, structure or other
receptacle that is intended or used as a collection point for donated clothing,
shoes, books, or other household items at times when no employee or
representative of the sponsoring company or organization is present.
   APPLICANT. The organization or company benefitting from the donation
container or the host site on whose property the donation container is
situated.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 113.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to place a donation container within the city
without first obtaining a license therefore from the Building and Housing
Department. The fee shall be as specified in the Business License Fees
Ordinance.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.22 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The applicant shall indicate the following information on the donation
container: the name of organization or company, address and contact telephone
number.
   (B)   All signage on a donation container shall be in compliance with all
requirements contained in this code.
   (C)   A donation container shall be painted and in good condition and
appearance, with no structural damage, no holes in the receptacle that would
allow leaks, no visible rust and free of graffiti or advertising other than the
name of the host site or organization or company benefitting from a donation
container.
   (D)   A donation container shall only be used as a collection receptacle for
clothing, books, or other household items.
   (E)   The collection or storage of items on top of, outside of, or next to
the donation container is prohibited.
   (F)   All donation containers must be located inside a fully enclosed
principal structure. Donation containers may not be placed outside a fully
enclosed and principal structure on any lot.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.23 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The organization or company benefitting from the donation container
and the host site on whose property the donation container is situated are
jointly and severally liable for the maintenance, upkeep and servicing of a
donation container.
   (B)   Failure to maintain, upkeep or service a donation container shall
result in citations and fines as specified herein.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
SELF SERVICE DEVICES AND MACHINES
§ 113.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SELF-SERVICE DEVICES AND MACHINES. Any device or machine that provides goods
or a service without the need for personal assistance in exchange for the
payment of funds, whether through credit card terminal, coin or cash dispenser.
SELF SERVICE DEVICES AND MACHINES shall include but not be limited to automatic
teller machines (ATMs), air pumps, charging stations, electronic games,
amusement devices, pay phones, newspaper machines, jukeboxes, pinball machines,
SELF SERVICE DEVICES AND MACHINES does not include those devices or machines
that serve food or drinks or video gaming terminals as defined in the Video
Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et. seq.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 113.31 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall keep, install, maintain, operate, service, lease or
distribute any self- service device or machine upon any premises within the
city for use by the public without first having obtained a license therefor.
   (B)   The license fee to be paid by an operator or proprietor to the city
shall be per device or machine as specified in the Business License Fees
Ordinance.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.32 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring a license shall make application therefor to the
Building and Housing Department pursuant to the application provisions of
Chapter 110. The application shall include the type and owners of the machines
or devices, the address of the premises where the licensed device or devices
are to be operated, the trade name and a general description of the device or
devices to be licensed, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 113.33 ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE.
   No person shall be eligible for a license if its owners, stockholders,
managers, members employees or any of them have employed coercive or illegal
measures to promote the use of his or her machines.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 113.34 REGULATIONS.
   All self service devices and machines shall be maintained in proper working
order and shall not operate as to create a nuisance to surrounding buildings
and persons.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.35 SUBCHAPTER TO BE IN ADDITION TO OTHER PROVISIONS.
   The requirement of this subchapter shall be in addition to and not in
substitution of the terms and provisions of this code or of any applicable
ordinance of the city requiring the purchase of a license or sticker for each
coin-operated machine kept or maintained for use by the public.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
110.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Tickets may be issued to the licensed location and the terminal
operator.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any section of this chapter
shall be fined no more than $200 for each offense. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing in this chapter shall
be deemed to limit the city in any way to use any or all other means available
to remove a nuisance, or summarily eliminate immediate hazards to the public
health, safety or welfare.
(Prior Code, § 113.99) (Ord. 67-O-673, passed - -1967; Ord. 84-O-1145, passed
4-2-1984; Ord. 84-O-1161, passed 12-17-1984; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
CHAPTER 114: FOOD SERVICE BUSINESS
Section
Food Service Business
   
114.001   Definitions
   
114.002   License required
   
114.003   Application for license
   
114.004   Inspections
   
114.005   License fee
   
114.006   Suspension or revocation of license
   
114.007   Regulations
   
114.008   Hours of operation
Vending Machines
   
114.020   Definition
   
114.021   License required
   
114.022   Periodic inspections
   
114.023   Sanitary regulations
Mobile Food Vehicles
   
114.030   Definitions
   
114.031   License required
   
114.032   Compliance with state and local laws
   
114.033   Application
   
114.034   Operating locations
   
114.035   Regulations
   
114.036   License fee
   
114.037   Consent of property owner required
   
114.038   Hours of operation
   
114.039   Signage furnishing and fixtures
   
114.040   Consumption of alcohol prohibited
   
114.041   Denial of license
   
114.042   Exemptions; scope
   
114.043   License to be displayed
Taverns
   
114.055   Definitions
   
114.056   License required
   
114.057   Inspections
FOOD SERVICE BUSINESS
§ 114.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COFFEE SHOP. Any establishment where drinks and small food items can be
purchased for consumption on or off site. COFFEE SHOPS include bakeries, juice
and smoothie bars.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person working on the premises of a food service establishment
who engages in food preparation or service, or who comes in contact with any
food utensil or equipment.
   EQUIPMENT. All stoves, ranges, hoods, meatblocks, tables and similar items,
other than utensils, used in the operation of a food service establishment.
   FOOD SERVICE BUSINESS. Any place at which or in which food is sold or
offered for sale to the general public for consumption on or off the premises.
“Restaurants”, “coffee shops”, “food peddlers” and “grocery stores” shall be
considered food service establishments.
   FOOD PEDDLER. Any person who sells or offers for sale any food items from a
non-motorized cart or stand.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked or processed edible substance, beverage or ingredient
used or intended for use in whole or in part for human consumption.
   GROCERY STORE. Any establishment where fresh or packaged foods are sold for
consumption off site. GROCERY STORE includes convenience stores, fruit stores,
delis, butchers and meat markets but does not include packaged liquor stores
licensed under the establishments selling only packaged liquor and licensed
under Chapter 112 of this code.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Health Officer of the city or his or her authorized
representative.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment where meals can be purchased by the general
public for consumption on or off site.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023; Ord. 25-O-2412, passed 7-16-2025)
§ 114.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a food service business without
first obtaining a license to do so. A separate license is required for each
food service establishment.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.003 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Applications for such license shall be in compliance with the general
ordinance provisions relating to licenses as set forth in
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.004 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   In addition to other inspections required by this code or any other
applicable ordinance of the city, upon receipt of the application, together
with the required license fees, the Health Officer shall make an inspection of
the food service business.
   (B)   The Health Officer shall inspect each food service business at least
annually, and shall make as many additional inspections and reinspections as
shall be necessary for the enforcement of this subchapter.
   (C)   The Health Officer, after proper identification, shall be permitted to
enter, at any reasonable time, any food service business for the purpose of
making inspections to determine compliance with this subchapter.
   (D)   The Health Officer shall be permitted to examine the records of the
establishment to obtain pertinent information pertaining to food and supplies
and to persons employed.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.005 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee for each food service establishment shall be as
specified in the Business License Fees Ordinance.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.006 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   No person whose food service business license has been revoked shall be
entitled to apply for another food service business license for the same
location for a period of six months from the date of revocation.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.007 REGULATIONS.
   All food service establishments shall obtain and maintain all required
county, state and federal licensure for food service and handling and shall
comply with all applicable laws thereto.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.008 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The City Council shall have the right to determine the hours of operation
for each license issued under the terms of this subchapter.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
VENDING MACHINES
§ 114.020 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   VENDING MACHINE. Any machine or device from which or through the operation
of which bottled soft drinks, packaged candy or other packaged food is sold to
the general public for human consumption.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.021 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall maintain, keep or operate a vending machine as defined above
without having first obtained a vending license and a separate license for each
vending machine.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.022 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.
   The Health Officer shall from time to time inspect or cause to be inspected
each vending machine and the storage of articles thereby dispensed, for the
purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of this code and all applicable
laws of the state are being complied with.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.023 SANITARY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All food which is received, stored and displayed for dispersal from a
vending machine shall be adequately protected from dust, flies, insects, vermin
or any contamination.
   (B)   All vending equipment and parts thereof with which food is liable to
be in direct contact shall be kept clean and free from dust, dirt, insects and
other contaminating materials.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLES
§ 114.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEVERAGES. A liquid for drinking that does not contain alcohol.
   FOOD or FOODSTUFF. Any substance that is defined as a raw, cooked, or
processed edible substance, ice, beverage, an ingredient used or intended for
use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption, and chewing gum.
   FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is primarily used for the delivery
of food or beverages to consumers in the city, on request for such delivery,
but does not include vehicles that primarily make deliveries of supplies or
inventory to licensed food establishments, food stores, or mobile food service
establishments.
   FOOD PREPARATION. Packaging, processing, cooking, assembling, portioning, or
any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food, but does
not include trimming of produce.
   MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE. A licensed, motorized vehicle modified to include
facilities for the cooking, processing and preparation of food and beverages,
when temporarily parked on property other than a public street, road, or right-
of-way, and from which food items or beverages are then sold to the general
public.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. The owner or vendor of a mobile food vehicle to be
licensed under this chapter, and who shall be the party responsible for the
compliance of the operations of the mobile food vehicle with the requirements
of this chapter, the city code, and other applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.031 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any candy, ice cream,
confections, or any food or beverage for human consumption from any motor
vehicle or any vehicle or any vehicle or cart of any kind in the city unless
the mobile food vehicle is properly licensed. All mobile food vehicle licenses
are subject to the approval by the Mayor and the City Council.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.032 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND LOCAL LAWS.
   Each mobile food vehicle that is permitted to operate in the city shall be
operated in strict compliance with the regulations set forth in this chapter as
well as all applicable ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations, including
without limitation, all zoning, building, health, fire, and safety regulations,
and all other provisions of this code, the county code, and state law. If a
conflict arises between applicable regulations, the strictest regulation shall
control.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.033 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications for all mobile food vehicle licenses shall be made in
writing to the Building and Housing Department on forms provided by that
office. In addition to the application requirements of Chapter 110 of this
code, each application shall include the following:
      (1)   The vendor shall, with its application for a license, register or
cause to be registered the mobile food vehicle operated by, or operated for,
such vendor within the city. The following information for the mobile food
vehicle to be registered shall be provided:
         (a)   The year, make, model, color, license plate number and vehicle
identification number of the vehicle; and
         (b)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
vehicle.
      (2)   A description of the food product(s) offered for sale, including
the intended menu;
      (3)   The name and address of the food preparation establishment or food
establishment where food items are to be prepared and/or packaged for sale by
mobile food vendor from the mobile food vehicle with copies of the
establishments most recent health inspection report from the local health
jurisdiction and County Health Department permits, and copies of the same
documentation with respect to the mobile food vehicle and/or mobile food
vendor;
      (4)   A letter of agreement from the food preparation establishment or
food service establishment where food items are prepared and/or packaged for
sale by the vendor from the mobile food vehicle agreeing to comply with all
applicable laws and regulations;
      (5)   A list of locations and times the mobile food vehicle will be
conducting its operations within the city, which may be amended from time to
time by the mobile food vendor to reflect its then current operations of the
mobile food vehicle, subject to review and approval by the Building and Housing
Department;
      (6)   Copies of all necessary licenses or permits required by the State
Public Health or Transportation authorities for the operation of the mobile
food vehicle;
      (7)   The written consent of the property owner stating the mobile food
vehicle is allowed to operate on the property, together with copies of any
relevant documentation between the property owner and the mobile food vendor
evidencing the terms of such consent;
      (8)   A signed statement approved by the city as to form and substance
providing that the vendor shall hold harmless the city and its officers and
employees, and shall indemnify the city, its officers, and employees for any
claims for damage to property or injury to persons which may be occasioned by
any activity carried out under the terms of the license; and
      (9)   Proof of insurance as follows:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance coverage insuring the
vendor and the city with respect to occurrences arising out of the activities
authorized by the license, with such coverage having combined single limits of
not less than $1,000,000 for personal injury and death and property damage per
occurrence, and in the aggregate, which coverage shall specifically refer to
this license. Coverage of the city shall be by written endorsement naming the
city as an additional insured.
         (b)   Automobile liability insurance with coverage of not less than
$1,000,000 for personal injuries or death per occurrence and $1,000,000 for
property damage per occurrence. All insurance coverage provided under the
license shall expressly provide that it is primary and noncontributory to any
insurance coverage maintained by the city, and shall waive any rights of
recovery against the city.
         (c)   Copies of all policies of insurance, certificates of insurance
and endorsements reflecting the coverages required under this agreement shall
be provided to the city prior to the issuance of any license under this
chapter. All such insurance coverage shall further provide that it may not be
cancelled except upon 30 days written notice served upon the Mayor and his or
her designee. A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
be invalid at any time the insurance required in this subchapter is not
maintained and evidence of continuing coverage is not filed with the Building
and Housing Department.
   (B)   At the time of application, all applicants shall pay an application
fee and corresponding inspection fees for building and fire to the Building and
Housing Department.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.034 OPERATING LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Mobile food vehicles are authorized to operate only in the following
locations in city:
      (1)   The Amazon fulfillment warehouse property located at 2201 W. 159th
Street, with the permission of the property owner;
      (2)   The parking lot located at the northeast corner of 16 7th Street
and Dixie Highway;
      (3)   The Cook County Courthouse Sixth Municipal District property
located at 16501 S. Kedzie Avenue; and
      (4)   All other locations require prior approval of the City Council.
   (B)   In addition to the above restrictions, no mobile food vehicle shall
operate in a location that:
      (1)   Would substantially obstruct a public way;
      (2)   Would impair the movement of pedestrians or vehicles;
      (3)   Would pose a hazard to public safety;
      (4)   Is adjacent to a bus stop, taxi stand or handicap loading zone;
      (5)   Is directly in front of a property entryway;
      (6)   Is adjacent to or within 500 feet of the property line of a food
establishment business. This requirement may be waived if the application is
submitted with written consent of the proprietor of the adjacent food
establishment business; or
      (7)   Is within 500 feet of any festival, special event, or civic event
that is permitted or sponsored by the city except when the vendor has obtained
a temporary vendor permit from the city;
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.035 REGULATIONS.
   All mobile food vehicles are subject to the following regulations:
   (A)   Mobile food vehicles must be brought to a complete stop, with the
ignition turned off, and be lawfully parked within the location approved for
the license prior to commencing operations.
   (B)   Pedestrian walkways of not less than six feet must be maintained
around the mobile food vehicle location.
   (C)   No more than three mobile food vehicles shall be allowed to operate
per private parking lot located in the authorized locations. The private
parking lot must remain in compliance with the zoning code, including the off-
street parking requirements for the host parking lot. The mobile food vehicles
shall not block required drive aisles and must be parked on an all-weather
surface lot at all times.
   (D)   A vendor shall not operate on private property within the permitted
operating locations without first obtaining written consent to operate from the
affected private property owner.
   (E)   Mobile food vehicles may not operate within the city for more than
eight hours during any 24-hour period, but in no case to exceed the hours of
operation for the business on the property on which the mobile food vehicle is
located.
   (F)   All mobile food vehicle vehicles shall have an annual inspection by
the Health Inspector and Fire Department.
   (G)   If liquid propane gas is used, the following conditions shall be met:
      (1)   Cooking and warming equipment shall be in good working condition
and cleaned of grease or other combustible material.
      (2)   Portable liquid propane gas containers, piping, valves and fittings
which are located outside and are being used to fuel equipment shall be
adequately protected to prevent tampering, damage by vehicles or other hazards,
and shall be located in an approved location. Portable liquid gas containers
shall be securely fastened in place by use of an approved method to prevent
unauthorized movement, tipping or regulator damage.
      (3)   Fittings, valves and hoses used with liquid propane gas equipment
shall be maintained in good working condition. When, in the opinion of the Fire
Safety Official, an unsafe condition exists with the fitting, valve, or hose
used by the equipment, it shall be replaced or the equipment shall not be used.
      (4)   Liquid propane gas containers shall be stored within a suitable
enclosure or otherwise protected against tampering.
      (5)   A Type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking
appliances and domestic cooling appliances used for commercial purposes that
produce grease laden vapors.
      (6)   Combustible materials shall be kept a minimum of three feet from
cooking appliances.
      (7)   A fire extinguisher of minimum size 2A10BC shall be provided in the
cooking area. Cooking equipment involving vegetable or animal oils and fats
shall be protected by a Class K rated portable fire extinguisher.
   (H)   Mobile food vehicles must provide or have garbage receptacles readily
available for immediate use by customers of the mobile food vehicle. City trash
receptacles are not to be used for this purpose. Such receptacles shall be
removed from the site upon the conclusion of the mobile food vehicle
operations, and at all times when the mobile food vehicle is not at the
location for which the license has been approved.
   (I)   Vendors must pick up, remove, and dispose of all garbage, refuse, or
litter consisting of foodstuffs, wrappers, and/or materials at one time
dispensed from the mobile food vehicle, and any residue deposited on the street
from the operation thereof, and shall otherwise maintain in a clean and debris-
free condition the entire area within a 25 foot radius of the location where
the mobile food vehicle is operating.
   (J)   Mobile food vehicles must comply with all noise regulations of the
city.
   (K)   Mobile food vehicles may not provide seating or tables for their
customers.
   (L)   Mobile food vehicles are allowed to display signage that is painted or
permanently affixed to the vehicle or freestanding sandwich boards.
   (M)   Mobile food vehicles may not have amplified sound or music emanating
from the vehicle.
   (N)   Mobile food vehicles shall be parked on all-weather surface, asphalt
or concrete, as determined by the §
156.313 of this code of ordinances, for the duration of their operation.
   (O)   Mobile food vehicles shall not be allowed to park in fire lanes,
handicap parking spaces, or in any other location that will impede traffic flow
or create unsafe conditions for pedestrians.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.036 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee for each mobile food vehicle shall be as specified in
the Business License Fees Ordinance.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.037 CONSENT OF PROPERTY OWNER REQUIRED.
   A mobile food vehicle may not serve, dispense, or sell food or beverages in
a public or private parking lot within the corporate limits of the city without
having first obtained written consent to operate from the owner of the property
on which the lot is located. A copy of such written consent shall be maintained
in the mobile food vehicle for review on request by any city employee or
officer and provided to the Building and Housing Department.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.038 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   A mobile food vehicle may be open to the public only between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
   (B)   Daily set up of a mobile food vehicle may not occur before one hour
prior to the permitted opening time, and the end of the day, clean up must be
completed not later than 6:30 p.m.
   (C)   Mobile food vehicles shall not be parked on the premises from which
they operate under license during the time period after end of the day clean up
and before the permitted set up time on the next intended day of operation.
   (D)   Hours of operation beyond these specified hours for special events
conducted by an owner or occupant of the location proposed for the operation of
the mobile food vehicle may be authorized with prior approval from the City
Council, upon verification that the conduct of the proposed event otherwise
complies with the applicable ordinances of the city, and the laws and
regulations of any other governmental authorities having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.039 SIGNAGE FURNISHING AND FIXTURES.
   It shall be unlawful for a vendor to use or cause to be displayed while in
transit, motion or parked any flashing or electronic signs or illuminated
signs. It shall be unlawful for mobile food vehicles to display or utilize any
signage that is not permanently affixed to a mobile food unit.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.040 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any mobile food vehicle and mobile food vendor to
sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, or to allow
patrons to consume liquor on the licensed premises regardless of whether such
liquor is provided by a licensee, a patron or otherwise, whether for a fee or
otherwise, without first having been issued an appropriate retail liquor
license in conformity with
Chapter 112 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.041 DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   An applicant may be denied a mobile food vehicle license under any of the
following conditions:
   (A)   The applicant has previously failed to comply with the provisions of a
mobile food vehicle license;
   (B)   The applicant has been convicted of a violation of any provisions of
this chapter; or
   (C)   The applicant has failed to qualify for any other license required by
the code of ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.042 EXEMPTIONS; SCOPE.
   Food delivery vehicles shall be exempt from the application of this chapter.
The regulations of this subchapter shall only apply to the mobile food vendors
in connection with their operation of mobile food vehicles, as defined in this
subchapter.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.043 LICENSE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Upon issuance of a mobile food vehicle license, the operator shall, at all
times, when operating a mobile food vehicle in the city, display the license
that has been issued by the city that will include the license number and year
for which the license is valid. The mobile food vendor shall display this
license upon the request of any police officer, city employee or customer.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
TAVERNS
§ 114.055 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TAVERN. An establishment primarily engaged in serving alcoholic liquor for
consumption on premises where no food is prepared or served.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 114.056 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate a tavern without first obtaining a
license to do so. A tavern license does not permit the sales of liquor and a
separate liquor license must also be obtained.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.057 INSPECTIONS.
   The Health Officer shall inspect each tavern located within the city at
least annually, and shall make as many additional inspections and reinspections
as shall be necessary for enforcement of this code.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2023)
CHAPTER 115: MERCHANTS PROVIDING PRODUCTS
Section
Retailers
   
115.01   Definition
   
115.02   License required
Pharmacies
   
115.10   Definition
   
115.11   License required
   
115.12   Periodic inspections
Gas Stations
   
115.20   Definition
   
115.21   License required
   
115.22   Regulations
   
115.23   Periodic inspections
Tobacco Dealers
   
115.30   License required
   
115.31   Sales to minors
   
115.32   Self-service displays restricted
   
115.33   Sale of single or loose cigarettes prohibited
RETAILERS
§ 115.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RETAILER. Any person or establishment that sells goods to the public for use
or consumption. Retailers include, but are not limited to, clothing stores,
book stores, hardware stores, florists, beauty supply stores, thrift stores,
furniture stores, pet supply stores, cellular telephone stores, electronic
stores, home goods and furnishings stores.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024; Ord. 25-O-2412, passed 7-16-2025)
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to operate as a retailer without first
obtaining a license to do so, unless the retailer holds a separate business
license under this code.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
PHARMACIES
§ 115.10 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PHARMACY. Any establishment where medicine requiring a prescription is sold
or dispensed.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 115.11 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or maintain a pharmacy without first having obtained
a license to do so.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.12 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.
   The Health Inspector shall from time to time make inspections of the
premises wherein such pharmacy is operated, for the purpose of ascertaining
whether the provisions of this code and all applicable laws of the state are
being complied with.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
GAS STATIONS
§ 115.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GAS STATION. Any premises used for offering fuels, oils and accessories for
motor vehicles for sale at retail to the public.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 115.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall maintain or operate a gas station without first having
obtained a license to do so.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.22 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall smoke, and no manager of a gas station shall permit
smoking, in and about a filling station or place where inflammable material is
stored.
   (B)   Repair services, automobile washing and retail convenience sales may
only be incidental services at a gas station.
   (C)   Storage or parking spaces may not be offered for rent at a gas
station.
   (D)   No motor vehicles or boats may be offered for sale or rent at a gas
station.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.23 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Inspector shall from time to time inspect, or cause to be
inspected, any such establishment for the purpose of ascertaining whether the
provisions of this code and all applicable laws of the state are being complied
with.
   (B)   If a gas station is engaged in the business of providing food, the
Health Inspector shall from time to time inspect, or cause to be inspected, any
such establishment for the purpose of ascertaining whether the provisions of
this code and all applicable laws of the state are being complied with.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
TOBACCO SALES
§ 115.30 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall maintain or operate any establishment where tobacco of any
kind is kept or sold, without first having obtained a license to do so and, for
the purposes of this subchapter, any cigarette or tobacco vending machine shall
be included within the meaning of this section. A tobacco sales license shall
be in addition to all other business licenses required under this code.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.31 SALES TO MINORS.
   No person shall sell, give away or offer to sell or give away any cigars,
cigarettes, tobacco or cigarette wrappers to any person under the age of 21
years.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.32 SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, give away or display tobacco
products for sale at any location where the customer can acquire those products
through self-service. All tobacco products shall be displayed from behind a
sales/service counter so that no customer can access tobacco products without
assistance by an employee of a licensee.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.33 SALE OF SINGLE OR LOOSE CIGARETTES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The sale or distribution by any person of a single or loose cigarette
that is not contained within a sealed container, pack or package as provided by
the manufacturer and bearing the federal health warning is prohibited.
   (B)   If any officer, director, manager, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of a licensed tobacco dealer is found guilty of violating
this section, or if such violation occurs within the licensed premises and with
the knowledge of any officer, director, manager, associate, member,
representative, agent, or employee of a licensed tobacco sales. Such violation
shall be deemed to be the act of the licensed tobacco sales and shall be
grounds for the suspension or revocation of the tobacco sales license, as
herein provided.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 116: MERCHANTS PROVIDING SERVICES
Section
In General
   
116.001   Definitions
   
116.002   License required
General Brokers
   
116.010   Definitions
   
116.011   License required
   
116.012   Application for license
   
116.013   Prohibited acts of licensee
Refuse Disposal Contractors
   
116.025   Definitions
   
116.026   License required
   
116.027   License fee
   
116.028   Prohibited acts of licensee
   
116.029   Duties of licensee
   
116.030   Refuse vehicles specifications
Group Homes
   
116.040   Definitions
   
116.041   License required
   
116.042   Application
   
116.043   Regulations
   
116.044   Inspections
Child and Adult Day Care Homes
   
116.060   Definitions
   
116.061   License required
   
116.062   License application
   
116.063   Investigation
   
116.064   License denial or revocation; renewal
   
116.065   Regulations
   
116.066   Inspections
IN GENERAL
§ 116.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MERCHANT PROVIDING SERVICE. Any person or establishment engaged in the
business of providing a service to the general public for a fee. MERCHANTS
PROVIDING SERVICES includes, but is not limited to barbers, beauticians, nail
salons, machine repair, medical clinics, counseling services, dry cleaners,
educational services, legal services, fitness centers, printing services,
taxicabs, tax preparation services, shipping and postal services, savings and
loan agencies, banks, ambulance services, consulting agencies, and moving
companies.
   CIVIC USE. Those businesses owned or maintained exclusively for educational
or charitable purposes such as schools, libraries, churches and governmental
buildings.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024; Ord. 25-O-2412, passed 7-16-2025)
§ 116.002 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   All merchants providing services shall obtain a business license under this
section unless the business holds a more specific business license required
under this code. Civic uses may be subject to reduced business license fees, as
specified in the Business License Fees Ordinance.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
GENERAL BROKERS
§ 116.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GENERAL BROKER. Any person who negotiates, buys, sells, trades, leases or
handles for another, on a commission basis, or on the basis of compensation in
proportion to the amount of the transaction, any moneys, stocks, bonds,
mortgagee, loans, investments, securities, certificates of indebtedness,
foreign exchange, letters of credit, steamship transportation tickets, grain,
produce, provisions, livestock, goods, ware, merchandise or any other
commodity, article or property (except real property) whether like or unlike
those named in this section, or acts through the medium of another licensed
broker, in the capacity and for any of the purposes in this section.
   INSURANCE BROKER. Any person engaged for others in negotiating contracts for
insurance of any kind or nature, either directly or through any insurance
agent, or with any insurance company other than an insurance company of which
such person shall be an employee.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person, association, copartnership or corporation,
who for a consideration sells or offers for sale or exchange of real estate, or
who leases, or offers to lease, or rents or offers to rent, any real estate, or
negotiates leases thereof, or of the improvements therein for another or
others; or who employs any person as a real estate sale agent to perform any of
the above acts.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 116.011 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person defined as a broker shall operate such business, represent
or hold oneself out as engaging in such business, without first having obtained
a license to do so, subject, however, to the following exception: where more
than one person is employed in a brokerage business, the license fee payable by
the business shall be a single fee paid by the principal or operating agency
and no additional license fee shall be payable by any employee or agent
thereof.
   (B)   No real estate broker shall erect or maintain any sign on any real
estate within the city without first having obtained a city real estate
broker's license.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.012 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Applications for licenses required by this chapter shall be made pursuant to
Chapter 110 and also include:
   (A)   The names and residences of all salespersons or brokers who will be
operating under the license applied for.
   (B)   The date and number of the state broker's license, if applicable.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.013 PROHIBITED ACTS OF LICENSEE.
   It is unlawful for any licensee under the provisions of this subchapter to
do the following:
   (A)   Make any substantial misrepresentation or engage in untruthful
advertising;
   (B)   Make any false promises of a character likely to influence, persuade
or induce action contrary to the best interests of the city and preservation of
property values in the city;
   (C)   Pursue a continued and flagrant course of misrepresentation or make
false promises through agents, salesperson, advertising or otherwise;
   (D)   Use misleading or untruthful advertising, or use any trade name or
insignia or membership in any real estate or other broker organization of which
the licensee is not a member;
   (E)   Act for more than one party in a transaction without the knowledge of
all parties for whom he or she acts;
   (F)   Fail to furnish copies upon request of all documents relating to a
transaction to all parties executing the same;
   (G)   Pay a commission or valuable consideration to any person for acts or
services performed in violation of this chapter;
   (H)   Employ any person as a salesperson on a purely temporary or single-
deal basis as a means of evading the law regarding payment of commissions or
any of the provisions of this subchapter;
   (I)   Display a "for rent" or "for sale" sign on any property without the
written consent of an owner or his or her duly authorized agent, or advertise
that any property is for sale and for rent in a newspaper or other publication
without the consent of the owner or his or her authorized agent;
   (J)   Fail, within a reasonable time, to provide information requested by
the City Council as a result of a formal or informal complaint to the city,
which would indicate a violation of this subchapter;
   (K)   Solicit for sale, lease or listing for sale or lease, residential real
estate within the city on the ground of loss of value due to the present or
prospective entry into any neighborhood of any person or persons of any
particular race, color, religion or national origin or ancestry; and/or
   (L)   Distribute or cause to be distributed, written material or statements
designed to induce any owner of residential real estate in the city to sell or
lease his or her property because of any present or prospective change in the
race, color, religion or national origin or ancestry of persons in the
neighborhood.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
REFUSE DISPOSAL CONTRACTORS
§ 116.025 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REFUSE. Includes, but is not limited to, garbage, such as all animal debris,
fruit or vegetable matter and all other substances capable of decay,
fermentation or putrefaction, leaves, grass, paper, waste paper, rags, floor
sweepings, tin cans, glassware, crockery, bottles, ashes, cinders, clinkers and
other household waste, with the exception of stone, dirt or waste material
resulting from landscaping and the remodeling of old or construction of new
buildings.
   REFUSE DISPOSAL CONTRACTOR. Any person, firm or corporation engage in the
business of collecting and disposing of refuse.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 116.026 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful to engage in the business of refuse disposal contracting
without first having obtained a license therefor. Application for such license
shall be in compliance with the general ordinance provisions relating to
licenses as set forth in
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.027 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee for refuse disposal collectors shall per vehicle as
specified in the Business License Fees Ordinance.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 116.028 PROHIBITED ACTS OF LICENSEE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any refuse disposal contractor to negotiate or
enter into an agreement with individual residents of the city with regard to
the collection of refuse for any period of time not within the term of its
license as issued by the city.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a refuse disposal contractor to accept prepayment
for refuse collection service for any period of time exceeding the expiration
date of his or her license from the city.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.029 DUTIES OF LICENSEE.
   It shall be the duty of the licensee to comply fully with the provisions of
this subchapter and terms and conditions of any agreement made by the licensee
with the city or any residents of the city respecting the collection, removal
and disposal of garbage, refuse and ashes as defined in §
116.025 of this chapter.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.030 REFUSE VEHICLES SPECIFICATIONS.
   All vehicles used for the collection of garbage, refuse and ashes must be of
the all-metal and totally-enclosed type.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
GROUP HOMES
§ 116.040 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROUP HOME. A dwelling unit shared by three or more unrelated persons,
exclusive of staff, who require assistance and/or supervision and who reside
together in a family-type environment as a single housekeeping unit and who are
developmentally disabled, mentally ill, or impaired by chronic illness and/or
mobility limitations with the aging process.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 116.041 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, religious or other
organization may establish, operate, maintain, offer or advertise a group home
within the city unless that person or entity obtains a business license as
provided herein.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.042 APPLICATION.
   Each applicant shall complete an application pursuant to the term of
Chapter 110 which shall also include:
   (A)   The proposed name and location of the group home;
   (B)   The number of residents who will reside within the group home;
   (C)   The number of other persons who will reside within the group home,
classified according to their respective duties and hours they will be present;
   (D)   List of other programs, services, institutions, facilities and
activities operated by the applicant;
   (E)   Current and previous experience with group home programs and/or a
specific plan for developing and securing expertise in the management of a
group home;
   (F)   A letter of explanation regarding the maximum number of residents to
be served, general programming, hours of operation and maximum number and
qualifications of staff to be assigned to the group home;
   (G)   Evidence of appropriate local, state and/or federal licensing,
certification or accreditation for the group home or agency, as required;
   (H)   Building floor plan and plat of survey; and
   (I)   Other information that the Building and Housing Department may
reasonably require.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.043 REGULATIONS.
   A group home shall not be occupied by more than eight unrelated persons,
exclusive of staff.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.044 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   The Building and Housing Department shall cause an inspection of the
premises to determine whether it complies with the city's housing, building and
zoning codes.
   (B)   The Fire Department shall cause an inspection to determine whether the
minimum life safety standards of the city and applicable state standards are
met.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHILD AND ADULT DAY CARE HOMES
§ 116.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT DAY CARE HOME. Any single-family home located in a residential
district and used as a home which regularly provides care for a group of no
more than two up to a maximum of six adults that do not reside in the home, for
a payment of a fee and for less than 24 hours per day. The adults (clients)
must be ambulatory with or without the aid of any assistive devices.
   DAY CARE HOME. Family homes which receive more than three up to a maximum of
12 children for less than 24 hours per day. The number counted includes the
family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of 12.
The term does not include facilities which receive only children from a single
household.
   GROUP DAY CARE HOME. Family homes which receive more than three up to a
maximum of 16 children for less than 24 hours per day. The number counted
includes the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under
the age of 12.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 116.061 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A person must apply for and obtain a business license before operating a
child or adult day care home in any residential property within the city. A
person must obtain a separate business license for each residential property
the person operates a child or adult day care home within the city.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.062 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   An application for a license to operate a child or adult day care home shall
be made in conformity with the general requirements of Chapter 110 of this code
relating to applications for licenses, and shall additionally contain:
   (A)   The location of the residential property for which a license is
sought;
   (B)   The number of children or adults to be cared for;
   (C)   The number of additional persons inside the home when children are
present;
   (D)   A list of persons who will be working in the child or adult day care
home;
   (E)   A copy of the day care home or group day care home's license issued by
the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services;
   (F)   The name and address of the applicant and a list of all residential
properties owned or occupied by the applicant; and
   (G)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used for transportation of
children.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.063 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   The Building and Housing Department, upon receipt of an application
for license under this subchapter, shall cause the city's Health Officer,
Director of Building and Housing, Fire Inspector and Police Department to make
a thorough investigation of the premises proposed to be licensed.
   (B)   In addition, the Police Department shall make a thorough investigation
of any transportation vehicle proposed to be used for transportation of any
children.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 116.064 LICENSE DENIAL OR REVOCATION; RENEWAL.
   A license may be denied, suspended or revoked pursuant to Chapter 110 of
this code and for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Violation of any provisions of this subchapter or of the rules,
regulations and minimum standards promulgated under this subchapter or by the
Illinois Department of Children and Family Services;
   (B)   Cruelty or indifference to the welfare of a child or adult;
   (C)   Conviction of the licensee or any of its employees of a felony or a
misdemeanor as shown by a certified copy of the record of conviction; and
   (D)   Revocation, denial or suspension of the day care/group day care home's
state license.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.065 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts the "General Requirements for Day Care Homes"
as provided in 89 Ill. Admin. Code. 406.8, and any amendments thereto.
   (B)   Day care/group day care homes shall abide by all statutes and
regulations pertaining to day care homes.
   (C)   The day care/group day care home shall prominently display the city
business license and state license in a conspicuous place.
   (D)   Day care/group day care homes must comply with all building and zoning
codes and may only be located in residential zoning districts.
   (E)   It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to immediately notify
the city of any suspension, revocation or denial of its state license.
   (F)   It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a child
day care home or adult day care home to make a report to the city's Health
Officer and the Building Department daily of all cases and suspect cases of
contagious and communicable diseases.
   (G)   No applicant may receive a day care home license if it is in violation
of this code for any other residential property within the city.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.066 INSPECTIONS.
   Every day care/group day care home must be open at all reasonable times for
an inspection by the city's Health Officer, Director of Building and Housing
and Fire Inspector as often as is deemed necessary.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 117: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
Peddlers
   
117.01   Definition
   
117.02   License required
   
117.03   Name and address to be on vehicle
Solicitors
   
117.20   Definition
   
117.21   License required
   
117.22   Application for license
   
117.23   Issuance of license
   
117.24   License fees
   
117.25   Duration of license
   
117.26   Revocation of license
   
117.27   Regulations
PEDDLERS
§ 117.01 DEFINITION.
   A PEDDLER is a peddler of goods, wares and merchandise is any person who has
not fixed or permanent place of business and who sells or offers for sale, or
exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, coal, wood, oil, traveling from place
to place on, along and upon the streets of the city, or who sells and delivers
from any vehicle from place to place any such wares and merchandise.
(Prior Code, § 117.02) (Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 117.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in or operate the business of peddling in the city
any goods, wares and merchandise without first having obtained a license to do
so.
(Prior Code, § 117.02) (Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 117.03 NAME AND ADDRESS TO BE ON VEHICLE.
   Every wagon, cart or other vehicle used by a licensee in and about his or
her business shall have the name of the owner and his or her address plainly
and distinctly painted on the outside of each side of every such wagon, cart or
other vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 117.04) (Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
SOLICITORS
§ 117.20 DEFINITION.
   SOLICITORS are transient merchants or transient vendors, or any person
soliciting orders for the sale of any articles or things in the city to be
delivered in the future, or advertising for or soliciting orders, donations,
gifts or customers for any association, organization, firm, establishment,
person, corporation or business.
(Prior Code, § 117.15) (Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 117.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to go from house to house
soliciting funds or subscriptions, or to publicly solicit either in person or
by agent, upon the public streets, sidewalks or any other public place in the
city, subscriptions for charitable or religious or educational or other
organizations or purposes, whether presents or gifts of money or promises are
sought, without having first secured a license therefor.
(Prior Code, § 117.16) (Ord. 71-O-762, passed - -1971; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 117.22 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   All applicants for a license to solicit within the city shall execute an
application at the Clerk's Office pursuant to
Chapter 110. The application shall additionally include: the name of the firm
or company, organization or association which he represents; the make, year and
model of automobile and license number of the automobile, if any, to be used
while making such solicitations; the article or articles to be solicited, or
purpose for which solicitation is to be made.
(Prior Code, § 117.17) (Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 117.23 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   All applications shall be referred to the Mayor and processed in
accordance with the code and other ordinances of the city.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall submit its recommendation to the City Council and
no such permit shall be issued, except upon order of the Council.
(Prior Code, § 117.19) (Ord. 71-O-762, passed - -1971; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 117.24 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The fee for a license shall be as specified in the Business License
Fees Ordinance.
   (B)   The City Council shall be empowered to exempt from the provisions of
this subchapter relative to fees any charitable, school or church function
wherein the proceeds of such function are being raised for a charitable or
public purpose.
(Prior Code, § 117.20) (Ord. 71-O-762, passed - -1971; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 117.25 DURATION OF LICENSE.
   A license to solicit within the city shall give the applicant the right and
privilege of soliciting within the city for the purpose named in such
application for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 117.21) (Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 117.26 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor
because of any violation by the licensee of this chapter or of any other
ordinances of the city or of any state or federal law, pursuant to
Chapter 110 of this code.
(Prior Code, § 117.22) (Ord. 71-O-762, passed - -1971; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed
5-15-2024)
§ 117.28 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall go to any residence or place of business within the
city with the intent or purpose of soliciting as provided in this chapter
without having in his or her possession a license authorizing such solicitation
as provided hereunder.
   (B)   No permit shall be in the possession of any person other than the one
to whom such permit is issued.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow any person
under the age of 18 years to publicly solicit either in person or by agent or
representative upon the public streets, sidewalks or any other public place in
the city for subscriptions or donations.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 118: AUTOMOTIVE BUSINESS
Section
Motor Vehicle Dealers and Manufacturers
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   License required
   
118.03   Regulations
Motor Vehicle Repair Service
   
118.10   Definitions
   
118.11   License required
   
118.12   Regulations
Car Washes
   
118.20   Definitions
   
118.21   License required
   
118.22   Regulations
Motor Vehicle Parking and Storage
   
118.30   Definitions
   
118.31   License required
   
118.32   Regulations
MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS AND MANUFACTURERS
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle, machine, truck, tractor-trailer or semi-trailor
propelled or drawn by any mechanical power.
   MOTOR VEHICLE DEALER. Any person engaged in the business of buying, selling
or leasing new or used motor vehicles to consumers, other motor vehicle dealers
or other end users.
   MOTOR VEHICLE MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of
manufacturing or assembling new or used motor vehicle or motor vehicle parts.
   MOTOR VEHICLE AUCTION. A motor vehicle dealer that sells, solicits and
advertises the sale of used vehicles belonging to others at auction.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 118.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of motor vehicle dealer or
manufacturer, without first having obtained a license to do so.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 118.03 REGULATIONS.
   All motor vehicles on display shall be in good working condition and free
from dents, broken glass or broken parts.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SERVICE
§ 118.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SERVICE. Any person engaged in the business of
repairing, rebuilding, maintaining, servicing, painting or modifying a motor
vehicle. MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SERVICES include, but are not limited to, auto
repair businesses, oil change businesses, mechanics, muffler repair shops, body
shops and transmission shops.
   EMISSIONS TESTING FACILITY. A facility that tests a motor vehicle's
pollutants for purposes of state and local regulation.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 118.11 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle repair service or emissions testing
facility without first obtaining a license to do so.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 118.12 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All repairs, rebuilding, maintenance, service, painting and modifying
of motor vehicles must be conducted indoors.
   (B)   All inoperable motor vehicles, motor vehicles in a state of
disassembly and majorly damaged motor vehicles may not remain outdoors
overnight unless fenced or screened from view on all sides.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
CAR WASHES
§ 118.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAR WASH. An area or structure equipped with facilities for washing motor
vehicles. CAR WASH includes detail services, self-service, full-service and
automated facilities.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 118.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a car wash without first obtaining a license to do
so. Gas stations that have a car wash on the premises do not require a separate
car wash license.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024; Ord. 25-O-2412, passed 7-16-2025) Penalty,
see §
110.99
§ 118.22 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Car washes shall abide by all rules governing their operation,
equipment, wastewater, run-off and sludge, including those of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency and the Illinois Plumbing Code.
   (B)   The Superintendent of Public Works or his or her designee shall be
authorized to inspect the car washes operation and equipment to ensure
compliance with this code.
   (C)   Car washes shall not store vehicles on site in open view of the public
for a period in excess of 48 hours.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024; Ord. 24-O-2412, passed 7-16-2025) Penalty,
see §
110.99
MOTOR VEHICLE PARKING AND STORAGE
§ 118.30 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE STORAGE. The keeping or parking of motor vehicles on a fixed
premises for a short or long term period in exchange for compensation.
   TOW YARD. A temporary holding place for motor vehicles that have been
removed from some other location by tow and held until retrieved by the vehicle
owner or otherwise disposed of by the business.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 118.31 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle storage business or tow yard without
first obtaining a license to do so. The fee shall be as specified in the
Business License Fees Ordinance according to the number of parking or storage
spaces.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 118.32 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All motor vehicle storage lots shall be striped and all operators
shall provide the total number of potential parking spots in their application
for a business license.
   (B)   Motor vehicle storage lots may not contain inoperable motor vehicles,
motor vehicles in a state of disassembly or majorly damages vehicles.
   (C)   Motor vehicle storage lots shall be fenced and screened on all sides.
   (D)   All areas where motor vehicles will be parked or stored must be paved
with concrete, asphalt or other approved surface.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 119: INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS
Section
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   License required
   
119.03   Regulations
§ 119.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CELL TOWER. An elevated structure with antennas, transmitters and receivers
used for the transmission of cellular signals.
   INDUSTRIAL BUSINESS. Includes those premises used for manufacturing or
construction of goods, warehousing, storage and distributing of manufactured
goods, cell towers, transportation dispatch, motor freight terminals and
miscellaneous trucking businesses.
   MISCELLANEOUS TRUCKING BUSINESS. All businesses associated with the
transportation of good or materials by truck.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A business wherein freight brought in by motor truck
is assembled and/or stored for outing in intrastate and interstate shipment by
motor truck.
   TRANSPORTATION DISPATCH. A business engaged in the management of a fleet of
trucks, buses or other motor vehicles.
   WAREHOUSE. Any premises where raw materials or manufactured goods are stored
before their export or distribution for sale.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 119.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in an industrial business
within the city without first obtaining a business license. The fee for
industrial business licenses shall be as specified in the Business License Fees
Ordinance.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.03 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All industrial businesses must conduct operations so as not to create
a nuisance or hazard for neighbors.
   (B)   Industrial businesses must be compliant with all permits and licensing
authorities for their specific operation.
(Ord. 25-O-2412, passed 7-16-2025)
CHAPTER 120: CONTRACTORS
Section
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Licenses required
   
120.03   License application
   
120.04   Bond and insurance requirements
   
120.05   License fee and term
   
120.06   Duties; removal of refuse; traffic obstruction
   
120.07   Inspection and enforcement
   
120.08   License suspension or revocation
 
   
120.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building regulations, see
Ch. 150
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person, partnership, corporation, or other business entity
engaged in the business of constructing, altering or repairing buildings or
other structures or lots and all trades and crafts associated with such work,
including, but restricted to, general building contractors, excavating
contractors, landscape and lawncare professionals tree removal, fence
contractors, snow plowing contractors. cement or concrete contractors, asphalt
contractors, masonry contractors, carpentry contractors, heating, air
conditioning, ventilating, mechanical, electrical and plumbing contractors and
subcontractors.
      (1)   Any person who engages in the construction, repair or alteration of
any building or structure within the city for which a building permit is
required, is presumed to be a CONTRACTOR, and must be licensed hereunder unless
such presumption is rebutted.
      (2)   A homeowner engaged in constructing, altering, or repairing his,
her or their personal residence or lot shall not be considered a CONTRACTOR for
purposes of this chapter.
   GENERAL CONTRACTOR. A contractor who uses one or more trades or
subcontractors to perform the required construction to complete any project for
which a building permit is required.
   HOMEOWNER. A person or trust that has purchased a property with the
intention of making it his, her or their primary residence for a period of at
least six months. Corporation or other business entities listed as
beneficiaries shall not be considered homeowners.
   LANDSCAPE and LAWN CARE PROFESSIONAL. Any person that employs one or more
individuals for the purpose of providing landscape maintenance for clients,
including, without limitation, the cultivating or beautifying of gardens; the
trimming of hedges, plants or grass; or the raking or sweeping of debris and
leaves; snow removal.
   LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE. The improvement and/or maintenance of the appearance
of an area of land by planting and/or maintaining trees, shrubs, grass or other
plants and lawn ornaments; or by altering the contour of the ground.
   PERSON. A living human being also known as a natural person.
   SUBCONTRACTORS. A contractor who performs only that type of work that is
classified as a trade (for example plumbing, electrical, and the like).
   VEHICLE. Any motor-driven vehicle used by the licensee to transport a work
crew, equipment, yard waste and/or debris.
   YARD WASTE. Leaves with twig stems no longer than four inches, grass
clippings and similar garden debris and waste, tree branches, limbs and other
similar wood materials; unusable or unwanted substances of organic garden or
yard material.
(Ord. 14-O-2099, passed 8-20-2014; Ord. 23-O-2373, passed 10-4-2023; Ord. 24-O-
Ord. 2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 120.02 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall act or perform any services as a contractor or
subcontractor within the city without first having obtained a contractor's
license therefor as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall operate a construction or landscape business within
the city without first having obtained a business license therefor.
   (C)   A separate license for snow removal by a landscape and lawn care
professional or any snow removal contractor is required.
   (D)   Each vehicle operated by a landscape contractor or snow removal
contractor shall at all times display a sticker in the front driver's side
window that will be issued by the city's Building and Housing Department upon
the completion and approval of a contractor's license application.
   (E)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Homeowners. The homeowner shall not be required to acquire a city
contractor license to perform replacement and/or repair work on his, her or
their primary residence.
      (2)   Plumbers. Illinois Department of Public Health licensed plumbing
contractor and licensed plumber or as expressed in state statutes.
(Ord. 14-O-2099, passed 8-20-2014; Ord. 23-O-2373, passed 10-4-2023; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.03 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   All applications for a contractor's license shall be made in writing to the
Building and Housing Department, upon forms furnished by the city. Each
application shall be in accordance with
Chapter 110 of this code and additionally state the name and business address
of the applicant, whether it is a contractor, subcontractor or landscape and
lawncare professional license application and if applicable, the trade, or
trades involved who would be operating under such license and a statement that
the applicant is familiar with all pertinent city ordinances, code and
regulations including building codes and agrees to fully comply with same.
(Ord. 14-O-2099, passed 8-20-2014; Ord. 23-O-2373, passed 10-4-2023; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 120.04 BOND AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Bonds. Each applicant for a license shall, before receiving such a
license, deposit with the Building and Housing Department a license and letter
of credit or permit bond issued by a company approved and authorized to issue
bonds by the state in a form suitable to the city in the following penal sums:
      (1)   As set by the City Council for a general contractor in the amount
of $10,000; or
      (2)   As set by the City Council for a subcontractor in the amount of
$10,000.
   (B)   Liability insurance. A certificate of insurance showing that the
applicant has both bodily injury and property damage coverage in the amount of
$1,000,000 for each occurrence and $2,000,000 in the aggregate. The certificate
of insurance must name the city as the certificate holder.
   (C)   Prior to any license being issued, the contractor and/or subcontractor
must present proof to the city that they or their company are licensed and
bonded.
(Ord. 14-O-2099, passed 8-20-2014; Ord. 23-O-2373, passed 10-4-2023; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.05 LICENSE FEE AND TERM.
   The license fee for contractors and subcontractors shall be stated in the
Business License Fees Ordinance.
(Ord. 14-O-2099, passed 8-20-2014; Ord. 23-O-2373, passed 10-4-2023; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 120.06 DUTIES; REMOVAL OF REFUSE; TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   A contractor who is licensed under this chapter shall secure the
appropriate and necessary building permits required by the city before
undertaking the building, constructing, rehabilitating, repairing, altering,
moving or demolishing any building, structure, sidewalk, street, fence,
swimming pool, driveway, HVAC equipment or landscaping or any other related
construction activity, including plumbing and electrical work.
   (B)   Such contractor shall comply with all provisions of this code of
ordinances relating to or regulating the activities of contractors.
   (C)   All contractors shall remove or cause to be removed, at least once a
week or, at the direction of the Building and Housing Department, all trash,
refuse and other waste materials accumulated as a result of the construction
activity at the site of construction.
   (D)   No contractor shall obstruct traffic, streets or sidewalks without
first receiving permission from the Mayor's Office of the city.
   (E)   The contractor shall restrict the movement of construction vehicles
exceeding the local weight limitations to the local streets approved by the
appropriate city department.
   (F)   No contractor shall permit dirt, mud or waste materials to fall or be
carried onto the public streets or walkways.
   (G)   Any accumulation of dirt, mud or waste materials shall be removed from
the public streets or walkways on a daily basis by the contractor.
   (H)   In newly established residential and commercial/industrial
subdivisions in which more than one contractor may be building, the developer
shall be held responsible for compliance with this section.
   (I)   The contractor shall at all times keep the site of activities in an
orderly condition, free from standing water, unguarded dangerous implements and
health and safety hazards.
   (J)   At all times when work is being performed, contractor shall have at
least one individual on site who is experienced in the type of work being
performed, understands and can read the project's plans and specifications, and
can effectively communicate.
   (K)   Contractors shall either remove all yard waste from the premises at
the conclusion of each work day; or bag all yard waste in brown paper yard
waste bags and place said waste bags in rear of premises. Under no
circumstances shall yard waste be left on the premises in plastic garbage waste
bags.
   (L)   Snow removed cannot be placed on streets or sidewalks.
(Ord. 14-O-2099, passed 8-20-2014; Ord. 23-O-2373, passed 10-4-2023; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.07 INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The provisions of this chapter are declared to be of a regulatory nature,
and it shall at all times be the right of the Police Department, Fire
Department, Department of Public Works, Building and Housing Department and
other city departments to regularly inspect the site of contractors' activities
to see that the same are being conducted and operated in accordance with the
requirements of all laws and ordinances applicable thereto.
(Ord. 14-O-2099, passed 8-20-2014; Ord. 23-O-2373, passed 10-4-2023; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 120.08 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The city may suspend or revoke a contractor or subcontract license
under this chapter pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 110 of this code.
   (B)   Any such suspension or revocation shall be in addition to any fine
imposed for the conduct giving rise to the revocation or suspension. No person
whose license has been revoked as herein provided shall be eligible for a new
license for a one-year period from the date of revocation or suspension.
   (C)   No person whose license has been revoked two times previously or whose
license and permit bond has been collected on in any amount two times
previously shall be eligible for licensing for five years from the date of the
last revocation.
(Ord. 14-O-2099, passed 8-20-2014; Ord. 23-O-2373, passed 10-4-2023; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any contractor or anyone performing the
services of a contractor to violate any of the terms or provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined
in the amount of not less than $200, nor more than $750.
   (C)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue and shall be punishable as such
hereunder.
   (D)   The city may also file a claim against the contractor's licensing and
permit bond (L&P bond) or otherwise proceed as specified in this code of
ordinances.
   (E)   If a vehicle is being used by a landscape and lawn care professional
or snow removal contractor without a vehicle sticker, as required under §
120.02 of this chapter, that vehicle shall be towed at the owner's expense.
(Ord. 14-O-2099, passed 8-20-2014; Ord. 23-O-2373, passed 10-4-2023; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15-2024)
CHAPTER 121: RENTAL PROPERTIES
Section
General Provisions
   
121.01   Purpose
   
121.02   Definitions
   
121.03   Licensed required
   
121.04   Interpretation and application
   
121.05   Scope
   
121.06   Responsible departments for enforcement
   
121.07   Occupancy and licensure
   
121.08   Inspections
Licensing and Fees
   
121.25   Rental license application
   
121.26   Crime-Free rental housing program
   
121.27   Fees
   
121.28   Residential rental density
Standards and Requirements
   
121.40   Zoning Ordinance
   
121.41   Property maintenance
   
121.42   Parking
   
121.43   Tenant responsibilities
   
121.44   License suspension or revocation
 
   
121.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 121.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards for the
protection of the life, safety, health, welfare and property of rental
residential owners and tenants, as well as that of the general public:
   (A)   Maximum occupant loads. To prevent the overcrowding of rental
dwellings by requiring compliance with minimum space standards per occupant for
each dwelling unit;
   (B)   Prevent slum areas. To facilitate the enforcement of minimum standards
for the maintenance of existing residential buildings and thus to prevent slums
and blight;
   (C)   Maintain property values. To preserve the value of land and buildings
throughout the city; and
   (D)   Crime-free housing. To reduce and prevent crimes from occurring within
rental housing and neighborhoods.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 121.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED DWELLING. A dwelling unit, building, structure, property or part
thereof that has not been actively used for its intended, designed or permitted
purpose for a period of 12 consecutive months, or for a cumulative period of 18
months during any three-year period.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. A residential building containing three or more dwelling
units. An APARTMENT BUILDING may also be classified as a multi-family dwelling.
   APPROVED. Having received approval of the city's Building and Housing
Department.
   CRIME-FREE RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAM. A system of rules used to educate rental
housing unit owners, owner's, mangers and/or agents for the control and record
keeping for any municipal violation or criminal activity as defined by local,
state or federal law. This includes the environmental design for rental housing
units and facilities.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms containing individualized cooking, sleeping
and sanitary facilities which is designed to be occupied or intended for use by
one household.
   FAMILY. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, living together as a single household unit.
   HOUSEHOLD. See “family”.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. Kinship members including:
      (1)   Mother or mother in law: a female parent;
      (2)   Father or father in law: a male parent;
      (3)   Son: a male child of the parent(s);
      (4)   Daughter: a female child of the parent(s);
      (5)   Brother: a male child of the same parent(s);
      (6)   Sister: a female child of the same parent(s);
      (7)   Grandfather: a parent's father;
      (8)   Grandmother: a parent's mother;
      (9)   Grandson; a child's son; and
      (10)   Granddaughter: a child's daughter.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
   LANDLORD. The land owner, lessor or sublessor of rental residential
property.
   LESSEE. See “tenant”.
   OCCUPANT. A person who lives in a dwelling unit. An OCCUPANT who is not an
individual owner is a tenant.
   OWNER. The land owner, person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property or recorded in the land records of
the city, as holding any interest in title to the property; or otherwise having
control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such
person, and the personal representative of the estate of such person if ordered
to take possession of real property by a court.
   OWNER'S AGENT. A person 18 years of age or older who maintains a primary
residence (as defined herein) or an office for the purpose of transacting
business in the city and is customarily present to perform the duties of
managing agent on a full time basis whether the rental unit is occupied or not.
   PRIMARY RESIDENCE. A dwelling unit maintained and occupied on a routine
basis by at least one individual owner more than 50% of the year and can be
proven to be that individual owner's legal residence through tax records or
other official documents filed with the state or federal government. A
residence occupied by its owner 50% or less of the year is classified as a
"secondary residence".
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE. The duly adopted Property Maintenance Code of the
city.
   RENTAL UNIT. An independent dwelling unit not occupied by the owner as a
primary or secondary residence. See “residential rental housing” definition.
   RENTER. A tenant. (See “tenant”).
   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL HOUSING.
      (1)   A dwelling, townhouse, condominium, dwelling unit, rooming unit,
building, premises or structure for residential use by a person or persons who
is not the legal owner of record.
      (2)   Units occupied by immediate family, as herein defined, are not
considered RESIDENTIAL RENTAL HOUSING.
      (3)   This chapter is not intended to, and does not, apply to hotels,
motels, nursing homes or assisted living facilities.
   SECONDARY RESIDENCE. A dwelling unit occupied by an owner less than 50% of
the year and occupied by no one else at any time, except for individuals
related by blood or marriage when the owner is actually present.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE. A building designed to be occupied by a family;
single household. See “family”.
   TENANT. A person not the owner who occupies a dwelling unit with the consent
of the owner for monetary or non-monetary consideration.
   CITY. The City of Markham, Illinois.
   VACANT. A dwelling unit, building, structure, property, or part thereof,
that an owner, tenant or other occupant has moved out of a property for a
period of 30 days or more.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The City of Markham Zoning Code.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 121.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, as defined herein, to lease or operate
residential rental housing without obtaining a license to operate it as
residential rental housing and complying with the provisions of this chapter,
together with other applicable codes and ordinances of the city.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 121.04 INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the protection of the
public health, safety and welfare. This chapter and the International Property
Maintenance Code adopted by the city shall apply, as minimum standards for
maintenance of residential rental housing, where the requirements of this
chapter vary from any other lawfully adopted city or state laws, rules,
regulations, ordinances, codes, deed restrictions or covenants, the more
restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. The city does
not enforce any private covenants between land owners or tenants or finally
determine conflicts between neighboring property owners.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 121.05 SCOPE.
   This chapter shall apply to all real property located within the
incorporated limits of the city which contains one or more rental units, as
defined herein.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 121.06 RESPONSIBLE DEPARTMENTS FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city has created this chapter pursuant to its home rule powers and
has designated the Building and Housing Department as the enforcement body. The
Director of the Building and Housing Department, or his or her designee, has
the authority for enforcing the provisions of this chapter and shall serve to
render interpretations of this chapter.
   (B)   The Crime-Free Rental Housing Program will be coordinated by the
city's Police Department through the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
   (C)   The Building and Housing Department Director or the Chief of Police
may, when circumstances dictate, call upon the Police Department, county,
state, fire district or other authorities, agencies, codes or regulations in
identifying and correcting conditions in rental housing which constitute
violations of this chapter or other duly enacted ordinances, regulations or
laws as applicable.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 121.07 OCCUPANCY AND LICENSURE.
   (A)   No dwelling unit may be occupied by other than the owner and owner's
family without having been licensed and inspected. The provisions of this
chapter shall apply for licensing and annual inspections of any rental unit
within the city.
   (B)   Occupancy limits shall be determined by the applicable city codes.
   (C)   No person, corporation or business entity of any kind or nature
whatsoever shall engage in the business of renting any dwelling unit to the
public, or operating a rental dwelling or dwelling unit, rooming house or
rooming unit, unless a valid and current residential rental license has been
issued by the Building and Housing Department for the specific location.
   (D)   No person shall rent or occupy a dwelling unit or rent or occupy any
rooming house unit unless a current valid license has been issued for that
specific location.
   (E)   No license shall be issued or renewed unless the owner or operator
agrees in the application to such inspections as may be required pursuant to
this chapter.
   (F)   This licensing requirement shall not apply to:
      (1)   Group homes governed by the Specialized Living Centers Act, 405
ILCS 25/1 et seq., dealing with the developmentally disabled, or other similar
uses governed by state or federal laws, rules or regulations.
      (2)   Licensed professionals acting as brokers or agents, unless licensed
professionals are owners or managers of property subject to this chapter.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
121.99
§ 121.08 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Inspections required for licensure. Units not made accessible for
inspection (or otherwise not inspected) in accordance with this chapter shall
be in violation of this chapter and shall not be licensed and are subject to
license revocation. Systematic residential rental property inspections will be
conducted annually. Inspections based upon complaints received will be
conducted as received and determined as necessary by the city.
   (B)   Notice of inspection. Upon presentation of proper credentials, city
authorized representatives may enter at reasonable times after giving notice to
the landlord of any building, structure or land within the city to perform the
duties imposed by this chapter. Reasonable notice for required scheduled
inspections shall be defined as a minimum of ten calendar days' advance written
notice. It shall be the responsibility of the landlord to notify the tenant(s)
of inspection appointments, arrange access with the tenant(s) and provide
access to all units. In the absence of the building landlord or landlord's
agent, an adult at least 18 years of age must be present during the inspection.
   (C)   Residential rental property complaints. In the case of a complaint of
a potentially life or health threatening condition(s) or a property maintenance
violation from any source, the city may promptly inspect or investigate without
prior notice; except that, notice of such inspection or investigation shall be
provided to the landlord or agent as soon as reasonably possible.
   (D)   Inspection areas. Rental property inspections will include a physical
inspection of the rental residential property including the interior of all
rental units, building exterior, exterior structures such as garages and
storage areas, common areas, basements/cellars, laundry areas, electrical,
plumbing and storage areas, as deemed appropriate by the inspector/code
enforcement official with the exception of personal items.
   (E)   Denial of access. Except in the case of an emergency, if a tenant or
property owner denies an inspector access to a rental property, the Director of
Building and Housing Department or his or her designee shall apply to the
Circuit Court for the issuance of an administrative search warrant for
inspections under this chapter.
   (F)   Time limit for compliance. When a licensing inspection of a rental
residential property reveals any violations of applicable codes, a compliance
time frame will be set by the inspector/code official. In establishing a
compliance time frame, the inspector/code official shall determine the
reasonable minimal time necessary to correct the violations based upon the
number and severity of the violations. The city shall send notice to the
property owner or the listed property agent by regular U.S. mail at the last
address provided on the most recent license application. Said notice shall
include the following:
      (1)   Description of the property sufficient for identification;
      (2)   A statement listing the violations of applicable codes;
      (3)   The date upon which the licensing re-inspection will occur; and
      (4)   An explanation that if upon completion of the licensing re-
inspection, the requirements of applicable city codes have not been met, it
will be recommended to the Director of Building and Housing Department that the
license be suspended or revoked.
   (G)   Immediate action. Notice of violations involving imminent danger to
the life, safety, health, welfare and/or property of the landlord and/or
tenants may be made by any means reasonably calculated to provide actual
notice, which shall include, but not be limited to, personal delivery,
registered or certified mail or posting of an appropriate notice on the
premises.
   (H)   Occupancy denial. In the case of imminent danger or fire hazard,
structural failure or danger of imminent collapse, interruptions or failures in
plumbing, heating, electrical systems or other hazardous health situations, the
city may order immediate repair or correction and may order the premises
vacated pending such repair or correction.
      (1)   Units vacated under this division shall be posted with signs
indicating that the unit has been determined to be illegal or, if applicable
uninhabitable and that occupancy is prohibited until the rental unit has been
inspected to verify that the violation has been corrected.
      (2)   Any person who defaces or removes a posted sign as described above
without the approval of the city shall be in violation of this chapter.
      (3)   Any person, not the owner, who enters, occupies, uses or any
person, including the owner, who permits others to enter, occupy or use the
structure after such a posting shall be charged with trespassing. Each day the
rental unit building or structure is entered, occupied or used following such a
posting shall be considered a separate offense.
   (I)   Citation issuance. If, at the conclusion of the period established for
corrective action, the violation has not, in the city's reasonable judgment,
been satisfactorily corrected, then the city may issue citations in accordance
with provisions of this chapter, suspend or revoke the license for the affected
unit or units, and have the rental unit vacated. Citations for local municipal
violations are adjudicated through the city's Municipal Housing Court.
   (J)   Time limit to vacate a building or unit. If notification has been
presented to the landlord that the property is not properly licensed or that
the license has been suspended or revoked, the rental property or properties
shall be vacated within 60 days of notification by the city.
      (1)   If said property is not vacated within the 60-day period, the
landlord will be responsible for all fines as set forth in this chapter.
Citations will be issued with a mandatory court appearance. Fines imposed upon
rental property owners who have initiated statutory eviction proceedings
against tenant(s) pursuant to the crime-free program of this chapter shall be
waived so long as such eviction proceedings are pending and being actively
pursued. This waiver does not relate to fines resulting from property
maintenance violations.
      (2)   Notification will be either personally delivered or mailed to the
landlord or property agent as listed on the most recent registration
application. This notice to the tenants and occupants will be posted:
 
1   You are hereby notified that the license for this structure has been revoked
or the owner has failed to license this residential rental property pursuant to
Chapter 121 of the Markham Code of Ordinances.
2   You must vacate this structure within 60 days of the date of this notice.
3   If you fail to vacate this structure, you will be in violation of this above
referenced Code and subject to penalties and fines with a minimum of $250 and a
maximum of $750 for each day you are found to be in violation with a mandatory
court appearance.
 
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
121.99
LICENSING AND FEES
§ 121.25 RENTAL LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Prior to engaging in the business of renting any dwelling unit to the
public or operating a rental dwelling unit(s), every owner of a rental
property, whether occupied or vacant, shall file with the city a completed
rental registration license application for the unit(s) including the
appropriate fee for each rental property and unit(s).
   (B)   Application for license registration renewal must be filed at least 30
days prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to renew an existing
residential rental registration license will result in a penalty and/or
citation(s).
   (C)   New rental units. Any rental unit must be registered within 30 days of
construction, conversion from owner-occupancy or change from any other non-
rental status.
   (D)   Sale of licensed residential rental unit.
      (1)   A residential rental license is non-transferrable to another person
or to another rental dwelling unit.
      (2)   Every person holding a residential rental license must give notice
in writing to the city within five business days after having legally
transferred or otherwise disposed of the ownership or legal control of any
licensed rental dwelling. Such notice must include the name, address and
contact information of the person succeeding to the ownership or control of
such rental dwelling or dwellings.
      (3)   New owner application. Any person becoming an owner of an existing
residential rental unit shall file a complete residential rental license
application within 30 days of the property transfer and must attend a “Crime-
Free Housing” training seminar within three months of property ownership.
   (E)   Residential rental license applications shall be completed pursuant to
Chapter 110 of this code and must also contain:
      (1)   A description of the premises by street name and number and
property tax identification number;
      (2)   The name, address and a copy of the government issued
identification of the property owner. If the property is held in a land trust,
the names and addresses of all beneficiaries must be disclosed;
      (3)   A copy of the current or proposed lease and copies of current
identification documents for all tenants or proposed tenants over the age of
18;
      (4)   An original signature crime free housing addendum. Electronic
signatures are prohibited;
      (5)   Where the owner has engaged in a management company to manage the
property, a copy of the signed management agreement must be provided;
      (6)   When a residential rental unit is owned by more than one
individual, or is owned by an entity that is not a natural person, an owner's
agent must be designated.
         (a)   The owner shall provide the name, address and 24 hour contact
information of the owner's agent;
         (b)   The agent shall be authorized by the owner in writing to accept
service of any city notices on behalf of the owner, including appointment
letters, notices of code violations, court process or any other communication
or correspondence in connection with the administration and enforcement of this
and other city codes and ordinances;
         (c)   The city shall be notified in writing within ten days of any
change of the owner's agent;
         (d)   An owner with a designated "owner's agent" who is found not to
be customarily available or able to perform the duties as defined shall
designate a different individual who is able to properly fulfill the
requirements within ten days of being notified of the deficiency;
         (e)   For the purposes of an emergency response to a residential
rental property the owner or owner's designated agent must be located within 30
miles of the city corporate limits for building and tenant emergencies;
         (f)   The agent must be listed on the license application and readily
accessible to the unit tenant, city, police and/or the city's Fire Protection
District; and
         (g)   The application shall be signed by the owner or the owner's
agent.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
121.99
§ 121.26 CRIME-FREE RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAM.
   (A)   Owner responsibilities."Owners" and "owner's agents" must comply with
all rules and regulations required in the Crime-Free Rental Housing Program.
      (1)   Owners or "owner's agent" must advise prospective tenants of the
city's Crime- Free Rental Housing Program.
      (2)   All owners or owners' agents shall require a signed lease,
identifying all tenants 18 years of age or older.
      (3)   All landlords shall incorporate into the body of all leases or
rental agreements, or renewals of leases or rental agreements, the first and
last legal names, gender and date of birth of all individuals who will reside
at the rental property during the term of the lease. All such landlords shall
also require their tenants, as a condition of their lease, to provide written
notice containing the first and last legal names, gender and date of birth of
any guests who will be temporarily residing at the rental property for more
than a calendar week (seven consecutive days).
      (4)   Owners or owner's agents must have all adult tenants sign the
Crime-Free Lease Addendum that must read as follows:
 

In addition to all other terms of this lease, landlord and tenant agree as
follows:
The tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest or any other person or
persons associated with the tenant or his or her household.
1.   Shall not engage in any criminal activity or violation of local, state or
federal law, when such activity or violation constitutes a threat to public health
or safety or which constitute a breach of the peace or disorderly conduct, on or
near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances;
2.   Shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate any violation of local,
state or federal law, when such activity or violation constitutes a threat to
public health or safety, and/or obstruction or resistance of law enforcement
efforts against criminal activity on or near the rental unit, common areas or
appurtenances;
3.   Shall not knowingly permit, solicit, aid or abet activities on or near the
rental unit, common areas or appurtenances, which facilitate any violation of
local, state or federal law, when such activity or violation constitutes a threat
to public health or safety or which constitute a breach of the peace or disorderly
conduct.
Should the tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest or any other
person or persons associated with the tenant, or his or her household, violate any
provisions stated herein on or near the rental unit, common areas or
appurtenances, such a violation shall constitute a material non-compliance with
the lease and shall further constitute grounds for termination of tenancy and
eviction.
Violation of any of the above provisions shall be a material and irreparable
violation of the lease and good cause for termination of tenancy. A single
violation of any of the provisions of this added addendum shall be deemed a
serious violation and a material and irreparable non-compliance. It is understood
that a single violation shall be good cause for immediate termination of the
lease. Proof of violation shall not require criminal conviction, but the tenant
understands and agrees that an arrest (supported by admissible corroborating
evidence that criminal activity in violation of the above provisions has occurred)
for a described violation or criminal activity shall be sufficient evidence of a
violation and grounds for termination of tenant's tenancy and occupancy. In
addition, commission of city ordinance violations on three or more separate
occasions in a six-month period or on six or more separate occasions in a 12-month
period when such violations constitute threats to public health or safety or which
constitute a breach of the peace or disorderly conduct shall be good cause for
termination of tenancy.
Should tenant or occupant, on one or more occasions, use or permit the use of the
rental unit or rental property for the commission of a felony or Class A
misdemeanor under the laws of the state, the landlord shall have the right to void
the lease and recover the rental unit or rental property pursuant to 735 ILCS 5/9-
120.
In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum and any other
provisions of the lease, the provisions of the addendum shall govern.
NOTE: A TENANT WILL NOT BE IN VIOLATION OF THIS LEASE OR SUBJECT TO EVICTION FOR
CONTACTING THE POLICE, OR FOR SEEKING OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES, AS A CRIME VICTIM OR
CONCERNED PERSON. A TENANT WILL NOT BE IN VIOLATION OF THIS LEASE OR SUBJECT TO
EVICTION FOR REPORTING ACTS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, DATING VIOLENCE, SEXUAL ASSAULT
OR STALKING. A TENANT IS ENCOURAGED TO REPORT THESE CRIMES WITHOUT FEAR OF HIS OR
HER STATUS AS A TENANT.
 
   (B)   Tenant access to owner or owner’s agent. The owner or owner's agent of
a rental residential property shall provide each tenant or occupant with the
name and telephone number of a responsible person, or managing agent, who in
emergency situations will be available on a 24-hour basis and who has the
authority to make repairs as needed for occupancy.
   (C)   Maximum number of tenants notification. The owner of a rental
residential property shall inform each tenant or occupant in writing, prior to
occupancy, of the maximum number of persons allowable by the occupancy
standards set forth in this chapter.
   (D)   Tenant records access. The owner or owner's agent of a residential
rental property shall make available to the Building and Housing Director and/
or Chief of Police or their designees, upon request, the following: the signed
lease, the signed Crime-Free Lease Addendum, credit history and background
checks as required to be maintained by this chapter.
   (E)   Nuisance residential rental property. It is hereby declared a nuisance
and declared to be against the health, safety, peace, and comfort of the city
for any property owner or owner's agent to knowingly permit the following:
      (1)   Rental of a rental unit, or residential rental property, to a
tenant who knowingly permits, solicits, aids or abets any of the following
offenses to occur on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances
related to the tenant: murder; kidnapping; sexual assault; robbery; burglary;
aggravated kidnapping; prostitution; solicitation of prostitution; pandering;
obscenity; child pornography; sale or distribution of obscene publications;
criminal housing management; possession of explosives; unlawful use of weapons;
sale of firearms; gambling; keeping a gambling place; concealing a fugitive;
violation of the state's Controlled Substances Act, being 720 ILCS 570;
violation of the Cannabis Control Act, being 720 ILCS 550; or commission of any
other crime under state or federal law, which constitutes a threat to public
health or safety not specifically listed above. Prohibition of these offenses
applies also to members of the tenant's household, guests or other parties
under control of the tenant;
      (2)   Rental of a rental unit, or residential rental property to a tenant
who knowingly permits, solicits, aids or abets any of the following offenses to
occur on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances relating to the
tenant: commission of city ordinance violations on three or more separate
occasions in a six-month period or on six or more separate occasions in a 12-
month period when such violations constitutes threats to public health or
safety or which constitute a breach of the peace or disorderly conduct, or an
unreasonably high number of calls for police service including, but not limited
to, calls that may fall within the descriptions listed above that when compared
to other properties in the city of similar type, reasonably indicate that the
activity at this property is out of character for the area and is impacting the
quality of life of those in the area. Prohibition of these offenses applies
also to members of the tenant's household, guests or other parties under
control of the tenant;
      (3)   Prior to seeking abatement of a nuisance or eviction of tenants
under this section, the city shall provide notice to the property owner or
owner's agent stating that the property is in danger of being declared a
nuisance. If the city seeks the eviction of tenants or the abatement of a
nuisance based on the conduct of a tenant or tenant's guests, or the conduct in
a tenant's rental unit, then the tenant shall also be provided this notice.
Said notice shall include the following:
         (a)   Description of the property sufficient for identification;
         (b)   A statement listing the applicable violations(s) of divisions
(E)(l) or (E)(2) above; and
         (c)   Notice that divisions (E)(l) and (E)(2) above do not apply to
situations where a tenant is a crime victim or where the tenant or other person
calling on the tenant's behalf has called for police service as a crime victim
or concerned person. Upon receiving such notice, the property owner, owner's
agent, or tenant shall have the right to request an informal hearing before the
Chief of Police or his or her designee within seven days of receipt of the
notice.
      (4)   Divisions (E)(l) or (E)(2) above shall not apply if a tenant is a
victim of a crime, has called for police service as a crime victim or concerned
person or where a third party has called for police service on a tenant's
behalf. Further, divisions (E)(l) and (E) (2) above shall not apply if a tenant
is a victim of the ordinance violations or has called for police service as a
crime victim or concerned person. Further, divisions (E)(1) or (E) (2) above
shall not apply to a tenant who reports acts of domestic violence, dating
violence, sexual assault or stalking;
      (5)   The City Police Department's Crime-Free Housing Coordinator may
attempt to assist property owners in the abatement of nuisances or with
proceedings for the eviction of tenants that have violated any of the
provisions of divisions (E)(1) or (E)(2) above; and
      (6)   For purposes of divisions (E)(1) or (E)(2) above, it shall be
sufficient evidence that a described offense occurred if the offender has been
arrested or cited for one or more of the offenses described in divisions (E)(1)
or (E)(2) above and the arrest or citation is supported by admissible
corroborative evidence that criminal activity or an ordinance violation has
occurred.
   (F)   Required class training. The owner of any rental residential property,
and when applicable, the property management agent of any rental residential
property, shall register, attend and successfully complete a landlord "Crime-
Free Rental Housing Program" training class conducted by the city within three
months from the date of the issuance of a license or renewal license for a
rental residential property.
      (1)   An owner or property agent of any rental residential property who
successfully completes the city landlord training class for "Crime-Free Rental
Housing Program" shall not be required to attend and complete a landlord
training class following the issuance of any subsequent license or renewal
license for any rental residential properties for four years.
      (2)   If the "Crime-Free Rental Housing Program" class is not attended or
certification is denied, the residential rental license for all properties
owned or managed by that owner or property manager will be denied or revoked.
Penalties set forth in this chapter for non-license compliance will be
applicable.
      (3)   When a new property agent is hired for a rental residential
property and that property agent has not attended and successfully completed a
landlord training class for "Crime-Free Rental Housing Program" by the city,
the new property agent shall attend and successfully complete this class within
three months from the date of the person's hiring as the property agent for the
rental residential property.
   (G)   Crime-free rental housing. The landlord or managing agent will be in
violation of this chapter if he or she has not complied with all crime-free
housing requirements as stated in this section. The Chief of Police or his or
her designee shall designate a Crime-Free Rental Housing Co-Coordinator, who
shall be responsible for conducting the crime-free housing seminars and
maintain a list of the attendees and their dates of attendance.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 121.27 FEES.
   Residential rental license and inspection fees shall be established annually
by the city and shall be assessed to and paid by each rental residential
property owner.
   (A)   (1)   License fee. An annual license fee as stated in the Business
License Fees Ordinance shall be paid to the city by the building owner (or
owner's agent) for each separate dwelling unit.
      (2)   Crime-free rental housing training fee. Required training classes,
as administered by the city's Police Department, shall be completed by the land
owner (or owner's registered agent) for all residential rental buildings. The
fee for this class is incorporated in the license fee.
   (B)   Reduced license fee. A residential rental is subject to a reduced
license fee if, upon application, the owner or owner's agent presents proof of
a valid and enforceable property maintenance agreement for, at a minimum,
exterior maintenance including grass cutting and snow removal.
      (1)   The owner or owner's agent shall sign an affidavit attesting to the
validity of the property maintenance agreement.
      (2)   This provision shall by no means alleviate the owner for the
ultimate responsibility of property maintenance.
      (3)   If the property fails to adhere to the requirements of the property
maintenance code or is found to be in violation of any other provision of this
code relating to property maintenance, despite proof of a valid and enforceable
property maintenance agreement, the owner or owner's agent shall be responsible
for the remaining portion of the license fee, in addition to any other fees or
fines imposed. The owner shall be thereafter ineligible for the reduced license
fee as specified herein for all future applications.
   (C)   Annual inspection fees and reinspection fees shall be per dwelling
unit as specified in the Business License Fees Ordinance. An owner that fails
to appear in person or through its agent shall be subject to the next
corresponding reinspection fee.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 20-O-2281, passed 9-16-2020; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15- 2024)
§ 121.28 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL DENSITY.
   (A)   As of September 2025, there are approximately 3,900 single-family
residences within the city. As of September 2025, there are approximately 741
single-family residences which have been granted licenses pursuant to the
city’s rental licensing system. Accordingly, approximately 19% of all single-
family residences in the city are occupied by renters.
   (B)   In order to achieve a healthy balance in residential housing, the
number of rental licenses issued by the city shall be regulated as follows:
      (1)   The moratorium on the issuance of rental licenses imposed by
Resolution No. 24-R-733 is extended through April 30, 2026.
      (2)   From May 1, 2026 through April 30, 2027, no more than 15% of the
total number of single-family residences in the city shall be eligible to
obtain a rental license.
      (3)   Beginning May 1, 2027, no more than 10% of the total number of
single-family residences in the city shall be eligible to obtain a rental
license.
   (C)   (1)   If the number of rental properties meets or exceeds the
permitted number of rental properties in the city on the effective date of this
section, no additional rental licenses shall be approved by the city.
      (2)   Existing rental licenses may be renewed. However, should a rental
license not be renewed, or if the rental license is revoked or lapses, the
rental license shall not be reinstated unless it is in conformance with this
section and other applicable sections of the municipal code.
      (3)   In accordance with the requirements set forth in §
121.25, a rental property that becomes vacant after October 1, 2026 shall
constitute grounds for non-renewal of an existing rental license. The
requirements set forth under §
150.005 of this code concerning owners’ responsibility to register vacant
properties shall apply.
   (D)   The Building and Housing Department shall be responsible for
maintaining the official count of issued licenses and also the official city
map identifying the location of all existing rental licenses.
   (E)   Exception. Legal, non-conforming multiple-flats.
      (1)   In the city, there are three legal non-conforming multiple-flats.
Multiple-flats, by design, are different than single-family residences because
at least one and perhaps two or more units were planned to be income-producing
rental units. Any multiple-flat with one or more rental units which were
licensed prior to the effective date of this section may continue to be rented
and qualify for a rental license, including where the multiple-flat is sold to
a new owner, and will not count against the applicable rental density cap set
forth under division (B).
      (2)   The legal, non-conforming multiple-flats that exist in the city are
as follows:
         (a)   15750 Dixie Highway.
         (b)   15742 Central Park Avenue.
         (c)   16630 Winchester Avenue.
(Ord. 25-O-2416, passed 9-17-2025)
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 121.40 ZONING ORDINANCE.
   No rental residential unit shall be created or occupied unless it complies
with the provisions of the city's Zoning Code and other applicable provision of
the city code.
   (A)   New rental units. No new rental units shall be established or added,
nor shall the occupancy limit of any rental residential unit be increased,
except in conformity with the city's Zoning Ordinance and all applicable city
codes.
   (B)   Existing abandoned rental units. Rental units that have been
abandoned, as defined herein, have lost rental status for any reason, are
otherwise unlicensed, unregistered or have not been inspected in accordance
with this chapter, shall lose or forfeit any previously existing legal non-
conformity and must meet current standards and requirements prior to occupancy.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 121.41 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   No rental residential unit shall be occupied or continued to be
occupied unless the structure in which said unit is located complies with the
provisions and standards of the city's Property Maintenance Code and all other
codes of the city relating to building and housing and is maintained in a
structurally sound condition and kept free from health, fire and other hazards
to life and property.
   (B)   The owner of the rental residential unit shall be responsible for
keeping the premises maintained in good repair and fit for human habitation,
which shall include the building's interior and exterior and all living areas.
Repairs may require obtaining proper city building permits.
   (C)   Equipment safety and maintenance. Every facility, piece of equipment,
utility or service which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed
and/or installed to function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in
satisfactory working condition and shall not be removed, shut off or
disconnected in any occupied rental residential unit, except for such temporary
interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in
process or during temporary emergencies or tenant's failure to pay agreed upon
services. Utilities or services shared by more than one unit shall be the
owner's responsibility to maintain.
   (D)   If, upon inspection, there is an insect or rodent infestation in more
than one dwelling unit, the owner shall be required to contract with a licensed
extermination company to treat all common areas and infested units not less
than on a monthly basis for the remainder of the license years.
   (E)   Garbage containers for apartment buildings. Providing for garbage and
rubbish removal and supplying such facilities or containers as are necessary
for the sanitary disposal of all garbage and rubbish is a condition of
occupancy. Such exterior containers shall be enclosed on three sides with
appropriate materials for appearance and the containers must be emptied at a
frequency so that garbage and rubbish does not overflow provided containers.
   (F)   If the city deems that any rental properties lawn has become a
nuisance to the surrounding neighbors, Public Works will be assigned to cut and
remove all grass and weeds from around the property at a minimum cost of $200
plus a $100 administrative fee. In addition, the Building and Housing
Department will issue a citation to the property owner.
   (G)   Fire extinguishers. Every rental residential unit shall have one fire
extinguisher, two and one-half pound charge, manufactured by an approved
testing agency for combating Class A, B and C fires.
   (H)   Security, crime-free rental housing program requirements. The
following requirements provide crime prevention through environmental design
(CPTED). Each rental unit must comply with these requirements:
      (1)   Deadbolts with three-inch screws secured into the building framing
for strike plates on all unit entry doors;
      (2)   Anti-lift slide devices on sliding doors and windows on the first
floor, garden levels and accessible second levels;
      (3)   Adequate security lighting for all hallways, entryways and parking
lots and common areas;
      (4)   Proper trimming of trees and shrubs, eliminating hiding places;
      (5)   Eye views on entry doors with 180-degree view;
      (6)   All multi-unit buildings must have the building address in clear
view on the front and back of the building. Single residences must have the
building address in clear view on the front of the building. Each of the
figures of every such address on any residence or apartment building shall not
be less than four inches in length; and
      (7)   Buzzer type entry security system must be in proper working order
from all of the dwelling units in every multi-unit buildings with common
entrances. All front and back entry doors must locked at all times.
   (I)   Water service. It shall be unlawful for occupants to remain in
occupancy of premises where the water service has been disconnected for a
period of six days or more and the Water Department is authorized to seek an
eviction of such unlawful occupants in the Circuit Court of the county. Where
there is a determination that children are involved in the occupancy of the
premises, the Water Department shall notify the state's Department of Children
and Family Services.
      (1)   A zero tolerance policy will be in effect if the Water and Public
Works Department has determined that a property that has been previously
disconnected from water service suddenly has reestablished water service, the
landlord or property manager will be held responsible for all fines and
penalties associated with the water account.
      (2)   In addition, the landlord or property manager may be informed to
terminate any lease agreement with tenants accused of stealing any city
services or will risk suspension or revocation of residential rental license.
   (J)   Residential rental licenses must be prominently displayed near the
front entrance to a residential rental unit and must be produced upon request
by any authorized agent of the city.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 20-O-2280, passed 8-19-2020; Ord. 24-O-
2388, passed 5-15- 2024) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.42 PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be provided and maintained for all rental units in
accordance with the standards set forth in the Zoning Code and city Building
Code standards.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 121.43 TENANT RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Every tenant of a rental unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary
condition that portion of the premises, both interior and exterior, that the
tenant occupies, uses, shares or controls. Every tenant shall ensure that his
or her trash, garbage and other refuse is stored and disposed of in a clean and
sanitary manner.
   (B)   No tenant either by negligence or abuse shall create or contribute to
the creation of any violation of this chapter.
   (C)   No tenant shall create or permit to be created by others any noise,
smoke, vibration, fumes, vapor, glare, odor or dust within that portion of the
premises that the tenant occupies, uses or controls which interferes with the
reasonable use and enjoyment of other rental residential units on a rental
residential property or of nearby properties.
   (D)   No tenant shall store flammable or hazardous materials or devices in
such quantities or in such a manner as to create a fire, health or other hazard
to the premises or other persons.
   (E)   Vehicles are to be parked or driven on improved parking areas or
driveways only without blocking public access to sidewalks or roadways.
   (F)   Tenants shall be required to procure renters' insurance for the unit
they inhabit.
   (G)   Tenants shall be responsible for registering all vehicles and animals
as required by this code.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty,
see §
121.99
§ 121.44 LICENSE SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   The city may suspend or revoke a residential rental license pursuant
to the provisions of Chapter 110 of this code.
   (B)   Any person whose residential rental license has been suspended or
revoked in violation of this chapter shall also be subject to any of the
following:
      (1)   Any and all civil remedies available to the city, including
injunctive remedies, that a court of competent jurisdiction may impose; and
      (2)   The posting of placard(s) by the city on any portion of the
property that states that the residential rental license has been suspended or
revoked and that no new leases may be entered into and no leases may be removed
until the proper license is secured. No person shall deface or remove a placard
posted pursuant to this section. A placard may only be removed by the city upon
full compliance with this section.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 121.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of this chapter, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $75, nor more than $750. Each day on
which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be considered a separate and
distinct violation.
   (B)   Violations of this chapter for failing to obtain a rental registration
license shall require the payment of the full license fee for each year the
violation occurred, in addition to any other fine or fee assessed.
   (C)   Violations of this chapter are subject to prosecution under the city's
administrative adjudication proceedings. The provisions of this division shall
not preclude the city from using other methods or proceedings to adjudicate
alleged violations of this chapter, including, without limitation, the
institution of an action in the Circuit Court of the county, or before another
administrative tribunal which has jurisdiction to consider the violation.
   (D)   In the event a person commits repeated violations of this chapter, the
city may institute an action to enjoin such person from committing further
violations of this chapter. In the event such action is instituted and an
injunction is issued, the person whose conduct is enjoined shall be required to
compensate the city for attorneys' fees and other costs incurred in obtaining
the injunction.
(Ord. 17-O-2162, passed 1-18-2017; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
CHAPTER 122: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
In General
   
122.01   Definitions
   
122.02   Business license required
Licensing
   
122.10   Application
   
122.11   Investigation
   
122.12   Fees
   
122.13   Issuance of a cannabis business license
   
122.14   Revocation or suspension of cannabis business license
   
122.15   Notice and hearing; appeal
Regulations
   
122.20   In general
   
122.21   Hours of operation
   
122.22   Cannabis dispensaries
   
122.23   Cannabis transporters
   
122.24   Advertising and signage
IN GENERAL
§ 122.01 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   ACT.  The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act of Illinois and any subsequent
amendments, 410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
   ADVERTISE. To engage in promotional activities including, but not limited
to, newspaper, radio, internet and electronic media, and television
advertising, the distribution of fliers and circulars, billboard advertising
and the display of window and interior signs. ADVERTISE does not mean exterior
signage displaying only the name of the licensed cannabis business
establishment.
   AGENT IN CHARGE. As required by the Act, a full-time agent or principal
officer of the cannabis business that is responsible for opening and closing
the business, delivery acceptance, oversight of sales and agents,
recordkeeping, inventory, training, and compliance with state and local law.
   APPLICANT. An individual or business seeking a cannabis business license
from the city or a renewal of said license.
   CANNABIS. Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including derivatives or
subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it), fiber,
oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination. CANNABIS does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act. CANNABIS also means cannabis flower,
concentrate and cannabis infused products.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. A cannabis craft grower, cultivation center, dispensary,
infuser, processor, or transporter.
   CANNABIS CONCENTRATE. A product derived from cannabis that is produced by
extracting cannabinoids, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), from the plant
through the use of propylene glycol, glycerin, butter, olive oil or other
typical cooking fats; water, ice, or dry ice; or butane, propane, CO2 ,
ethanol, or isopropanol and with the intended use of smoking or making a
cannabis-infused product. The use of any other solvent is expressly prohibited
unless and until it is approved by the Department of Agriculture.
   CANNABIS CONTAINER. A sealed, traceable, container, or package used for the
purpose of containment of cannabis or cannabis-infused product during
transportation.
   CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or business
that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry,
cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization, per the Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS DISPENSARY. A facility operated by an organization or business that
is licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation
to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business establishments for the
purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis
seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to purchasers or to qualified
registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers, per the Act, as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS FLOWER. Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including
derivatives or subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis;
including raw kief, leaves, and buds, but not resin that has been extracted
from any part of such plant; nor any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin.
   CANNABIS-INFUSED PRODUCT. A beverage, food, oil, ointment, tincture, topical
formulation, or another product.
   CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Act, as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA. Equipment, products and materials which are intended
to be used for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, ingesting or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body.
   CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Act, as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CLONE. A plant section from a female cannabis plant not yet rootbound,
growing in a water solution or other propagation matric, that is capable of
developing into a new plant.
   LIMITED ACCESS AREA. A building, room, or other area under the control of a
cannabis dispensing organization licensed under the Act and upon the licensed
premises with access limited to purchasers, dispensing organization owners and
other dispensing organization agents, or service professionals conducting
business with the dispensing organization.
   MINOR. Any individual under the age of 21 years old.
   ORDINARY PUBLIC VIEW. Within the sight line with normal visual range of a
person, unassisted by visual aids, from a public street or sidewalk adjacent to
real property, or from within an adjacent property.
   PERSON. A natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian, or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
   TINCTURE. A cannabis infused solution, typically comprised of alcohol
glycerin, or vegetable oils, derived either directly from the cannabis plant or
from a processed cannabis extract. A tincture is not an alcoholic liquor as
defined in the Liquor Control Act of 1934. A tincture shall include a
calibrated dropper or other similar device capable of accurately measuring
servings.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 122.02 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a cannabis business within
the city without first obtaining a business license.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
LICENSING
§ 122.10 APPLICATION.
   Each cannabis business shall complete a written application, provided by the
Building and Housing Department, which must contain the following:
   (A)   Applicant information. 
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual. The name, date of birth, home
address, telephone number, email address, and a copy of a valid state
identification of the person registering the business and anyone with a
financial interest in the cannabis business.
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership/non-corporate entity. The name,
date of birth, home address, telephone number, email address, and a copy of a
valid state identification for each partner, principal, member thereof, and
anyone with a financial interest in the cannabis business.
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation. The name, date of birth, home
address, telephone number, email address, and a copy of a valid state
identification of each principal officer, registered agent thereof, and anyone
with a financial interest in the cannabis business, a copy of the corporation
or LLC's certificate of good standing issued by the Illinois Secretary of
State.
   (B)   The legal name of the cannabis business and any other names it may
operate under.
   (C)   The physical location, telephone number, and internet address of the
cannabis business.
   (D)   A copy of all documents submitted to the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation or the Illinois Department of Agriculture
for issuance of a state license.
   (E)   A copy of the cannabis business's state issued license and a statement
as to whether the cannabis business is a qualified social equity applicant by
the State of Illinois.
   (F)   A copy of the special use license issued by the City Council.
   (G)   A copy of the site plan as submitted to the Plan Commission.
   (H)   The hours of operation for the cannabis business.
   (I)   The name, address, date of birth, and copy of state issued agent
identification for the designated agent in charge and all other dispensing
agents.
   (J)   The property owner's name, address, telephone number and email address
and a valid copy of the lease agreement if applicable.
   (K)   Proof of adequate insurance coverage for liability, worker's
compensation, tenant or owner's insurance for the premises and equipment.
   (L)   A copy of the cannabis business's security plan that describes the
cannabis business's plans to: (i) prevent diversion, theft, or loss of cannabis
and monetary funds; (ii) monitor the activities in and around the cannabis
business; and (iii) restrict access to limited access areas and restricted
access areas. The Chief of Police shall have the right to review the security
plan.
   (M)   Non-refundable application fee of $500.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 122.11 INVESTIGATION.
   Once the business license application is complete, the application shall be
forwarded to the Director of Building and Housing and the Chief of Police for
investigation.
   (A)   The Director of Building and Housing shall cause an inspection of the
premises for compliance with all applicable laws, including the building,
electrical, plumbing, health, housing, zoning and fire codes of the city, and
any other regulations of the city relating to the public health, safety and
welfare.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation into the applicant's
personal and criminal history and review the security plan.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 122.12 FEES.
   (A)   The business license fee for a cannabis business establishment shall
be as specified in the Business License Fees Ordinance.
   (B)   The city anticipates that it will incur additional expenses and
impacts upon the city's road systems, utility services, public safety services,
educational system, inspectional services, and permitting services. In order to
minimize the burdens on the city, applicants for business licenses may be
required to execute a cannabis business impact agreement, including the payment
of yearly impact fees to the city.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 122.13 ISSUANCE OF A CANNABIS BUSINESS LICENSE.
   The application materials, inspectional reports, background information and
any other relevant information shall be forwarded to the Mayor, or his or her
designee, who shall issue a business license if the cannabis business complies
with all applicable provisions of this chapter. If the Mayor denies the
cannabis business license, he or she must notify the applicant in writing
within 14 days.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 122.14 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF CANNABIS BUSINESS LICENSE.
   The Mayor may deny, refuse to renew, suspend or revoke a cannabis business
license pursuant to Chapter 110 and for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation of material fact, or false statement on the
application for a cannabis business license or any subsequent renewal.
   (B)   Failure to inform the city of any changes to the information contained
in the application for a cannabis business license.
   (C)   Any outstanding debt owed to the city by the cannabis business
establishment or any of its owners, partners, officers, or board members,
including any taxes, fees, or penalties.
   (D)   Any violation of the laws of the State of Illinois or any city
ordinance.
   (E)   Revocation or suspension of the cannabis business's state issued
license.
   (F)   Any violation of the terms of the cannabis business's special use
permit.
   (G)   Operating without a cannabis business license.
   (H)   A pattern of conduct that demonstrates incompetence or that the
cannabis business has engaged in conduct or actions that would constitute
grounds for discipline under the Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Taxation
Act.
   (I)   Refusing to allow the Mayor, his or her designee, or any member of law
enforcement or building department to enter and inspect the cannabis business,
or refusing to cooperate in an investigation.
   (J)   Any fact or condition that, if had existed at the time of the original
completion of the application for a cannabis business license would have
warranted the denial of the business license.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 122.15 NOTICE AND HEARING; APPEAL.
   (A)   Prior to taking any adverse action against a cannabis business
license, and at least 14 days prior to hearing, the Mayor shall issue by
regular and electronic mail to the addresses listed on the application for a
cannabis business license, a written notice of hearing. The written notice
shall contain the charges made, date, time, and location of the hearing.
   (B)   The Mayor has the authority to subpoena and administer oaths to
witnesses, hear the charges, agree to negotiated consent orders, and issue a
written order within 14 days.
   (C)   Any cannabis business that is denied a cannabis business license or
whose cannabis business license was declined to be renewed, suspended, or
revoked has the right to appeal to the City Council.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
REGULATIONS
§ 122.20 IN GENERAL.
   (A)   Compliance with law. All cannabis businesses must comply with all
state and local laws, including the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS
705/1 et seq., building, electrical, plumbing, health, housing, zoning and fire
codes.
   (B)   Report to police. Every cannabis business must promptly, within 24
hours, document and report any loss, theft, security breach, or criminal
activity to city police.
   (C)   Inspections. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to refuse
entry or otherwise refuse inspection by the Mayor, his or her designee, any
member of law enforcement or building services.
   (D)   Employee identification. It shall be unlawful for an employee of a
cannabis business to engage in employment activities for the cannabis business
unless he or she displays a valid agent identification card, as required by
state law. A copy of all agent identification cards shall be forwarded to the
City Clerk and updated as the card is renewed, suspended, revoked, or the
employee is terminated.
   (E)   Sanitary conditions. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to
maintain any building or equipment in an unclean or unsanitary state. All
buildings and equipment shall be free from infestation by insects, rodents, or
pests.
   (F)   Deliveries. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to accept
cannabis deliveries through public or limited access areas. All deliveries must
be accepted into a restricted access area with adequate security.
   (G)   Odor control. Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke,
odors, debris, dust, fluids, and other substances from exiting a cannabis
business establishment must be provided at all times.
   (H)   Lighting. No portion of the exterior of the cannabis business shall
utilize or contain any flashing lights, search lights or spot lights or any
similar lighting system.
   (I)   Minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to
allow any person under the age of 21 years old to enter or loiter about any
cannabis business. Cannabis dispensaries authorized to sell medical cannabis
may allow qualified patients pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act over the age of 18 years old with proper identification to
enter the cannabis dispensary.
   (J)   On-site consumption. The on-site consumption of cannabis is prohibited
within a cannabis business and on the adjacent premises. The business shall be
responsible for enforcing the prohibition of on-site consumption of cannabis
under all circumstances inside and outside the business and adjacent premises.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 122.21 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to open earlier than 6:00
a.m.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to close later than 10:00
p.m. No cannabis business shall allow any person other than himself or
employees to remain in the premises where cannabis is offered for sale longer
than 30 minutes after the closing hour.
   (C)   Hours of operation shall apply to all sales, delivery, and dispensing
activities of the business.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024))
§ 122.22 CANNABIS DISPENSARIES.
   (A)   Inoperable equipment. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis dispensary
to operate if its security system, point of sale system, or inventory system
are inoperable.
   (B)   Sale to minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any cannabis
dispensary to give, sell, or deliver to any minor, directly or indirectly, any
cannabis. Cannabis businesses authorized to sell medical cannabis may allow
qualified patients pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Program Act over the age of 18 years old to purchase medical cannabis.
   (C)   Minimum employees. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis dispensary to
operate if less than two licensed employees are present.
   (D)   Prohibited dispensing. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis dispensary
to dispense cannabis through vending machines, drive through windows, or
delivery services.
   (E)   Visibility of products. It shall be unlawful for any retail cannabis,
cannabis products, or cannabis paraphernalia to be displayed or kept so as to
be visible outside the cannabis dispensary by ordinary public view.
   (F)   Storage. During hours of operation, all cannabis shall be stored in an
enclosed locked room or cabinet accessible only to authorized business agents.
When the business is closed, all cannabis and currency shall be stored in a
reinforced vault room in the restricted access area in a manner as to prevent
diversion, theft or loss.
   (G)   Packaging. Any product containing cannabis shall be pre-packaged in a
sealed, odorproof, and child-resistant cannabis container consistent with all
regulations contained in the Act.
   (H)   Prohibited products. It shall be unlawful for any cannabis business to
sell:
      (1)   Cannabis seeds, except to those individuals showing valid
identification as a qualifying patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act.
      (2)   Clones or other live plant material.
      (3)   Any products containing alcohol, with the exception of tinctures as
allowed by state law.
      (4)   Cannabis, cannabis concentrate, or cannabis infused products in
combination or bundled with each other or any other items for one price.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 122.23 CANNABIS TRANSPORTERS.
   (A)   A cannabis transporting organization agent must keep his or her
identification card visible at all times when on the property of a cannabis
business establishment and during the transportation of cannabis when acting
under his or her duties as a cannabis transporting organization agent and must
provide the identification card upon request to any law enforcement officer
engaged in his or her official duties.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or individual who is not a
licensed cannabis transporting organization agent to be present in a commercial
vehicle or trailer engaged in the transportation of cannabis for a cannabis
transporter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of 21 years old to be
present in a commercial vehicle or trailer engaged in the transportation of
cannabis as a cannabis transporter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to transport cannabis anywhere other than to a
cultivation center, craft grower, infuser organization, dispensing
organization, testing facility, or otherwise authorized by law.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for an adult use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to use a commercial motor vehicle with a weight
rating over 10,001 pounds.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for an adult use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to operate as a cannabis transporter without a
copy of the registration and manifest for the cannabis delivery in the vehicle.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for an adult use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to transport cannabis so it is visible or
recognizable from outside the vehicle.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for a vehicle transporting cannabis to bear any
markings to indicate the vehicle contains cannabis or bear the name or logo of
the cannabis business establishment.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for an adult use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to transport cannabis unless it is stored in an
enclosed, locked, storage compartment that is secured or affixed to the
vehicle.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 122.24 ADVERTISING AND SIGNAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business or any other person or
entity to engage in advertising that is false or misleading, promotes over-
consumption of cannabis or cannabis products, depicts the actual consumption of
cannabis or cannabis products, depicts a person under 21 years of age consuming
cannabis, makes any health, medicinal, or therapeutic claims about cannabis or
cannabis infused products, includes the image of a cannabis leaf or bud,
includes any image designed or likely to appeal to minors, including cartoons,
toys, animals, or children or any other likeness to images, characters, or
phrases that is designed in any manner to be appealing to or encourage
consumption by persons under 21 years of age.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business or any other person or
entity to place or maintain an advertisement of cannabis or a cannabis infused
product in any form or through any medium:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of the perimeter of school grounds, a playground,
a recreation center or facility, a child care center, a public park or public
library, or a game arcade.
      (2)   On or in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter.
      (3)   On or in publicly owned or publicly operated property.
   (C)   Electronic message board and temporary signs are not permitted in
connection with cannabis businesses.
   (D)   All signage must comply with the Act.
(Ord. 20-O-2261, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
CHAPTER 123: LODGING
Section
Hotels
   
123.01   Definitions
   
123.02   License
   
123.03   Guest register
   
123.04   Regulations
Short Term Rentals
   
123.10   Definitions
   
123.11   License required
   
123.12   Application
   
123.13   Regulations
   
123.14   Suspension or revocation
HOTELS
§ 123.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   GUEST. Individuals who have properly registered with the operator of the
hotel (registered guests), persons occupying guest rooms with registered
guests, visitors invited to guest rooms by a registered guest and persons
patronizing food or beverage facilities provided by the hotel or motel.
   HOTEL. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for monetary
consideration, obtain temporary living quarters, sleeping and/or housekeeping
accommodations. The term includes, but is not limited to, inns, motels, tourist
homes or courts, and lodging houses. Except as otherwise provided by this code,
this definition shall also include ROOMING HOUSES and all temporary lodging
establishments operating within the City of Markham, with the exception of
short term residential rentals, as defined herein.
   OPERATOR. The person operating an establishment that requires licensure
under this chapter.
   OPERATOR'S LICENSE. A business license issued by the city for the operation
of a hotel as defined herein.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A dwelling house, roominghouse, furnished-room house,
lodginghouse, boardinghouse or any other similarly occupied building, structure
or portion thereof, kept, held or used, where sleeping or lodging is provided
(or which is equipped to provide lodging) by prearrangement for a definite
period, for compensation, for three or more persons in contradistinction to
hotels open to transients.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 123.02 LICENSE.
   (A)   License required. No person shall operate a hotel as defined in this
chapter, unless he or she holds a current, unrevoked operator's license issued
by the city in his or her name for the specific named hotel.
   (B)   Upon application the City Council may grant approval for an extended
stay hotel as part of the hotel operator's license application and renewal and
shall set specific parameters to the length of any permitted hotel stays in
excess of two consecutive weeks. In no event shall the City Council approve an
extended stay hotel to provide accommodations in excess of six consecutive
months without the operator first qualifying to lease residential rental
property under this code.
   (C)   Application for license. No operating license shall be issued or
renewed unless the applicant, owner or operator has first made application
therefor on an application form provided by the Building and Housing Department
pursuant to Chapter 110 of this code.
   (D)   Issuance of license. The city is hereby authorized, upon application
therefor and approval by the City Council, to issue new operating license and
renewals therefor, in the names of applicant owners or operators of hotels. No
such license shall be issued unless the hotel, in connection with which the
license is sought is found, after inspection by the Director of Building and
Housing, to meet all applicable rules and regulations of this code pertaining
to health and fire prevention and applicable rules and regulations adopted
pursuant hereto and all laws of the state regarding hotels, motels and rooming
houses.
   (E)   Residency. No operating license shall be issued or renewed for a non-
resident applicant unless the applicant designates in writing to the city the
name of a registered agent in the state and county, for the receipt of service
of notice of violations of the provisions of this subchapter and for service of
process pursuant to this subchapter, and no operating license shall be issued
or renewed for nonresident applicant unless such applicant has first designated
a registered agent in the state and county for the receipt of service of
violations of the provisions of this subchapter, when said applicant is absent
from the city for a period of 30 days or more. Such a designation shall be made
in writing and shall accompany each application form. The applicant may
designate any person who is a registered agent in the state and county.
   (F)   Conditions of license.
      (1)   Transferability. No license shall be transferred to another person
or owner or operator. Every person holding an operating license shall give
notice in writing to the city within two working days after having transferred
or otherwise disposed of the legal control of any business licensed under this
chapter. Such notice shall include the name and address of the person or
persons succeeding to the ownership or control of such multiple dwelling or
rooming house. The notice requirement shall be satisfied upon compliance with
the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Record of repairs and changes. Every owner or operator of a hotel
shall keep or cause to be kept an accurate record of all repairs, alterations
and equipment changes related to the provisions of this subchapter or to any
rules and regulations pertaining hereto, and all corrections made as a result
of inspections as required hereunder. Such record shall be made available to
the Director of Building and Housing by the owner or operator when requested.
Every owner or operator subject to this section shall be notified that such
records may be used in administrative or judicial proceedings pursuant to the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (G)   Inspection.
      (1)   Inspection authorized. No operating license shall be issued or
renewed unless the premises seeking licensure undergoes all inspections
required as determined by the Director of Building and Housing.
      (2)   Reinspection; suspension oflicense. At the end of the time allowed
for correction of any violations cited, the Director of Building and Housing or
his or her designee shall reinspect the multiple dwelling or rooming house, and
if he or she determines that such conditions have not been corrected, he or she
may suspend or revoke the operating license pursuant to Chapter 110 of this
code.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 123.03 GUEST REGISTER.
   (A)   Each operator shall keep a registration record for each guest. The
record shall include, at a minimum, the guest name(s), date(s) of occupancy,
room number(s), and price paid.
   (B)   Each operator shall require guests to register using a valid form of
photo identification showing, at a minimum, the guest's name, photo, address
and date of birth. Each operator shall keep a photocopy of the guest's photo
identification with the guest register.
   (C)   The operator shall make available the guest register for review and
inspection by any representative of the city upon 24 hour notice from the city,
unless emergent or exigent circumstances exist.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 123.04 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any operator:
      (1)   To permit any violation of any ordinance or law on or in the
property;
      (2)   To rent any sleeping room by the hour or for any period of fewer
than 12 consecutive hours;
      (3)   To rent any sleeping room more than once within any consecutive 12
hour period;
      (4)   To advertise an hourly rate or any other rate for a sleeping room
for less than 12 hours;
      (5)   To permit prostitution, pimping, gambling or illegal possession or
delivery of, or trafficking in, controlled substances, other drugs, or firearms
to occur on or in the hotel or motel property;
      (6)   To fail to timely report to the police any criminal activity
occurring on hotel property; and
      (7)   To rent any sleeping room (or to advertise the renting thereof) for
a period in excess of two consecutive weeks without first obtaining a specific
extended stay hotel license approval by the City Council.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
SHORT TERM RENTALS
§ 123.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL. The use and/or occupancy for a period of less than six
months of a principal structure or accessory structure pursuant to a written or
oral agreement that permits and/or provides for occupancy of all or part of
such structure by any person other than the owner thereof, or an immediate
family member of the owner thereof, and whether or not the permission of such
occupancy is in exchange for consideration therefor. A residential property
shall not be considered a short term rental when: (1) the preceding owner of a
property maintains possession of a residential structure after closing for the
sale thereof, but leases the property back from the successor owner for a
period of time pursuant to a written agreement; and (2) the extension of a
lease on a month to month basis under the same terms and for the same tenant.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 123.11 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a short term rental, as defined herein, without
first obtaining a business license from the city.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 123.12 APPLICATION.
   An application for a short term rental shall be made in accordance with
Chapter 110 and shall also contain the following information:
   (A)   The applicant's relationship to the property for which the short term
rental license is sought.
   (B)   If the applicant is not the owner of the premises, the applicant shall
provide a signed and notarized letter from all owners of record indicating
their permission and authorization for the premises to be used as a short-term
rental premises. The applicant must also attach a copy of the lease or other
document indicating his or her interest in the premises.
   (C)   The name, address, telephone number, and email address of an emergency
contact that lives within 20 miles of the subject property, is over the age of
18, and has authority to make decisions about the property in the event of an
emergency.
   (D)   The names and websites of all platforms the licensee will advertise
the short term residential rental, including but not limited to AirBNB, VRBO,
Facebook, etc.
   (E)   If the premises is a part of an association, the applicant must affirm
that the short-term residential rental of the premises is in compliance with
all association requirements and not otherwise prohibited.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 123.13 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to lease, rent, offer or invite the
leasing or renting, or to otherwise permit the short-term rental and/or
occupancy of any residential dwelling unit located within the city for less
than six months without first obtaining a short-term residential rental license
as provided herein.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to post false or misleading
information in an advertisement for a short-term residential rental.
   (C)   Each owner of a short-term residential rental shall be required to
immediately notify the Building and Housing Department upon any police activity
at the residential property.
   (D)   Each owner of a short-term residential rental shall keep accurate
records of each booking and stay of their residential property including the
names of the tenants, the rent listed, the rent paid, the number of nights, and
the dates of occupancy. These records shall be open to inspection by the city.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 123.14 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   A short term residential rental license may be suspended or revoked pursuant
to
Chapter 110 of this code and/or for:
   (A)   Any of the following criminal activity:
      (1)   Any local, state or federal law prohibiting the manufacture,
distribution, delivery, use or possession of a controlled substance including,
but not limited to the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, the Illinois
Cannabis Control Act, and the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act;
      (2)   Prostitution-related activity;
      (3)   Gang-related activity;
      (4)   Violent acts involving the discharge of a firearm, death or serious
bodily injury to any person; or
      (5)   Disturbance of the peace, public drunkenness, drinking in public,
harassment of a passerby, loitering, public urination, unlawful garbage or
waste disposal, gambling, lewd conduct, or excessive noise.
   (B)   Use of the residential property for commercial persons including
charging an admission fee for entry
   (C)   Exceeding the design load or maximum occupancy of any structure
located on the residential property.
   (D)   Use of the residential property for a party, amusement, event, or
other gathering in excess of the maximum occupancy limits.
   (E)   Misrepresenting any material facts regarding the short-term
residential rental in any listing, to any tenant or prospective tenant or to
the city.
   (F)   Providing alcohol to any guest or invitee to a guest.
   (G)   Rental of a short-term residential rental unit for less than 12 hours.
   (H)   Rental of a short-term residential rental unit to more than one
booking within 48 hours.
   (I)   Advertising less than the minimum rental period.
   (J)   Multiple bookings or rentals of any short-term residential rental for
the same or overlapping periods.
   (K)   Rental of a short-term residential rental unit to individuals under
the age of 21 years old.
   (L)   Rental of a short-term residential rental unit in violation of the
bylaws or association requirements.
(Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024) Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 124: HOME OCCUPATIONS
Section
   
124.01   Definition
   
124.02   License required
   
124.03   License fee; duration
   
124.04   Requirements
§ 124.01 DEFINITION.
   As used in this chapter:
   HOME OCCUPATION. Business activity conducted within any residential dwelling
and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which business activity is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the residential dwelling for dwelling
purposes and does not change the character thereof. For purposes of this
section, a home occupation does not include individuals who work from their
home on a full or part time basis for an employer who maintains a separate
place of business.
(Ord. 21-O-2317, passed 11-17-2021; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 124.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct a home occupation within the city without first
securing a license therefor.
(Ord. 21-O-2317, passed 11-17-2021; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 124.03 LICENSE FEE; DURATION.
   The license fee for a home occupation license shall be as specified in the
Business License Fees Ordinance and shall expire on April 30 of each year.
(Ord. 21-O-2317, passed 11-17-2021; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 124.04 REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The home occupation must comply with the city's zoning code.
   (B)   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling
unit or accessory building. All sales must be conducted entirely by mail,
telephone or the internet. In-person retail sales are prohibited.
   (C)   No more than 25% of the dwelling unit maybe devoted to the home
occupation.
   (D)   The home occupation shall be incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the building as a dwelling, and no alterations to the dwelling
unit may be made which change the character thereof.
   (E)   Only members of the immediate family occupying the dwelling unit may
be employed in connection with the home occupation.
   (F)   No signs related to the home occupation may be displayed.
   (G)   No mechanical or electrical equipment may be used except such types as
are customary for domestic, household or hobby purposes. No equipment which
creates noise vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference beyond
what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district shall be used.
   (H)   No hazardous materials maybe used or stored on the premises of the
home occupation.
   (I)   No equipment or materials associated with the home occupation may be
stored outside the dwelling unit or accessory building. This includes heavy
equipment and trailers used for commercial purposes.
   (J)   No truck or commercial vehicle, other than a Class B Truck or Class B
Commercial Vehicle as defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code or by the
Illinois Secretary of State, may be parked or stored in any residential zoning
district. All trucks greater than a Class B heavy equipment, and/or trailers
used for commercial purposes shall be removed from residential property and not
allowed to be parked or stored in any residential zoning district after January
1, 2024.
   (K)   The home occupation shall not create an increase in traffic or an
increased demand for parking.
   (L)   The home occupation shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 10:
00 p.m.
   (M)   The following home occupations are expressly forbidden:
      (1)   Barbershops and beauty parlors;
      (2)   Commercial stables;
      (3)   Veterinary hospitals;
      (4)   Poultry farms and kennels;
      (5)   Real estate offices;
      (6)   Restaurants; and
      (7)   Firearms dealing.
(Ord. 21-O-2317, passed 11-17-2021; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
CHAPTER 125: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
125.01   Purpose and definition
   
125.02   Permit required
   
125.03   Procedure
   
125.04   Vendor permits for city events
§ 125.01 PURPOSE AND DEFINITION.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to identify those special events
occurring within the city to ensure efficient delivery of city services and
compliance with all zoning, building, fire and other applicable ordinances and
regulations for the safety and well-being of the city.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, a special event shall be defined as a
one-time event conducted in any zoning district in the city by a business,
organization, individual or group that will be conducted partially or entirely
outdoors and is either: (i) for profit or fundraising purpose; (ii) attended by
more than 25 people; or (iii) requires the use of public property.
   (C)   This section shall not be construed to require a permit for lemonade
stands or other sales of nonalcoholic drinks by minors under the age of 16.
(Ord. 22-O-2331, passed 5-18-2022; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 125.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A special events permit shall be required for any of the following
activities:
   (A)   Any event conducted primarily outdoors for a profit or as a promotion,
including but not limited to, sidewalk sales, tent sales, garage sales, pop up
shops, yard sales, estate sales, farmers markets, carnivals and parking lot
sales.
   (B)   Any organized athletic, fund raising or public awareness special
event, conducted primarily outdoors, including but not limited to parades,
running/walking/fitness events, outdoor wellness events, outdoor speaking
engagements, outdoor festivals and music events.
   (C)   Any event conducted primarily outdoors wherein more than 25 people
will be in attendance at any given time including, but not limited to,
weddings, repasses, graduation parties and yard parties.
   (D)   Any event that proposes to use the public way such as public streets,
alleys, sidewalks, parks, parking lots or municipal owned land including, but
not limited to, parades, running/walking events, block parties, sidewalk sales
and parking lot sales.
(Ord. 22-O-2331, passed 5-18-2022; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 125.03 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any individual seeking to conduct a special event, as defined and
described herein, shall apply to the Building and Housing Department for a
permit.
   (B)   The applicant shall describe the special event, including the date(s),
time(s), location, proposed signage and parking availability.
   (C)   The fee for a special event permit shall be as specified in the
Business License Fees Ordinance, Any additional costs incurred by the city for
a special event under this section shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
   (D)   Restrictions.
      (1)   The use of searchlights, inflatable symbols and oversized signage
may be permitted in conjunction with a special business promotion, upon
application and written permission by the Building and Housing Department.
      (2)   Block parties shall require the organizer to obtain the written
permission of at least half of the residents that live on the affected block
prior to review by the city. If approved, organizers shall provide all
residents of that block with written notification of the date and time of the
party and a notification of any street closure.
      (3)   Any proposed event that involves use of the public way or public
land is subject to authorization from the city Police, Fire, and Public Works
Departments. Applicants shall be required to sign a waiver and indemnity form
for their use of the public way.
      (4)   Applications for the conduct of a garage or yard sale shall be
limited to bona fide residents of the city who have resided within the city for
a minimum of one year at the location for which the license is sought. A
license for the conduct of a garage or yard sale may be summarily approved and
issued by the City Clerk.
      (5)   There shall be no more than two garage or yard sales conducted by a
resident at any location in a calendar year. The duration of the license for
the conduct of a garage or yard sale shall be for a period not longer than two
consecutive days. Further, the sale shall not begin before 10:00 a.m., nor end
past 7:00 p.m., on any day during daylight savings time and not past 5:00 p.m.
during standard time.
(Ord. 22-O-2331, passed 5-18-2022; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
§ 125.04 VENDOR PERMITS FOR CITY EVENTS.
   (A)   Permit required. All vendors participating in city sponsored events
shall be required to obtain a vendor permit from the Building and Housing
Department.
   (B)   Fees. The fee for a vendor permit shall be as specified in the
Business License Fees Ordinance.
   (C)   Requirements. Vendors shall be required to provide proof of insurance
and sign a waiver and indemnity form for their participation in city events.
(Ord. 23-O-2365, passed 6-21-2023; Ord. 24-O-2388, passed 5-15-2024)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
135.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
      
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
137.   WEAPONS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Intent
   
130.03   Knowledge
   
130.04   Recklessness
   
130.05   Negligence
   
130.06   Attempt
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Includes a failure or omission to take action.
(720 ILCS 5/2-2)
   ANOTHER. A person or persons other than the offender.
(720 ILCS 5/2-3)
   CONDUCT. An act, or a series of acts, and the accompanying mental state.
(720 ILCS 5/2-4)
   OFFENSE. A violation of any penal statute of the city or state.
(720 ILCS 5/2-12)
(Prior Code, § 130.01)
§ 130.02 INTENT.
   A person intends, or acts intentionally or with intent, to accomplish a
result or engage in conduct described by the section defining the offense when
his or her conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish that result or
engage in that conduct.
(720 ILCS 5/4-4) (Prior Code, § 130.02)
§ 130.03 KNOWLEDGE.
   (A)   A person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:
      (1)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her conduct,
described by the section defining the offense, when he or she is consciously
aware that his or her conduct is of such nature or that such circumstances
exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial
probability that such fact exists; and/or
      (2)   The result of his or her conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that such result is
practically certain to be caused by his or her conduct.
   (B)   Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed willfully,
within the meaning of a statute using the latter term, unless the section
clearly requires another meaning.
(720 ILCS 5/4-5) (Prior Code, § 130.03)
§ 130.04 RECKLESSNESS.
   A person is reckless, or acts recklessly, when he or she consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or
that a result will follow, described by the section defining the offense; and
such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation. An act performed recklessly
is performed wantonly, within the meaning of a section using the latter term,
unless the statute clearly requires another meaning.
(720 ILCS 5/4-6) (Prior Code, § 130.04)
§ 130.05 NEGLIGENCE.
   A person is negligent, or acts negligently, when he or she fails to be aware
of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a result
will follow, described by the statute defining the offense; and such failure
constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care which a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
(720 ILCS 5/4-7) (Prior Code, § 130.05)
§ 130.06 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits an attempt when, with intent
to commit a specific offense, he or she does any act which constitutes a
substantial step toward the commission of that offense.
   (B)   Impossibility. It shall not be a defense to a charge of attempt that,
because of a misapprehension of the circumstances, it would have been
impossible for the accused to commit the offense attempted.
   (C)   Maximum fine. A person convicted of an attempt may be fined not to
exceed the maximum provided for the offense attempted.
(720 ILCS 5/8-4) (Prior Code, § 130.06) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provisions of this title for which another penalty is
not specifically provided shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than
$500.
(Prior Code, § 130.99) (Ord. 13-O-2051, passed 2-6-2013)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Damage of firefighting apparatus, hydrants or equipment
   
131.02   Trespass to land
   
131.03   Damaging city property
§ 131.01 DAMAGE OF FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS, HYDRANTS OR EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall willfully and maliciously cut, injure, damage, tamper with,
destroy or deface any fire hydrant, fire hose, fire engine or other public or
private firefighting equipment, or any apparatus appertaining to such
equipment, or intentionally open any fire hydrant without proper authorization.
(720 ILCS 5/21.1-1) (Prior Code, § 131.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.02 TRESPASS TO LAND.
   (A)   (1)   Whoever does the following commits a Class B misdemeanor:
         (a)   Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains within
or on a building;
         (b)   Enters upon the land of another, after receiving, prior to such
entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden;
         (c)   Remains upon the land of another, after receiving notice from
the owner or occupant to depart; or
         (d)   Enters upon one of the following areas in or on a motor vehicle
(including an off-road vehicle, motorcycle, moped or any other powered two-
wheel vehicle), after receiving prior to that entry, notice from the owner or
occupant that the entry is forbidden or remains upon or in the area after
receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart:
            1.   Any field that is used for growing crops or which is capable
of being used for growing crops;
            2.   An enclosed area containing livestock;
            3.   An orchard; or
            4.   A barn or other agricultural building containing livestock.
      (2)   For purposes of division (A)(1) above, this section shall not apply
to being in a building which is open to the public while the building is open
to the public during its normal hours of operation; nor shall this section
apply to a person who enters a public building under the reasonable belief that
the building is still open to the public.
   (B)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the
meaning of division (A) above if he or she has been notified personally, either
orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice forbidding an entry has
been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main entrance to the land or the
forbidden part thereof.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or
otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of his or her
agent having apparent authority to hire workers on the land and assign them
living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon, nor to anyone
living on the land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing or other
agreement or arrangement with the owner or his or her agent, nor to anyone
invited by the migrant worker or other person so living on the land to visit
him or her at the place he or she is so living on the land.
   (D)   A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section if he or
she beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial properties
located within the city. For the purpose of this division (D), UNOCCUPIED AND
ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY means any real estate in which
the taxes have not been paid for a period of at least two years, and which has
been left unoccupied and abandoned for a period of at least one year.
BEAUTIFIES means to landscape, clean up litter or to repair dilapidated
conditions on or to board up windows and doors.
   (E)   No person shall be liable in any civil action for money damages to the
owner of unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial property which
that person beautifies pursuant to division (D) above.
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a person from entering a building or
upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of this division
(F), EMERGENCY means a condition or circumstance in which an individual is or
is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent danger of serious bodily
harm or in which property is or is reasonably believed to be in imminent danger
of damage or destruction.
   (G)   (1)   A person may be liable in any civil action for money damages to
the owner of the land he or she entered upon with a motor vehicle as prohibited
under division (A)(1)(d) above. A person may also be liable to the owner for
court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees. The measure of damages shall be:
         (a)   The actual damages, but not less than $250, if the vehicle is
operated in a nature preserve or registered area, as defined in §§ 3.11 and
3.14 of the state’s Natural Areas Preservation Act, being 525 ILCS 30;
         (b)   Twice the actual damages if the owner has previously notified
the person to cease trespassing; or
         (c)   In any other case, the actual damages, but not less than $50.
      (2)   If the person operating the vehicle is under the age of 16, the
owner of the vehicle and the parent or legal guardian of the minor are jointly
and severally liable.
      (3)   For the purpose of this division (G), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         LAND. Includes, but is not limited to, land used for crop land, fallow
land, orchard, pasture, feed lot, timber land, prairie land, mine spoil nature
preserves and registered areas. LAND does not include driveways or private
roadways upon which the owner allows the public to drive.
         OWNER. The person who has the right to possession of the land,
including the owner, operator or tenant.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as provided under § 1-217 of the state’s
Vehicle Code, being 625 ILCS 5.
(720 ILCS 5/21-3) (Prior Code, § 131.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.03 DAMAGING CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to:
      (l)   Knowingly damage any city property without the city’s consent;
      (2)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosion, damage city property
without the city’s consent;
      (3)   Knowingly start a fire on city land without the consent of the
city; and/or
      (4)   Knowingly deposit on city land or in a city building any stink bomb
or any offensive-smelling compound which thereby tends to interfere with the
use by the city of its land or buildings.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, PROPERTY means anything of value
including, but not limited to, real estate, money, commercial instruments,
written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of
value, labor or services, things affixed to or found on land or part of or
affixed to any building, electricity, gas or water.
(Prior Code, § 131.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
   
132.01   Disorderly conduct
   
132.02   Curfew
   
132.03   Excessive noise or offensive sound
   
132.04   Live sex act business prohibited
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
   (A)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
   (B)   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is
concealed in such place;
   (C)   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or public
employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed, knowing at
the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing
that such an offense has been committed;
   (D)   Enters upon the property of another and, for a lewd or unlawful
purpose, deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it;
   (E)   Transmits in any manner to the Police Department or Fire Department,
or any privately-owned and operated ambulance service, a false request for an
ambulance, emergency medical technician-ambulance or emergency medical
technician-paramedic knowing at the time there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such assistance is required; and/or
   (F)   (1)   On public property in the city, including streets, sidewalks and
rights-of-way, all persons shall be properly and reasonably attired whenever
they appear in public view.
      (2)   Pants worn by any person, regardless of age, should be size
appropriate and secured at the waist to prevent the pants from falling more
than three inches below the hips (crest of the ilium) causing exposure of the
person or the person’s undergarments.
(720 ILCS 5/26-1) (Prior Code, § 132.01) (Ord. 13-O-2059, passed 7-17-2013)
Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.02 CURFEW.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CURFEW HOURS.
         (a)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. Saturday;
         (b)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
         (c)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00
a.m. on the following day.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN.
         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
      PARENT. A person who is:
         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another
person; or
         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian
to have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
      REMAIN. To:
         (a)   Linger or stay; or
         (b)   Fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   (B)   Offenses.
      (1)   A minor commits an offense if he or she remains in any public place
or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or
control of a minor commits an offense if he or she knowingly permits the minor
to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment during
curfew hours.
   (C)   Exemptions. It is an exemption to prosecution under division (B) above
that the minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a
civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the U.S.
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Minors Act, being 750 ILCS 30.
   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section,
a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no exemption in division (C) above is present.
(720 ILCS 555/1) (Prior Code, § 132.02) Penalty, see §
132.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to impose curfew, see 65 ILCS 5/11-1-5
§ 132.03 EXCESSIVE NOISE OR OFFENSIVE SOUND.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person or entity to generate or to create a
sound which can be heard more than 75 feet from the source of the sound through
the use of any device for the production or broadcast of sound, including, but
not limited to, a radio, disk- or tape-playing device, sound-amplifying device,
musical instrument or instruments or a warning device not used to warn of an
impending accident or disaster.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a sound device to be used for the broadcast
of information to the public within the times limited by ordinance and in the
absence of such ordinance during the period from 10:00 a.m. through 7:00 p.m.
(Prior Code, § 132.03) (Ord. 01-O-1716, passed 7-18-2001; Ord. 13-O-2050,
passed 2-6-2013) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.04 LIVE SEX ACT BUSINESS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The City Council makes the following findings:
      (1)   The operation of a business for purposes of providing the
opportunity to engage in, or the opportunity to view, live sex acts is declared
to be a disorderly house and a public nuisance per se which should be
prohibited;
      (2)   The operation of a live sex act business contributes to the spread
of sexually transmitted diseases;
      (3)   The operation of a live sex act business is inimical to the health,
safety, general welfare and morals of the inhabitants of the city; and
      (4)   Evidence in support of these findings may be found in the Sex
Clubs, Factual Record, and Sexually Oriented Businesses, Factual Record,
Supplement reports referenced in Mutschler LLC v. City of Phoenix , 129 P.3d
71, 212 Ariz. 160 (Ariz. App., 2006).
   (B)   In this section, unless the context otherwise requires, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CONSIDERATION. The payment of money or the exchange of any item of value
for:
         (a)   The right to enter the business premises or any portion thereof;
         (b)   The right to remain on the business premises or any portion
thereof;
         (c)   The right to purchase any item permitting the right to enter, or
remain on, the business premises, or any portion thereof; or
         (d)   The right to a membership permitting the right to enter, or
remain on, the business premises, or any portion thereof.
      LIVE SEX ACT. Any act whereby one or more persons engage in a live
performance or live conduct which contains oral sexual contact or sexual
intercourse.
      LIVE SEX ACT BUSINESS. Any business in which one or more persons may
view, or may participate in, a live sex act for a consideration.
      OPERATE AND MAINTAIN. To organize, design, perpetuate or control. OPERATE
AND MAINTAIN includes providing financial support by paying utilities, rent,
maintenance costs or advertising costs, supervising activities or work
schedules, and directing or furthering the aims of the enterprise.
      ORAL SEXUAL CONTACT. Oral contact with the penis, vulva or anus.
      SEXUAL INTERCOURSE. Penetration into the penis, vulva or anus by any part
of the body or by any object or manual masturbatory contact with the penis or
vulva.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate and maintain a live sex
act business.
   (D)   Operation of a live sex act business is a public nuisance per se which
may be abated by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   The Corporation Counsel or his or her designee, may initiate legal
court action in court for an injunction against the business to stop it from
operation or any other legal remedy to abate any violation in this section.
   (F)   If Corporation Counsel or his or her designee initiate legal court
action against a violator of this section and prevail in court, the violator
will be responsible for the city’s legal attorney fees and court costs
associated with the action.
   (G)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to apply to the non-obscene
presentation, showing, or performance of any play, drama, or ballet in any
theater, concert hall, fine arts academy, school, institution of higher
education, or similar establishment as a form of expression of opinion or
communication of ideas or information, as differentiated from the promotion or
exploitation of sex for the purpose of advancing the economic welfare of a
commercial or business enterprise.
(Ord. 19-O-2220, passed 3-20-2019) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
130.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   If a juvenile is determined to be in violation of §
132.01(F) of this chapter, a citation shall be issued to the juvenile and/or
parent or legal guardian who has care and control of the minor and he or she
shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $100 on the first offense
and not more than $300 for each subsequent offense. In addition to the civil
penalty, the court may order the juvenile to participate in up to 40 hours of
court-approved community service activities.
         (b)   If an adult is determined to be in violation of §
132.01(F) of this chapter, a citation shall be issued to the person and the
person shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $100 on the first
offense and not more than $300 for each subsequent offense. In addition to the
civil penalty, the court may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours
of court-approved community service activities.
      (2)   Violators of any provision of §
132.01(F) of this chapter shall be issued a citation and subject to the
penalties described above. To this end, a violation of §
132.01(F) of this chapter shall not be deemed a criminal offense; and thus,
violators shall not be subject to arrest, imprisonment or other criminal
penalty for violation of §
132.01(F) of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 132.01)
   (C)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of §
132.02 of this chapter shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined
not less than $10, nor more than $500; except that, neither a person who has
been made a ward of the court under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, being 705
ILCS 405, nor that person’s legal guardian, shall be subject to any fine. In
addition to or instead of the fine imposed by this division (C), the court may
order a parent, legal guardian or other person convicted of a violation of §
132.02(B) of this chapter to perform community service as determined by the
court; except that, the legal guardian of a person who has been made a ward of
the court under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987 may not be ordered to perform
community service. The dates and times established for the performance of
community service by the parent, legal guardian or other person convicted of a
violation of §
132.02(B) of this chapter shall not conflict with the dates and times that the
person is employed in his or her regular occupation.
(Prior Code, § 132.02)
   (D)   Any person violating the provisions of §
132.04 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $ 100 nor more than $750
for each offense.
(Ord. 13-O-2059, passed 7-17-2013) (Ord. 19-O-2220, passed 3-20-2019)
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
133.01   Resisting or obstructing a police officer
   
133.02   Refusing to aid an officer
   
133.03   Tampering with public notice
   
133.04   Construction activity on Sundays and holidays
 
   
133.99   Penalty
§ 133.01 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A POLICE OFFICER.
   No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one known to
the person to be a police officer of any authorized act within his or her
official capacity.
(720 ILCS 5/31-1) (Prior Code, § 133.01) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.02 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.
   No person, upon command, shall refuse or knowingly reasonably fail to aid a
person known by him or her to be a police officer in:
   (A) Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
   (B) Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(720 ILCS 5/31-8) (Prior Code, § 133.02) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.03 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.
   No person shall knowingly and without lawful authority alter, destroy,
deface, remove or conceal any public notice posted according to law, during the
time for which the notice was to remain posted.
(720 ILCS 5/32-9) (Prior Code, § 133.03) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.04 CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY ON SUNDAYS AND HOLIDAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to conduct outdoor
building construction activity during Sundays and holidays; provided that, the
Mayor, in consultation with the department head, may issue written exceptions
to this section for good cause shown. Emergency outdoor construction activity
shall be allowed according to the circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 133.04) (Ord. 01-O-1720, passed 9-5-2001; Ord. 05-O-1824, passed
2-2-2005) Penalty, see §
133.99
§ 133.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   The penalty, notwithstanding any other provision of this title, for
violation of §
133.04 of this chapter shall be a fine of $500 for each Sunday on which a
defendant is found to be in violation hereof, together with the revocation of
any current license held by the defendant as a contractor within the city.
(Prior Code, § 133.04) (Ord. 01-O-1720, passed 9-5-2001; Ord. 05-O-1824, passed
2-2-2005)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
   
134.01   Public indecency
   
134.02   Obscenity
   
134.03   Harmful material
Possession of Cannabis
   
134.10   Definitions
   
134.11   Limits
   
134.12   Possession of cannabis and cannabis paraphernalia; minors
   
134.13   Unlawful possession of cannabis
   
134.14   Unlawful use of cannabis
   
134.15   Cannabis cultivation restrictions
   
134.16   Manufacture or delivery of cannabis
Drug Paraphernalia Dealers
   134.25   Jurisdiction
   134.26   Definition
   134.27   Possession of drug paraphernalia
   134.28   Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia
   134.29   Delivery to minors
   134.30   Advertisement
   134.31   Forfeiture of drug paraphernalia
 
   
134.99   Penalty
§ 134.01 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct, as defined in 720
ILCS 5/12-12; or
      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
   (B)   PUBLIC PLACE, for purposes of this section, means any place where the
conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
(720 ILCS 5/11-9) (Prior Code, § 134.01) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.02 OBSCENITY.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he or she:
      (1)   Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver
or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene;
      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
      (3)   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his or her body for gain;
      (5)   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material
with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal
laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented
or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (B)   “Obscene” defined. Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:
      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest;
      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd
exhibition of the genitals; and
      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.
      (1)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults; except
that, it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience.
      (2)   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic, political
or scientific value.
      (3)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence
shall be admissible to show:
         (a)   The character of the audience for which the material was
designed or to which it was directed;
         (b)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for
ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would
probably have on the behavior of such people;
         (c)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits
of the material, or absence thereof;
         (d)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in the
state;
         (e)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising
or other promotion of the material; and
         (f)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
   (D)   Prima facie evidence. The creation, purchase, procurement or
possession of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially
adapted for reproducing multiple copies or the possession of more than three
copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to
disseminate.
   (E)   Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      (1)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under 18 years of age; or
      (2)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.
(720 ILCS 5/11-20) (Prior Code, § 134.02) Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.03 HARMFUL MATERIAL.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTE. Transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
      HARMFUL TO MINORS. The quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement or sado-masochistic
abuse, when, taken as a whole, it:
         (a)   Predominantly appeals to the prurient interest in sex of minors;
         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community in the state as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for
minors; and
         (c)   Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value
for minors.
      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the contents.
      MATERIAL.
         (a)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, film, video game,
computer game, video or similar visual depiction, including any such
representation or image which is stored electronically; or
         (b)   Any book, magazine, printed matter however reproduced or
recorded audio of any sort.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a full opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion below the top of
the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one clothed
for sexual gratification or stimulation.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse or physical
contact with a person’s clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or,
if such person be a female, breast.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   A person is guilty of distributing harmful material to a minor when he
or she:
      (1)   Knowingly sells, lends, distributes or gives away to a minor,
knowing that the minor is under the age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable
care in ascertaining the person’s true age:
         (a)   Any material which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-
masochistic abuse, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions
or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic
abuse and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors;
         (b)   A motion picture, show or other presentation which depicts
nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and is harmful to minors; or
         (c)   An admission ticket or pass to premises where there is exhibited
or to be exhibited such a motion picture, show or other presentation.
      (2)   Admits a minor to premises where there is exhibited or to be
exhibited such a motion picture, show or other presentation, knowing that the
minor is a person under the age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the person’s true age.
   (C)   In any prosecution arising under this section, it is an affirmative
defense:
      (1)   The minor as to whom the offense is alleged to have been committed
exhibited to the accused a draft card, driver’s license, birth certificate or
other official or apparently official document purporting to establish that the
minor was 18 years of age or older, which was relied upon by the accused;
      (2)   The defendant was in a parental or guardianship relationship with
the minor or that the minor was accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
      (3)   The defendant was a bona fide school, museum or public library, or
was a person acting in the course of his or her employment as an employee or
official of such organization or retail outlet affiliated with and serving the
education purpose of such organization;
      (4)   The act charged was committed in aid of legitimate scientific or
educational purposes; or
      (5)   An advertisement of harmful material, as defined in this section,
culminated in the sale or distribution of such harmful material to a child
under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of the child by
the defendant, his or her employees, or agents, as where the order or request
for such harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone, Internet or
similar means of communication, and delivery of such harmful material to the
child was by mail, freight, Internet or similar means of transport, which
advertisement contained the following statement, or a substantially similar
statement, and that the defendant required the purchaser to certify that he or
she was not under the age of 18 and that the purchaser falsely stated that he
or she was not under the age of 18:
 
NOTICE: It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to purchase the
matter advertised. Any person under the age of 18 that falsely states that he
or she is not under the age of 18 for the purpose of obtaining the material
advertised is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor under the laws of the state.
 
   (D)   The predominant appeal to the prurient interest of the material shall
be judged with reference to average children of the same general age of the
child to whom such material was sold, lent, distributed or given, unless it
appears from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination
or distribution that it is designed for specially susceptible groups, in which
case the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged with reference to
its intended or probable recipient group.
   (E)   Distribution of harmful material in violation of this section is a
Class A misdemeanor.
   (F)   Any person under the age of 18 that falsely states, either orally or
in writing, that he or she is not under the age of 18, or that presents or
offers to any person any evidence of age and identity that is false or not
actually his or her own for the purpose of ordering, obtaining, viewing or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material is
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
(720 ILCS 5/11-21) (Prior Code, § 134.03) Penalty, see §
134.99
POSSESSION OF CANNABIS
§ 134.10 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter.
   CANNABIS. Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including derivatives or
subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks
of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds
of the plant any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it), fiber,
oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination. CANNABIS does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act. CANNABIS also means cannabis flower,
concentrate and cannabis infused products.
   CANNABIS CONCENTRATE. A product derived from cannabis that is produced by
extracting  cannabinoids, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) from the plant
through the use of propylene glycol, glycerin, butter, olive oil or other
typical cooking fats; water, ice, or dry ice; or butane, propane, CO 2 ,
ethanol, or isopropanol and with the intended use of smoking or making a
cannabis-infused product. The use of any other solvent is expressly prohibited
unless and until it is approved by the Department of Agriculture.
   CANNABIS CONTAINER. A sealed, traceable, container, or package used for the
purpose of containment of cannabis or cannabis-infused product during
transportation.
   CANNABIS FLOWER. Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including
derivatives or subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis;
including raw kief, leaves, and buds, but not resin that has been extracted
from any part of such plant; nor any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin.
   CANNABIS-INFUSED PRODUCT. A beverage, food, oil, ointment, tincture, topical
formulation, or another product containing cannabis that is not intended to be
smoked.
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA. Equipment, products and materials which are intended
to be used for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, ingesting, or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body.
   ENCLOSED, LOCKED SPACE. A closet, room, greenhouse, building, or other
enclosed area equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access
only by authorized individuals under this Act, ENCLOSED, LOCKED SPACE may
include:
      (1)   A space within a residential building that is the primary residence
of the individual cultivating five or fewer cannabis plants that are more than
five inches tall and includes sleeping quarters and indoor plumbing and is only
accessible by a key or code that is different from any key or code that can be
used to access the residential building from the exterior; or
      (2)   A structure, such as a shed or greenhouse, that lies on the same
plot of land as a residential building that includes sleeping quarters and
indoor plumbing and is used as a primary residence by the person cultivating
five or fewer cannabis plants that are more than five inches tall. The
structure must remain locked when it is unoccupied by people.
   MINOR. Any individual under the age of 21 years old.
   PERSON. A natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian, or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be
observed by others. PUBLIC PLACE includes all parts of buildings, parks,
recreation areas, wildlife areas, or playgrounds owned in whole or in part, or
leased, by the state or a unit of local government. PUBLIC PLACE does not
include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide
licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar social service care on the
premises.
(Prior Code, § 134.04) (Ord. 04-O-1805, passed 7-7-2004; Ord. 05-O-1842, passed
11-16-2005; Ord. 20-O-2262, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 20-O-2279, passed 8-19-2020)
Penalty, see §
134.99
§ 134.11 LIMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an Illinois resident over the age of 21 to
possess any amount greater than:
      (1)   30 grams of cannabis flower:
      (2)   Five grams of cannabis concentrate;
      (3)   500 milligrams of THC contained in cannabis-infused products.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a non-resident over the age of 21 to possess
any amount greater than:
      (1)   15 grams of cannabis flower;
      (2)   2.5 grams of cannabis concentrate;
      (3)   250 milligrams of THC contained in a cannabis infused product.
   (C)   The amounts listed in (A) and (B) shall be cumulative. However, it
shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly obtain, seek to obtain, or
possess an amount of cannabis that would cause him or her to exceed the
possession limit under this section, including cannabis that is cultivated by a
person under this Act or obtained under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act.
(Ord. 20-O-2262, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 20-O-2279, passed 8-19-2020) Penalty,
see §
134.99
§ 134.12 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS AND CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA; MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is under 21 years of age to
possess any amount of cannabis, unless he or she is a qualified patient under
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person who is under 21 years of age to
possess cannabis paraphernalia, unless he or she is a qualified patient under
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
(Ord. 20-O-2262, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 20-O-2279, passed 8-19-2020) Penalty,
see §
134.99
§ 134.13 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess cannabis in the following
places:
   (A)   A school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver
pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
   (B)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school, unless
permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
   (C)   In any correctional facility.
   (D)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
childcare, or other similar social service care on the premises.
   (E)   In a motor vehicle upon a highway in this state, except in a sealed,
odor-proof, child-resistant cannabis container which is reasonably inaccessible
while the vehicle is moving.
(Ord. 20-O-2262, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 20-O-2279, passed 8-19-2020) Penalty,
see §
134.99
§ 134.14 UNLAWFUL USE OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use cannabis in the following
places:
      (1)   A school bus, unless permitted for a qualifying patient or
caregiver pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
      (2)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or secondary school
unless permitted for a qualifying patient or caregiver pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
      (3)   In any correctional facility.
      (4)   In a private residence that is used at any time to provide licensed
childcare, or other similar social service care on the premises.
      (5)   In any public place.
      (6)   While he or she is knowingly in close physical proximity to anyone
under 21 years of age who is not a registered medical cannabis patient under
the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
      (7)   Within the passenger area of any motor vehicle upon a highway of
this state.
      (8)   On any private property, including on land owned in whole or in
part or managed in whole or in part by the village or the state, and including
areas where vehicles are parked, without the express permission of the business
or lawful possessor of the property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any law enforcement officer, corrections
officer, probation officer, firefighter, school bus permit or CDL holder to use
cannabis while on duty.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke cannabis in any place
where smoking is prohibited under the Smoke Free Illinois Act.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use cannabis on private
property without the consent of the lawful owner or possessor.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful and declared a nuisance for any person to allow
the odor of burnt cannabis to transmit into neighboring properties.
(Ord. 20-O-2262, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 20-O-2279, passed 8-19-2020) Penalty,
see §
134.99
§ 134.15 CANNABIS CULTIVATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an individual to cultivate cannabis plants
unless they are licensed by the state or a registered qualifying patient of the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a registered qualifying patient of the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act to cultivate cannabis plants:
      (1)   Outside a closed locked space.
      (2)   That are not for personal use.
      (3)   If the individual is under the age of 21 years old.
      (4)   In excess of five plants that are more than five inches tall.
      (5)   In a location where they are subject to ordinary public view.
      (6)   On nonresidential property.
      (7)   Without the consent of the lawful owner of the property.
   (C)   lt shall be unlawful for a registered qualifying patient under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act to sell, transfer, or gift
any home-grown cannabis as authorized under this section and the Act.
   (D)   A violation of this section is punishable by a fine between $100 and
$200.
(Ord. 20-O-2262, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 20-O-2279, passed 8-19-2020) Penalty,
see §
134.99
§ 134.16 MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY OF CANNABIS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not licensed by the State of Illinois to
knowingly manufacture, deliver, or possess with the intent to deliver or
manufacture, any amount of cannabis.
(Ord. 20-O-2262, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 20-O-2279, passed 8-19-2020) Penalty,
see §
134.99
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA DEALERS
§ 134.25 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter is hereby termed "An Ordinance Prohibiting the Sale and
Possession of Items Designed or Marketed for Use with Illegal Drugs"; and,
pursuant to the police powers vested in the city by the state's Constitution,
this subchapter shall be in effect within the city, to prohibit the sale and
possession of items intended for use or designed for use with illegal drugs.
(Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 134.26 DEFINITION.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA is all equipment, products and materials of any kind,
other than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in the
Methamphetamine Control and Community Protection Act and cannabis paraphernalia
as defined in Section 1-10 of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, which are
intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a
controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substance Act in 720 ILCS,
being 720 ILCS 570.
      (1)   It includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
         (b)   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
         (c)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
         (d)   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
         (e)   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
         (f)   Dilutents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances;
         (g)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
         (h)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
         (i)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
         (j)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body;
         (k)   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing cocaine into the human body, such as:
            1.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
            2.   Water pipes;
            3.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
            4.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
            5.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
            6.   Chamber pipes;
            7.   Carburetor pipes;
            8.   Electric pipes;
            9.   Air-driven pipes;
            10.   Chillums;
            11.   Bonds; and
            12.   Ice pipes or chillers.
      (2)   In determining whether an object is DRUG PARAPHERNALIA, a court or
other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factor, the following:
         (a)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
         (b)   Prior convictions, if any, of any owner, or of anyone in control
of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
         (c)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this subchapter;
         (d)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
         (e)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
         (f)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or
of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or
should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
this subchapter; the innocence of any owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, as to a direct violation of this subchapter shall not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
         (g)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;
         (h)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
         (i)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
         (j)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
         (k)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
         (l)   Direct or circumstantial, evidence of the ratio of sales of the
objects to the total sales of the business enterprise;
         (m)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
         (n)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
(Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 134.27 POSSESSION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug
paraphernalia, to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture,
compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack,
store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the
human body a controlled substance in violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 134.28 MANUFACTURE OR DELIVERY OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   It is unlawful for any person to deliver, posses with intent to deliver, or
manufacture, with intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant,
propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce,
process, prepare, test or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance in violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 134.29 DELIVERY TO MINORS.
   Any person 18 years of age or over who violates §
134.28 of this chapter, by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18
years of age, who is at least three years his or her junior, shall be in
violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 134.30 ADVERTISEMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill
or other publication any advertisement, knowing or under circumstances where
one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or
in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug
paraphernalia.
(Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 134.31 FORFEITURE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   All drug paraphernalia manufactured, delivered, possessed, intended for use
or designed for use, as defined in §
134.26 of this chapter, shall be seized without a warrant by a peace officer
and the same shall be subject to forfeiture.
(Ord. 24-O-2394, passed 9-4-2024)
§ 134.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §§
134.10 through
134.16 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $700,
for each offense.
(Prior Code, § 134.04) (Ord. 04-O-1805, passed 7-7-2004; Ord. 05-O-1842, passed
11-16-2005; Ord. 20-O-2262, passed 4-15-2020; Ord. 20-O-2279, passed 8-19-2020)
CHAPTER 135: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Gambling
   
135.03   Keeping a gambling place
   
135.04   Seizure of gambling devices and gambling funds
 
   
135.99   Penalty
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other machines or
device for the reception of money or other thing of value on chance or skill,
or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded,
bet, won or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment or other
device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A GAMBLING DEVICE does
not include:
      (1)   A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for amusement
which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical device, which
device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of the operation
thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which returns to the
player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or property;
      (2)   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for the
money invested and in which there is no element of chance of hazard; and/or
      (3)   An electronic video game machine, terminal or device that, upon
insertion of cash, credit card or debit card, is available to play or simulate
the play of a video game, including, but not limited to, video poker, line up
and blackjack, as defined in the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., as
amended, and as authorized by the state’s Gaming Board utilizing a video
display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or
credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that
directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
(230 ILCS 40/5)
   LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed
by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to
win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle,
gift, sale or some other name, but not including any lottery established by the
state or any other state.
   POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees
by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device that any
particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall in the event of any
contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser or holder to
receive money, property, or evidence of debt.
(720 ILCS 5/28-2) (Prior Code, § 135.01)
§ 135.02 GAMBLING.
   (A)   A person commits gambling when, within the corporate limits of the
city, he or she:
      (1)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value,
unless excepted in division (B) below;
      (2)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest or any political
nomination, appointment or election;
      (3)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells,
bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling
device;
      (4)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he or she has received in the courses of a
bet or wager;
      (5)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or
chance, political nomination, appointment or election;
      (6)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or
transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;
      (7)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or
knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or
other similar device;
      (8)   Knowingly drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticker or share,
or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state or foreign
government;
      (9)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state; or
      (10)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such information; except that, nothing in this division (A)
prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting
of sporting events or contests.
   (B)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted
of gambling:
      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance
including without limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life or
health or accident insurance;
      (2)   Offers of prizes, awards or compensation to the actual contestants
in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest;
      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of the state;
      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside the state when such
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law; or the
manufacture, distribution or possession of video gaming terminals, as defined
in the state’s Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.;
      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo”, when conducted in accordance
with 230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.;
      (6)   Lotteries when conducted by the state in accordance with 20 ILCS
1605/1 et seq.;
      (7)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this division (B), an ANTIQUE SLOT
MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier;
      (8)   Raffles when conducted in accordance with 230 ILCS 15/1 et seq.;
      (9)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with 230 ILCS 30/1 et
seq.; and
      (10)   Video gaming terminal games at a licensed establishment, licensed
truck stop establishment, licensed large truck stop establishment, licensed
fraternal establishment or licensed veteran’s establishment when conducted in
accordance with the state’s Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.
   (C)   In prosecutions under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(10) above,
circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight as in any
criminal prosecution.
(720 ILCS 5/28-1) (Prior Code, § 135.02) (Ord. 13-O-2049, passed 1-16-2013)
Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.03 KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a GAMBLING PLACE is any real estate,
vehicle, boat or any other property whatsoever used for the purposes of
gambling. No person shall knowingly permit any premises or property owned or
occupied by him or her or under his or her control to be used as a gambling
place.
   (B)   When any premises is determined by the Circuit Court to be a gambling
place:
      (1)   Such premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
proceeded against as such; and
      (2)   Such premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a
violation of any section of this chapter shall be held liable for, and may be
sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any unsatisfied
fine that may be levied under any section of this chapter.
(720 ILCS 5/28-3) (Prior Code, § 135.03) Penalty, see §
135.99
§ 135.04 SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.
   (A)   Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use or
every device used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a gambling device
and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation and destruction by city
authorities. As used in this section, a GAMBLING DEVICE includes any slot
machine, and includes any machine or device constructed for the reception of
money or other thing of value and so constructed as to return or cause someone
to return on chance to the player thereof money, property or a right to receive
money or property. With the exception of any device designed for gambling which
is incapable of lawful use, no gambling device shall be forfeited or destroyed
unless an individual with a property interest in the device knows of the
unlawful use thereof.
   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to
the city. Any money or other thing of value integrally related to acts of
gambling shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to the city.
(720 ILCS 5/28-5) (Prior Code, § 135.04)
§ 135.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Illegal gambling may cause the business owner’s business and/or liquor
license to be suspended and/or revoked.
(Ord. 13-O-2052, passed 2-6-2013)
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Litter
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Dumping or depositing of litter prohibited; exemptions
   
136.03   Dumping or depositing litter from motor vehicle prohibited
   
136.04   Accumulation of litter prohibited
   
136.05   Presumption of violation by operator throwing litter from motor
vehicle
   
136.06   Receptacles required in public areas
   
136.07   Power of court to order removal of litter
 
   
136.99   Penalty
LITTER
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   LITTER. Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste. LITTER may
include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste; newspaper, magazines, glass,
metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging construction material,
abandoned vehicle (as defined in 625 ILCS 5/4-100), motor vehicle parts,
furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or offensive matter of
any kind; any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard; or
anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been discarded,
abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly.
(415 ILCS 105/3)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in the state statutes.
(Prior Code, § 136.01)
§ 136.02 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS.
   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause or permit
the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of litter
upon any public or private property in the city, or upon or into any river,
lake, pond or other stream or body of water in the city unless:
   (A)   The property has been designated by the city or any of its agencies
for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that property in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the state’s Pollution
Control Board;
   (B)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended by
the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of
litter;
   (C)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property
or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession,
or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant
and does not create a public health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, or a
fire hazard;
   (D)   The person is acting pursuant to special cleanup days established by
the Board of Trustees; and/or
   (E)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency situation
where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly disposes of any
litter when the emergency situation no longer exists.
(415 ILCS 105/4, 105/8) (Prior Code, § 136.02) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.03 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard or otherwise
dispose of litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any
public or private property or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream or
body of water in the city, except as permitted under §
136.02(A) through (E) of this chapter.
   (B)   Nor shall any person transport, by any means, garbage or refuse from
any dwelling, residence, place of business, farm or other site to and deposit
the material in, around or on top of trash barrels or other receptacles placed
along public highways or at roadside rest areas.
(415 ILCS 105/5, 105/8) (Prior Code, § 136.03) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.04 ACCUMULATION OF LITTER PROHIBITED.
   No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of which the
person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as to
constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be blown
or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real property of another
person.
(415 ILCS 105/6, 105/8) (Prior Code, § 136.04) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.05 PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION BY OPERATOR THROWING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor
vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the
operator of that motor vehicle has violated §
136.03 of this chapter, but that presumption may be rebutted.
(415 ILCS 105/9) (Prior Code, § 136.05)
§ 136.06 RECEPTACLES REQUIRED IN PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A) In order to assist the public in complying with this subchapter, the
owner or person in control of any property which is held out to the public as a
place for assemblage, the transaction of business, recreation or as a public
way shall cause to be placed and maintained receptacles for the deposit of
litter of sufficient volume and in sufficient numbers to meet the needs of the
numbers of people customarily coming on or using the property.
   (B) For purposes of this section, PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE
TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS includes, but is not limited to, commercially operated
parks, campgrounds, drive-in restaurants, automobile service stations, business
parking lots, car washes, shopping centers, marinas, boat launching areas,
industrial parking lots, boat moorage and fueling stations, piers, beaches and
bathing areas, airports, roadside rest stops, drive-in movies and shopping
malls; and PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR ASSEMBLAGE, RECREATION OR AS A
PUBLIC WAY includes, but is not limited to, any property that is publicly owned
or operated for any of the purposes stated in the definition in this division
for PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS, but
excludes state highway rights-of-way and rest areas located thereon.
(415 ILCS 105/10) (Prior Code, § 136.06) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.07 POWER OF COURT TO ORDER REMOVAL OF LITTER.
   The penalties prescribed in this subchapter are in addition to, and not in
lieu of any penalties, rights, remedies, duties or liabilities which may be
otherwise imposed or conferred by a court.
(415 ILCS 105/8) (Prior Code, § 136.07)
§ 136.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
136.02 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $500.
(415 ILCS 105/4, 105/8) (Prior Code, § 136.02)
      (2)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
136.03 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $500.
(415 ILCS 105/5, 105/8) (Prior Code, § 136.03)
      (3)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
136.04 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $10, nor more than $500.
(415 ILCS 105/6, 105/8) (Prior Code, § 136.04)
      (4)   If no litter receptacles are placed on property described in §
136.06 of this chapter, the owner or person in control of the property shall be
fined $100 for violating §
136.06 of this chapter. If the owner or person in control of the property has
placed litter receptacles on his or her property, but the number or size of the
receptacles has proved inadequate to meet the needs of the numbers of people
coming on or using his or her property, as indicated by the condition and
appearance of that property, and the owner or person in control has failed to
provide sufficient or adequate receptacles within ten days after being made
aware of that fact by written notice from the police, he or she shall be fined
$25 for each receptacle not so provided and maintained.
(415 ILCS 105/10) (Prior Code, § 136.06)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS
Section
Deadly Weapons
   
137.01   Unlawful use of weapons
   
137.02   Exemptions
   
137.03   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition
   
137.04   Defacing identification marks of firearms
   
137.05   Confiscation and disposition of weapons
Air Rifles
   
137.20   Definitions
   
137.21   Selling, renting or transferring to children; prohibition
   
137.22   Carrying or discharging on public streets
   
137.23   Permissive possession
   
137.24   Permissive sales
   
137.25   Seizure and removal
Assault Weapons
   
137.40   Definitions
   
137.41   Assault weapons and large magazines; sales prohibited; exceptions
   
137.42   Destruction of confiscated weapons
 
   
137.99   Penalty
DEADLY WEAPONS
§ 137.01 UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful use of weapons when he or she
knowingly:
      (1)   Sells, manufactures, purchases, possesses or carries any bludgeon,
black-jack, slung-shot, sand-club, sand-bag, metal knuckles or other knuckle
weapon regardless of its composition, throwing star, or any knife, commonly
referred to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically
by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of
the knife, or a ballistic knife, which is a device that propels a knifelike
blade as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material or compressed
gas;
      (2)   Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle
or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon or instrument of like character;
      (3)   Carries or possesses with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, any firearm in a church, synagogue, mosque, or other building,
structure, or place used for religious worship;
      (4)   Carries on or about his or her person or in any vehicle, a tear gas
gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance,
other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious liquid gas or substance
designed solely for personal defense carried by a person 18 years of age or
older;
      (5)   Carries or possesses in any vehicle or concealed on or about his or
her person except when on his or her land or in his or her own abode, legal
dwelling, or fixed place of business, or on the land or in the legal dwelling
of another person as an invitee with that person’s permission, any pistol,
revolver, stun gun or taser or other firearm, except that this division (A)(5)
does not apply to or affect transportation of weapons that meet one of the
following conditions:
         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;
         (b)   Are not immediately accessible;
         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box,
shipping box, or other container by a person who has been issued a currently
valid firearm owner’s identification card; or
         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the Firearm
Concealed Carry Act by a person who has been issued a currently valid license
under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act.
      (6)   Sets a spring gun;
      (7)   (a)   Carries or possesses on or about his or her person, upon any
public street, alley, or other public lands within the village limits, except
when an invitee thereon or therein, for the purpose of the display of such
weapon or the lawful commerce in weapons, or except when on his or her land or
in his or her own abode, legal dwelling, or fixed place of business, or on the
land or in the legal dwelling of another person as an invitee with that
person’s permission, any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or other firearm,
except that this division (A)(7) does not apply to or affect transportation of
weapons that meet one of the following conditions:
            1.   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;
            2.   Are not immediately accessible;
            3.   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box,
shipping box, or other container by a person who has been issued a currently
valid firearm owner’s identification card; or
            4.   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the Firearm
Concealed Carry Act by a person who has been issued a currently valid license
under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act.
         (b)   A STUN GUN OR TASER, as used in this division (A)(7) means:
            1.   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such
as, batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a length of
wire and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current capable of
disrupting the person’s nervous system in such a manner as to render him or her
incapable of normal functioning; or
            2.   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such
as batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing worn by a human,
can send out current capable of disrupting the person’s nervous system in such
a manner as to render him or her incapable of normal functioning.
      (8)   Sells, manufactures, delivers, imports, possesses, or purchases any
assault weapon attachment or .50 caliber cartridge in violation of 720 ILCS 5/
24-1.9 or any explosive bullet. For purposes of this division (A):
         (a)   CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal case having a projectile affixed
at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end thereof, with the
propellant contained in such tube between the projectile and the cap; and
         (b)   EXPLOSIVE BULLET means the projectile portion of an ammunition
cartridge which contains or carries an explosive charge which will explode upon
contact with the flesh of a human or an animal.
      (9)   Carries or possesses on or about his or her person while in a
building occupied by a unit of government, a billy club, other weapon of like
character, or other instrument of like character intended for use as a weapon.
For the purposes of this division (A), BILLY CLUB means a short stick or club
commonly carried by police officers which is either telescopic or constructed
of a solid piece of wood or other man-made material;
      (10)   Manufactures, possesses, sells, or offers to sell, purchase,
manufacture, import, transfer, or use any device, part, kit, tool, accessory,
or combination of parts that is designed to and functions to increase the rate
of fire of a semiautomatic firearm above the standard rate of fire for
semiautomatic firearms that is not equipped with that device, part, or
combination of parts;
      (11)   Carries or possesses any assault weapon or .50 caliber rifle in
violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-1.9; or
      (12)   Manufactures, sells, delivers, imports, or purchases any assault
weapon or .50 caliber rifle in violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-1.9.
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a))
   (B)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Crossbows, common or compound bows and underwater spearguns are
exempted from the definition of ballistic knife as defined in division (A)(1)
above.
      (2)   The provision of division (A)(1) above prohibiting the sale,
manufacture, purchase, possession, or carrying of any knife, commonly referred
to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand
pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the
knife, does not apply to a person who possesses a currently valid Firearm
Owner’s Identification Card previously issued in his or her name by the
Illinois State Police or to a person or an entity engaged in the business of
selling or manufacturing switchblade knives.
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(e))
(Prior Code, § 137.01) Penalty, see §
137.99
§ 137.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Section
137.01, divisions (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(7), and (A)(9) do not apply to or affect
any of the following:
      (1)   Peace officers, and any person summoned by a peace officer to
assist in making arrests or preserving the peace, while actually engaged in
assisting the officer;
      (2)   Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted
of an offense, while in the performance of their official duty, or while
commuting between their homes and place of employment;
      (3)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United
States or the state’s National Guard or the Reserve Officers Training Corps,
while in the performance of their official duty;
      (4)   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public utility to
perform police functions or guards of armored car companies while actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or commuting
between their homes and places of employment; watchmen while actually engaged
in the performance of the duties of their employment;
      (5)   Persons licensed as private security contractors, private
detectives or private alarm contractors or employed by an agency certified by
the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation, if their duties
include the carrying of a weapon under the provisions of 225 ILCS 447/5-5 et
seq., the Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint
Vendor, and Locksmith Act of 2004, while actually engaged in the performance of
the duties of their employment or commuting between their homes and places of
employment. A person shall be considered eligible for this exemption if he or
she has completed the required 20 hours of training for a private security
contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor, or employee of a
licensed private security contractor, private detective, or private alarm
contractor agency and 28 hours of required firearm training, and has been
issued a firearm control card by the Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation. Conditions for the renewal of firearm control cards issued under
the provisions of this section shall be the same as for those cards issued
under the provisions of the Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security,
Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith Act of 2004. The firearm control card shall
be carried by the private security contractor, private detective, or private
alarm contractor, or employee of the licensed private security contractor,
private detective, or private alarm contractor agency at all times when he or
she is in possession of a concealable weapon permitted by his or her firearm
control card;
      (6)   Any person regularly employed in a commercial or industrial
operation as a security guard for the protection of persons employed and
private property related to such commercial or industrial operation while
actually engaged in the performance of their duty or traveling between sites or
properties belonging to the employer, and who, as a security guard, is a member
of a security force registered with the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation; provided that the security guard has successfully
completed a course of study, approved by and supervised by the Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation, consisting of not less than 48 hours of
training which shall include theory of law enforcement, liability for acts and
the handling of weapons. A person shall be considered to be in compliance with
this section who has completed the required 20 hours of training for a security
officer and 28 hours of required firearm training and who has been issued a
firearm control card by the state’s Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation. Conditions for the renewal of firearm control cards issued under
the provisions of this section shall be the same as for those cards issued
under the provisions of 225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq., the Private Detective,
Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith Act of 2004.
Such firearm control card shall be carried by the security guard at all times
when he or she is in possession of a concealable weapon permitted by his or her
firearm control card;
      (7)   Agents and investigators of the state’s Legislative Investigating
Commission authorized by the Commission to carry the weapons specified in §
137.01(A)(4) and (A)(5) while on duty in the course of any investigation for
the Commission;
      (8)   Persons employed by a financial institution as a security guard for
the protection of other employees and property related to such financial
institution, while actually engaged in the performance of their duties,
commuting between their homes and places of employment or traveling between
sites or properties owned or operated by such financial institution, and who,
as a security guard, is a member of a security force registered with the
Department of Professional and Financial Regulation; provided that any person
so employed has successfully completed a course of study, approved by and
supervised by the Department of Financial and Professional Regulation,
consisting of not less than 48 hours of training which includes theory of law
enforcement, liability for acts and the handling of weapons. A person shall be
considered to be eligible for this exemption if he or she has completed the
required 20 hours of training for a security officer and 28 hours of required
firearm training, and has been issued a firearm control card by the Department
of Financial and Professional Regulation. Conditions for renewal of firearm
control cards issued under the provisions of this section shall be the same as
for those issued under the provisions of 225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq., the Private
Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor, and Locksmith
Act of 2004. The firearm control card shall be carried by the security guard at
all times when he or she is in possession of a concealable weapon permitted by
his or her firearm control card. For purposes of this division (A)(8),
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION means a bank, savings and loan association, credit union
or company providing armored car services;
      (9)   Any person employed by an armored car company to drive an armored
car while actually engaged in the performance of his or her duties;
      (10)   Persons who have been classified as peace officers pursuant to the
Peace Officer Fire Investigation Act (20 ILCS 2910/0.01 et seq.);
      (11)   Investigators of the office of the State’s Attorneys Appellate
Prosecutor authorized by the Board of Governors of the office of the State’s
Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor to carry weapons pursuant to § 7.06 of the
State's Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor’s Act (725 ILCS 210/7.06);
      (12)   Special investigators appointed by a State's Attorney under § 3-
9005 of the Counties Code (55 ILCS 5/3-9005);
      (13)   Probation officers while in the performance of their duties, or
while commuting between their homes, places of employment or specific locations
that are part of their assigned duties, with the consent of the chief judge of
the circuit for which they are employed, if they have received weapons training
according to requirements of the Peace Officer and Probation Officer Firearm
Training Act (50 ILCS 710);
      (14)   Court security officers while in the performance of their official
duties or while commuting between their homes and places of employment, with
the consent of the Sheriff;
      (15)   A person employed as an armed security guard at a nuclear energy,
storage, weapons or development site or facility regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission who has completed the background screening and training
mandated by the rules and regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; or
      (16)   Manufacture, transportation or sale of weapons to persons
authorized under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(15) above to possess those
weapons.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(a))
   (B)   Section
137.01(A)(5) and (A)(7) do not apply to or affect any person carrying a
concealed pistol, revolver, or handgun and the person has been issued a
currently valid license under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act at the time of
the commission of the offense.
720 (ILCS 5/24-2(a-5))
   (C)   Section 138.01(A)(5) and (A)(7) do not apply to or affect a qualified
current or retired law enforcement officer or a current or retired deputy,
county correctional officer, or correctional officer of the Department of
Corrections qualified under the laws of this state or under the federal Law
Enforcement Officers Safety Act.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(a-6))
   (D)   Section
137.01(A)(5) and (A)(7) of this chapter do not apply to or affect any of the
following:
      (1)   Members of any club or organization organized for the purpose of
practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges, whether public
or private, and patrons of such ranges, while such members or patrons are using
their firearms on those target ranges;
      (2)   Duly authorized military or civil organizations while parading,
with the special permission of the governor;
      (3)   Hunters, trappers or fishermen while engaged in lawful hunting,
trapping or fishing under the provisions of the Wildlife Code or the Fish and
Aquatic Life Code;
      (4)   Transportation of weapons broken down in a non-functioning state or
are not immediately accessible; or
      (5)   Carrying or possessing any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or
other firearm on the land or in the legal dwelling of another person as an
invitee with that person’s permission.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(b))
   (E)   Section
137.01(A)(1) of this chapter does not apply to the purchase, possession or
carrying of a black-jack or slung-shot by a police officer.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(d))
   (F)   Sections
137.01(A)(8) and
137.03(A)(8) of this chapter do not apply to:
      (1)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard, while in the performance of their
official duty;
      (2)   Bona fide collectors of antique or surplus military ordinance;
      (3)   Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics or
specializing in the development of ammunition or explosive ordnance; or
      (4)   Commerce, preparation, assembly or possession of explosive bullets
by manufacturers of ammunition licensed by the Federal Government, in
connection with the supply of those organizations and persons exempted by
division (F)(1) above, or like organizations and persons outside the state, or
the transportation of explosive bullets to any organization or person exempted
in this section by a common carrier or by a vehicle owned or leased by an
exempted manufacturer.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(g))
   (G)   Section
137.01(A)(5) and (A)(7) do not apply to any parole agent or parole supervisor
who meets the qualifications and conditions prescribed in § 3-14-1.5 of the
Unified Code of Corrections (730 ILCS 5/3-14-1.5).
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(g-6))
   (H)   An information or indictment based upon a violation of any provision
of this subchapter need not negative any exemptions contained in this
subchapter. The defendant shall have the burden of proving such an exemption.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(h))
   (I)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to or affect the
transportation, carrying or possession of any pistol or revolver, stun gun,
taser or other firearm consigned to a common carrier operating under license
with the State or the Federal Government where such transportation, carrying or
possession is incident to the lawful transportation in which the common carrier
is engaged. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to or affect the
transportation, carrying or possession of any pistol, revolver, stun gun, taser
or other firearm not the subject of and regulated by 720 ILCS 5/24- 1(a)(7),
which is unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box, shipping box or
other container by the possessor of a valid firearm owner’s identification
card.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2(i))
(Prior Code, § 137.02)
§ 137.03 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of firearms or
firearm ammunition when:
      (1)   He or she is under 18 years of age and has in his or her possession
any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person;
      (2)   He or she is under 21 years of age, has been convicted of a
misdemeanor other than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent and has any
firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession;
      (3)   He or she has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this or
any other jurisdiction and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her
possession;
      (4)   He or she is a narcotic addict and has any firearms or firearm
ammunition in his or her possession;
      (5)   He or she has been a patient in a mental hospital within the past
five years and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession;
      (6)   He or she is mentally retarded and has any firearms or firearm
ammunition in his or her possession; or
      (7)   He or she has in his or her possession any explosive bullet. For
the purposes of this section, EXPLOSIVE BULLET means the projectile portion of
an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries an explosive charge which
will explode upon contact with the flesh of a human or an animal. CARTRIDGE
means a tubular metal case having a projectile fixed at the front thereof and a
cap or primer at the rear end thereof with the propellent contained in the tube
between the projectile and the cap.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A)(1) above prohibits a person under 18 years of
age from participating in any lawful recreational activity with a firearm such
as, but not limited to, practice shooting at targets upon established public or
private target ranges or hunting, trapping or fishing in accordance with the
state’s Wildlife Code or the Fish and Aquatic Life Code.
(720 ILCS 5/24-3.1) (Prior Code, § 137.03) Penalty, see §
137.99
§ 137.04 DEFACING IDENTIFICATION MARKS OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   Any person who shall knowingly or intentionally change, alter, remove
or obliterate the name of the importer’s or manufacturer’s serial number of any
firearm commits a Class 2 felony under state law.
   (B)   A person who possesses any firearm upon which any such importer’s or
manufacturer’s serial number has been changed, altered, removed or obliterated
commits a Class 3 felony under state law.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent a person from making repairs,
replacement of parts or other changes to a firearm if those repairs,
replacement of parts or changes cause the removal of the name of the maker,
model or other marks of identification other than the serial number on the
firearm’s frame or receiver.
   (D)   A prosecution for a violation of this section under state law may be
commenced within six years after the commission of the offense.
(720 ILCS 5/24-5) (Prior Code, § 137.04) Penalty, see §
137.99
§ 137.05 CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.
   Upon conviction of an offense in which a weapon was used or possessed by the
offender, any weapon seized may be confiscated by the trial court for further
disposition consistent with state law.
(720 ILCS 5/24-6) (Prior Code, § 137.05)
AIR RIFLES
§ 137.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR RIFLE. Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B.B. gun,
pellet gun or any implement that is not a firearm, which impels a pellet
constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials with a force
that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.
   DEALER. Any person, copartnership, association or corporation engaged in the
business of selling at retail or renting any of the articles included in the
definition of “air rifle”.
(720 ILCS 535/1) (Prior Code, § 137.10)
§ 137.21 SELLING, RENTING OR TRANSFERRING TO CHILDREN; PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give or otherwise
transfer an air rifle to any person under the age of 13 years where the dealer
knows or has cause to believe the person to be under 13 years of age or where
the dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry relative to the age of the
person and the person is under 13 years of age.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, lend or otherwise
transfer any air rifle to any person under 13 years of age, except where the
relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward, or adult instructor and
pupil exists between the person and the person under l3 years of age, or where
the person stands in loco parentis to the person under 13 years of age.
(720 ILCS 535/2) (Prior Code, § 137.11) Penalty, see §
137.99
§ 137.22 CARRYING OR DISCHARGING ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under 13 years of age to carry any air
rifle on the public streets, roads, highways or public lands within the city,
unless the person under 13 years of age carries the rifle unloaded.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle from or
across any street, sidewalk, road, highway or public land or any public place,
except on a safely-constructed target range.
(720 ILCS 535/3) (Prior Code, § 137.12) Penalty, see §
137.99
§ 137.23 PERMISSIVE POSSESSION.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this subchapter, it is lawful for any
person under 13 years of age to have in his or her possession any air rifle if
it is:
   (A)   Kept within his or her house of residence or other private enclosure;
   (B)   Used by the person under 13 years of age and he or she is a duly
enrolled member of any club, team or society organized for educational purposes
and maintaining as part of its facilities or having written permission to use
an indoor or outdoor rifle range under the supervision, guidance and
instruction of a responsible adult, and then only if the air rifle is actually
being used in connection with the activities of the club, team or society under
the supervision of a responsible adult; or
   (C)   Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances
when the air rifle is fired, discharged or operated in a manner as not to
endanger persons or property and then only if it is used in a manner as to
prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space outside the
limits of such grounds or residence.
(720 ILCS 535/4) (Prior Code, § 137.13)
§ 137.24 PERMISSIVE SALES.
   The provisions of this subchapter do not prohibit sales of air rifles:
   (A)   By wholesale dealers or jobbers;
   (B)   To be shipped out of the state; or
   (C)   To be used at a target range operated in accordance with 720 ILCS 535/
4 or by members of the Armed Services of the United States or veterans’
organizations.
(720 ILCS 535/5) (Prior Code, § 137.14)
§ 137.25 SEIZURE AND REMOVAL.
   Any police officer shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner, any air rifle sold or used in any manner in violation of
this subchapter.
(720 ILCS 535/6) (Prior Code, § 137.15)
ASSAULT WEAPONS
§ 137.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTIQUE WEAPON. Weapons that have not been manufacturer or altered for a
period of no less than 75 years and are rendered permanently unusable.
   ASSAULT WEAPON.
      (1)   A semi-automatic rifle that has the capacity to accept a large
capacity magazine detachable or otherwise and one or more of the following:
         (a)   Only a pistol grip without a stock attached;
         (b)   Any feature capable of functioning as a protruding grip that can
be held by the non-trigger hand;
         (c)   A folding, telescoping or thumbhole stock;
         (d)   A shroud attached to the barrel, or that partially or completely
encircles the barrel, allowing the bearer to hold the firearm with the non-
trigger hand without being burned, but excluding a slide that encloses the
barrel; or
         (e)   A muzzle brake or muzzle compensator.
      (2)   A semi-automatic pistol or any semi-automatic rifle that has a
fixed magazine, that has the capacity to accept more than ten rounds of
ammunition;
      (3)   A semi-automatic pistol that has the capacity to accept a
detachable magazine and has one or more of the following:
         (a)   Any feature capable of functioning as a protruding grip that can
be held by the non-trigger hand;
         (b)   A folding, telescopic or thumbhole stock;
         (c)   A shroud attached to the barrel, or that partially or completely
encircles the barrel, allowing the bearer to hold the firearm with the non-
trigger hand without being burned, but excluding a slide that encloses the
barrel;
         (d)   A muzzle brake or muzzle compensator; or
         (e)   The capacity to accept a detachable magazine at some location
outside of the pistol grip.
      (4)   A semi-automatic shotgun that has one or more of the following:
         (a)   Only a pistol grip without a stock attached;
         (b)   Any feature capable of functioning as a protruding grip that can
be held by the non-trigger hand;
         (c)   A folding, telescopic or thumbhole stock;
         (d)   A fixed magazine capacity in excess of five rounds; or
         (e)   An ability to accept a detachable magazine.
      (5)   Any shotgun with a revolving cylinder;
      (6)   Conversion kit, part or combination of parts, from which an assault
weapon can be assembled if those parts are in the possession or under the
control of the same person;
      (7)   Shall include, but not be limited to, the assault weapon models
identified as follows:
         (a)   The following rifles or copies or duplicates thereof:
            1.   AK, AKM, AKS, AK-47, AK-74, ARM, MAK90, Misr, NHM 90, NHM 91,
SA-85, SA-93, VEPR;
            2.   AR-10;
            3.   AR-15, Bushmaster XM15, Armalite M15 or Olympic Arms PCR;
            4.   AR70;
            5.   Calico Liberty;
            6.   Dragunov SVD Sniper Rifle or Dragunov SVU;
            7.   Fabrique National FN/FAL, FN/LAR or FNC;
            8.   Hi-Point Carbine;
            9.   Hi-91, HK-93, HK-94 or HK-PSG-1;
            10.   Kel-Tec Sub Rifle;
            11.   Saiga;
            12.   SAR-8, SAR-4800;
            13.   SKS with detachable magazine;
            14.   SLG 95;
            15.   SLR 95 or 96;
            16.   Steyr AUG;
            17.   Sturm, Ruger Mini-14;
            18.   Tavor;
            19.   Thompson 1927, Thompson M1 or Thompson 1927 Commando; or
            20.   Uzi, Galil and Uzi Sporter, Galil Sporter or Galil Sniper
Rifle (Galatz).
         (b)   The following pistols or copies or duplicates thereof:
            1.   Calico M-110;
            2.   MAC-10, MAC-11 or MPA3;
            3.   Olympic Arms OA;
            4.   TEC-9, TEC-DC9, TEC-22 Scorpion or AB-10; or
            5.   Uzi.
         (c)   The following shotguns or copies or duplicates thereof:
            1.   Armscor 30 BG;
            2.   SPAS 12 or LAW 12;
            3.   Striker 12; or
            4.   Streetsweeper.
      (8)   ASSAULT WEAPON does not include any firearm that has been made
permanently inoperable, any antique firearm as defined in § 1.1 of the Firearm
Owners Identification Act (430 ILCS 62/1.1) or weapons designed for Olympic
target shooting events.
   DETACHABLE MAGAZINE. Any ammunition feeding device, the function of which is
to deliver one or more ammunition cartridges into the firing chamber which can
be removed from the firearm without the use of any tool, including a bullet or
ammunition cartridge.
   LARGE CAPACITY MAGAZINE. Any ammunition feeding device with the capacity to
accept more than ten rounds, but shall not be constructed to include the
following:
      (1)   A feeding device that has been permanently altered so that it
cannot accommodate more than ten rounds;
      (2)   A .22 caliber tube ammunition feeding device; or
      (3)   A tubular magazine that is contained in a lever-action firearm.
   MUZZLE BRAKE. A device attached to the muzzle of a weapon that utilized
escaping gas to reduce recoil.
   MUZZLE COMPENSATOR. A device attached to the muzzle of a weapon that
utilized escaping gas to control muzzle movement.
(Ord. 13-O-2060, passed 7-19-2013)
§ 137.41 ASSAULT WEAPONS AND LARGE MAGAZINES; SALES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall manufacture, sell, offer or display for sale, give,
lend, transfer ownership of, acquire or posses any assault weapon or large
capacity magazine. This subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   The sale or transfer to, or possession by any officer, agent or
employee of the city or any other municipality, county or state of the United
States, members of the armed forces of the United States; or the organized
militia of this or any other state; or peace officers to the extent that any
such person named in this section is otherwise authorized to acquire or possess
an assault weapon and/or large capacity magazine and does so while acting
within the scope of his or her duties; and/or
      (2)   Transportation of assault weapons or large capacity magazines if
such weapons are broken down and in a non-functioning state and are not
immediately accessible to any person.
   (B)   Any assault weapon or large capacity magazine possessed, sold or
transferred in violation of division (A) above is hereby declared to be
contraband and shall be seized and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 13-O-2060, passed 7-19-2013) Penalty, see §
137.99
§ 137.42 DESTRUCTION OF CONFISCATED WEAPONS.
   (A)   Whenever any firearm or large capacity magazine is surrendered or
confiscated pursuant to the terms of this subchapter, the Chief of Police or
his or her designee shall ascertain whether such firearm or large capacity
magazine is needed as evidence in any matter.
   (B)   If such firearm or large capacity magazine is not required for
evidence, it shall be destroyed at the direction of the Chief of Police or his
or her designee. A record of the date and method of destruction and an
inventory of the firearm or large capacity magazine so destroyed shall be
maintained.
(Ord. 13-O-2060, passed 7-19-2013)
§ 137.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person convicted of violating §
137.22 of this chapter shall pay a fine not to exceed $50.
(720 ILCS 535/7) (Prior Code, § 137.12)
   (C)   (1)   Any person found in violation of §
137.41 of this chapter shall be sentenced to not more than six months
imprisonment or fined not less than $500 and not more than $1,000, or both.
      (2)   Any person who, prior to the effective date of §
137.41 of this chapter, was legally in possession of an assault weapon or large
capacity magazine prohibited by §
137.41 of this chapter shall have 30 days from the effective date of §
137.41 of this chapter to do either of the following without being subject to
prosecution hereunder:
         (a)   To remove the assault weapon or large capacity magazine from
within the city;
         (b)   To modify the assault weapon or large capacity magazine either
to render it permanently inoperable or to permanently make it a device no
longer defined as an assault weapon or large capacity magazine; or
         (c)   To surrender the assault weapon to the Chief of Police or his or
her designee for disposal as provided in §
137.42 of this chapter.
(Ord. 13-O-2060, passed 7-19-2013)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   HOUSING REGULATIONS
      
152.   NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION AREAS
      
153.   SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
      
154.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
155.   MOBILE HOME PARKS
      
156.   ZONING CODE
      
157.   FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS
      
158.   STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
      
159.   SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Unsafe chimneys
   
150.002   Construction standards for construction of multi-story and multi-
family buildings
   
150.003   Soil erosion and sedimentation regulations
   
150.004   Property Redevelopment Program
   
150.005   Registration of vacant, abandoned and foreclosed properties
   
150.006   Reserved
Unsafe Buildings
   
150.020   Maintenance of unsafe building prohibited
   
150.021   Notice to owner to put structure in safe condition
   
150.022   Failure of owner to take correction action
Impact Fees
   
150.035   Purpose and intent
   
150.036   Applicability
   
150.037   Exemptions
   
150.038   Definitions
   
150.039   Notice and hearing required to establish or increase
   
150.040   Imposition, calculation and collection
   
150.041   Accounts
   
150.042   Use of proceeds
   
150.043   Refunds
   
150.044   Audits
   
150.045   Protest and appeal
   
150.046   Statute of limitations
   
150.047   Variance and exceptions
   
150.048   Amendment procedures
   
150.049   Credits
Redevelopment Project Area Interested Parties Registry
   
150.060   Definitions
   
150.061   Establishment of registries
   
150.062   Maintenance of registry
   
150.063   Registration by residents, organizations
   
150.064   Determination of eligibility
   
150.065   Renewal and termination
   
150.066   Amendment to registration
   
150.067   Registries available for public inspection
   
150.068   Notices to be sent to interested parties
   
150.069   Non-interference
   
150.070   Amendment to rules
Codes Adopted; Permit Fees
   
150.085   Definitions
   
150.086   Building and Residential Codes adopted
   
150.087   Mechanical/HVAC Code adopted
   
150.088   Plumbing Code adopted
   
150.089   Electrical Code adopted
   
150.090   Emergency permits
   
150.091   Contractor/commercial vehicles
   
150.092   Cancellation or permits
   
150.093   Refund policy
   
150.094   Other codes adopted
 
   
150.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 UNSAFE CHIMNEYS.
   No person shall within the city erect or maintain any insecure and unsafe
stack, wall, chimney or other structure which from its situation, mode of
construction or other cause may be dangerous to person or property.
(Prior Code, § 150.01) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.002 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF MULTI-STORY AND MULTI-
FAMILY BUILDINGS.
   The provisions of this section shall apply to all multi-story and multi-
family structures only, excluding single- family residences.
   (A)   The fire resistance rating of structural elements (including walls,
floors and roof) and tenant separation or party walls shall be a minimum of two
hours and shall be constructed of masonry or concrete.
   (B)   Exterior and load-bearing wall construction shall be of masonry. All
floors shall be of the precast concrete type or poured concrete type having at
least a two-hour fire resistance rating.
(Prior Code, § 150.02) (Ord. 87-O-1280, passed 7-1-1987) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.003 SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION REGULATIONS.
   The findings and provisions adopted by City Council in order to protect
persons and property, and prevent damage to the environment, through the
regulation of any activity that breaks topsoil or otherwise moves earth, in
order to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation, are adopted by reference as
though set forth in full herein, including any future amendments to these
provisions.
(Prior Code, § 150.03) (Ord. 06-O-1853, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 150.004 PROPERTY REDEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
   (A)   Enactment. The city enacts the Property Redevelopment Program for
properties it acquires by a judicial deed or judicial sales deed for the
purpose of putting properties back on the tax roll and so that these properties
can be rehabbed at no cost to the city.
   (B)   Applicants. Under the program to redevelop properties, a person or
legal entity may make a request to City Council to purchase any of the
properties that the city has acquired through the County Circuit Court as
described in this section. The applicant must show that they have the financial
ability to redevelop the property and must submit plans as to how the property
will be redeveloped. The plans must show that the property will be redeveloped
in accordance with the applicable zoning for the location of the property. All
applications must include who will occupy the property as the owner and not a
tenant. In the alternative, it could include a plan of the applicant to sell to
a person or entity that will occupy the property and not rent the property.
   (C)   Rehabilitation. Upon the approval of their application, the applicant
must sign an agreement with the city which will give the applicant six months
to redevelop the property. In the agreement, the applicant will agree to
forfeit any work it completes within the six-month period if it fails to
complete the rehabilitation within the six- month period or within any
extension granted by City Council. The forfeiture in the agreement will include
not only work but supplies and will prevent the applicant from filing any type
of lien against the property. The rehabilitation of the property means that the
property will be repaired to bring it into compliance with all of the current
codes of the city and any amendments thereof. The applicant will be required to
obtain all necessary permits to do any work on the property. Furthermore, the
aforesaid agreement will require the applicant to provide insurance to the city
in which the city is an additional insured for an amount determined by City
Council to be sufficient to protect the city. The applicant will be required to
provide the city with the proof that the city had been added to its insurance
policy as additionally insured before the applicant can be issued any permits
to do work on the property.
   (D)   Sales price. The sales price will be the higher of either the value of
the property determined by an state licensed appraiser or the total of any
costs the city had invested into the property. The calculation of the costs the
city had invested into the property will include but not be limited to
appraisal fees, any outstanding grass cutting fees, outstanding water bills,
outstanding citations fines against the property, and legal fees paid
associated with the property. The City Council can deviate from the aforesaid
determination of the sales price based on the circumstances and facts presented
if it finds it in the best interest of the city to deviate.
   (E)   Conveyance. If the applicant completes the rehabilitation or obtains
an extension by City Council during the six-month period and rehabilitate the
property during the extension, the applicant can request a deed from City
Council. At the time the applicant makes its request, the applicant must
include the amount of the sales price in the form of certified funds to the
city. Upon a determination by City Council that the applicant had complied with
this section, the city will issue the applicant a quit claim deed with no title
insurance or warranties. If the property conveyed to the applicant is used as
rental property, this fact will be taken into consideration if the applicant
ever submits an application to City Council under this program.
(Ord. 19-O-2232, passed 5-15-2019)
§ 150.005 REGISTRATION OF VACANT, ABANDONED AND FORECLOSED PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Purpose. The Corporate Authorities find that vacant, abandoned and
foreclosed properties negatively affect property values, lead to increases in
crime and contribute to the overall deterioration of the safety and welfare of
the city and its citizens. The purpose of this section is to identify, track
and regulate vacant, abandoned and foreclosed properties within the city.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      DEFAULT. Occurs when the mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the
mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of debt
referred to in the mortgage,
      ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any law enforcement officer, building and housing
official, zoning inspector, code enforcement officer, fire inspector, building
inspector or other person authorized by the city to enforce applicable codes.
      EVIDENCE OF VACANCY. Any condition that on its own or combined with other
conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property
is vacant. Such conditions may include but are not limited to: overgrown and/or
dead vegetation; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities;
accumulation of trash junk or debris; abandoned vehicles, auto parts and/or
materials; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with
habitation or occupancy; the presence of an unsanitary, stagnant swimming pool;
the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; statements by
neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents; and/or the
presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings in violation of
applicable code.
      FORECLOSURE OR FORECLOSURE ACTION. The legal process by which a mortgagee
or other lien holder terminates or attempts to terminate a property owner’s
equitable right of redemption to obtain legal and equitable title to the real
property pledged as security for a debt or the real property subject to the
lien. The legal process is not concluded until the property obtained by the
mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by certificate of title, or any
other means, is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm’s length
transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
      FORECLOSED PROPERTY REGISTRY. A web-based electronic database of
searchable real property records, used by the city to allow mortgagees the
opportunity to register properties and pay applicable fees as required in this
chapter.
      MORTGAGEE. The creditor, including but not limited to trustees; mortgage
servicing companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent, servant, or
employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any assignee of the
creditor’s rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement; or
any other person or entity with the legal right to foreclose on the real
property, excluding governmental entities as assignee or owner.
      OWNER. Every person, entity, or mortgagee, who alone or severally with
others, has legal or equitable interest to any real property as defined by this
chapter; has recorded title in the official records of the state, county or
city to any real property; has legal care, charge, or control of any such
property; is in possession or control of any such property; any person
maintaining, operating or collecting rent of any such property and/or is vested
with possession or control of any such property. The property manager shall not
be considered the owner.
      PROPERTY MANAGER. Any party designated by the owner as responsible for
inspecting, maintaining and securing the property as required in this chapter.
      REAL PROPERTY. Any residential or commercial land and/or buildings,
leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or portion thereof
identified by a property parcel identification number, located in the city
limits.
      REGISTRABLE PROPERTY. Any real property located in the city, that (1)
whether vacant or occupied, that is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action by
the mortgagee or trustee, (2) has been the subject of a foreclosure action by a
mortgagee or trustee and a judgement has been entered, (3) has been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a
mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a
deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale, (4) has been determined vacant, or (5) is
otherwise vacant. The designation of a “foreclosure” property as REGISTRABLE
shall remain in place until such time as the property is sold to a non-related
bona fide purchaser in an arm’s length transaction or the foreclosure action
has been dismissed.
      SEMI-ANNUAL REGISTRATION. Six months from the date of the first action
that requires registration, as determined by the city, or its designee, and
every subsequent six months the property is registrable. The date of the
initial registration may be different than the date of the first action that
required registration.
      UTILITIES AND SERVICES. Any utility and/or service that is essential for
a building to be habitable and/or perform a service necessary to comply with
all city codes. This includes, but is not limited to, electrical, gas, water,
sewer, lawn maintenance, pool maintenance, and snow removal.
      VACANT. A building or substantial portion thereof that is unoccupied or
has not actively been furnished and so used as a place of business or residence
for more than 60 days. This includes manufactured housing and mobile homes
whether located in a mobile home park or not. VACANT BUILDING does not include
a building designed for storage if such building is secure from unauthorized
entry, in good repair and does not otherwise constitute a nuisance. VACANT
BUILDING does not include unoccupied property which are undergoing
construction, renovation, or rehabilitation and which are in compliance with
all applicable city ordinances, codes, and regulations, and for which
construction, renovation or rehabilitation is proceeding diligently to
completion.
   (C)   Registration of real property under foreclosure.
      (1)   A foreclosed property registry is hereby established to catalog
each foreclosed property within the city which shall contain the following
information, at a minimum:
         (a)   The address and PIN number of the property;
         (b)   The name and mailing address of the mortgagee;
         (c)   The case name and number of all litigation pending concerning
the property;
         (d)   The name, email address, telephone number and mailing address of
the property manager;
         (e)   Whether the property is occupied or vacant. If the property is
occupied, whether the current tenants are owners, renters, squatters or other.
      (2)   Real property within the city shall be registered under this
division by the mortgagee within ten days of the mortgagee filing a foreclosure
action.
      (3)   At the time of initial registration each registrant shall pay a
non-refundable semi-annual registration fee of $500 for each registrable
property. Subsequent non-refundable semi-annual registrations of properties and
fees in the amount of $500 are due within ten days of the expiration of the
previous registration. Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: (1)
registration and registration enforcement, (2) code enforcement and mitigation
related to defaulted properties, (3) post-closing counseling and foreclosure
intervention limited to owner-occupied persons in default, which may not
include cash and mortgage modification assistance, and (4) for any related
purposes as may be adopted in the policy set forth in this chapter.
      (4)   When a registrable property is vacant or becomes vacant, the owner
shall designate a property manager to be responsible for the requirements of
this section. The property manager shall be responsible for inspecting,
maintaining and securing the property.
      (5)   If the mortgage and/or servicing on a property is sold or
transferred, the new mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this section.
Within ten days of the transfer, the new mortgagee shall register the property
or update the existing registration. The previous mortgagee(s) will not be
released from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines, and
penalties imposed by the city and accrued during that mortgagee’s involvement
with the registrable property.
      (6)   If the mortgagee sells or transfers the registrable property in a
non-arm’s length transaction to a related entity or person, the transferee is
subject to all the terms of this chapter. Within ten days of the transfer, the
transferee shall register the property or update the existing registration. Any
and all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties, regardless of who the
mortgagee was at the time registration was required, including but not limited
to unregistered periods during the foreclosure process, are the responsibility
of the transferee and are due and payable with the updated registration. The
previous mortgagee will not be released from the responsibility of paying all
previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties imposed by the city and accrued
during that mortgagee’s involvement with the registrable property.
      (7)   If the foreclosing or foreclosed property is not registered, or the
registration fee is not paid within 30 days of when the registration or renewal
is required pursuant to this section, a late fee equivalent to 10% of the semi-
annual registration fee shall be charged for every 30-day period, or portion
thereof, the property is not registered and shall be due and payable with the
registration.
      (8)   This division shall also apply to properties that have been the
subject of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as
well as any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure or by any other legal means.
      (9)   Properties subject to this division shall remain subject to the
semi-annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security, and
maintenance standards of this section as long as the property remains
registrable.
      (10)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to
properly register or to modify the registration to reflect a change of
circumstances as required by this section is a violation of this division and
shall be subject to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to
the city.
      (11)   If any property is in violation of this section the city may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance with and/or place a lien on the
property for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any additional cost
incurred to the property into compliance.
      (12)   Registration of foreclosure property does not alleviate the
mortgagee and/or owner from obtaining all required licenses, permits and
inspections required by applicable code or state statutes. Acquisition of
required licenses, permits and inspections or registration of rental property
does not alleviate the requirement for the property to be registered under this
division. Mortgagee and/or owner is expected to update the status of the
property in the event of a mortgagee managed rental.
      (13)   Properties meeting the requirements of this division are not
required to register under division (D) below.
   (D)   Registration of all other vacant and abandoned properties.
      (1)   A separate registry is hereby established for all other vacant
properties within the city that are not subject to the foreclosed property
registry.
      (2)   The Director of Building and Housing or his or her designee is
authorized to declare a building vacant if (1) the building is under
construction but no substantial work has taken place for at least 180 days; (2)
for a commercial building, no business has been conducted for at least 60 days
and other evidence of vacancy is present; (3) fora residential building, any
utility or service has ceased for at least 60 days and other evidence of
vacancy is present. The Director of Building and Housing shall issue a notice
to the taxpayer of record that the building has been declared vacant pursuant
to this section.
      (3)   An owner of any vacant property shall, within 30 days after the
property becomes vacant or within 30 days after notice that a building has been
declared vacant, register the vacant property with the Building and Housing
Department.
      (4)   Each vacant property registration shall be made in writing to the
Building and Housing Department on a form provided for the purpose, accompanied
by the applicable registration fee, and shall contain:
         (a)   The address and PIN of the property.
         (b)   The name, telephone number, email address and mailing address of
the owner of the property.
         (c)   The name, email address, street address and telephone number of
the property manager.
         (d)   The case name and number of any litigation pending concerning or
affecting the property, including bankruptcy or foreclosure cases.
         (e)   The name, street address and telephone number of all persons
with any legal interest in the property.
         (f)   Type and location of any toxic, flammable or hazardous materials
stored or used at said location, if applicable.
         (g)   Any other relevant information about the vacant property for
police, paramedics, the Fire Department, or other emergency responders, if
applicable.
      (5)   At the time of initial registration each registrant shall pay a
non-refundable semi-annual registration fee of $500 for each property.
Subsequent non-refundable semi-annual registrations of properties and fees in
the amount of $500 are due within ten days of the expiration of the previous
registration. Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: (1) registration
and registration enforcement, (2) code enforcement and mitigation related to
vacant and abandoned properties, and (3) for any related purposes as may be
adopted in the policy set forth in this section.
      (6)   Changes in registration information. An owner shall notify the
Building and Housing Department within 21 days of any change in the
registration information by filling an amended registration provided by the
Building and Housing Department. A new registration is required for any change
in ownership whatsoever.
   (E)   Regulations for all registrable property. The owner or mortgagee of a
registrable property shall be responsible for the following:
      (1)   Property maintenance. All registrable properties, including
adjoining yard areas, shall be maintained in compliance with all city
ordinances and remain free of weeds, overgrown bush, dead vegetation, building
materials, accumulation of newspapers, discarded furniture, clothing,
appliances, debris, garbage, graffiti, litter, portable toilets, rodents,
standing water and any other items that give the appearance that the property
is abandoned. All grass and vegetation shall be landscaped and maintained. The
property shall be properly winterized between November 1 and March 31 of the
year.
      (2)   Security. All registrable properties shall be kept secure from
unauthorized entry. All points of ingress and egress including garages, doors
and windows shall be closed and locked. Broken windows, doors, gates, or fences
shall be repaired and secured immediately. If the property has been boarded up
the boards must be painted black.
      (3)   Posting. If a registrable building is vacant, it shall be posted
with the name and 24-hour contact telephone number of the Property Manager. The
posting shall be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches and shall be placed in a
window facing the street. The posting shall contain the following information:
         THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY _____________________________________
         AND IS INSPECTED ON A REGULAR BASIS.
         THE PROPERTY MANAGER CAN BE CONTACTED
         BY TELEPHONE AT __________________________________________________
         OR BY EMAIL AT ____________________________________________________.
         UNAUTHORIZED ENTRY AND VANDALISM ARE STRICTLY PROHIBITED.
      (4)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to
properly inspect and secure a property subject to this chapter, and post and
maintain the signage noted in this section, is a violation and shall be subject
to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the city. The city
may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section, and
recover costs and expenses in support thereof.
   (F)   City incurred fees. All fees incurred by the city to maintain, secure,
or otherwise bring a property into code compliance shall be reimbursed to the
city by the owner or mortgagee of the property. Fees shall be as stated in an
invoice from an outside contractor or as designated in the city’s fee ordinance
plus an additional $100 administrative fee per activity. Failure to reimburse
the city may result in a lien of the property pursuant to applicable law.
   (G)   Remedies not exclusive. The provisions of this chapter are cumulative
with and in addition to other available remedies. Nothing contained in this
chapter shall prohibit the city from collecting on fees, fines, and penalties
in any lawful manner; or enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but
not limited to, injunction, abatement, or as otherwise provided by law or
ordinance.
   (H)   Implementation. The city may contract with an entity to implement all
or portions of this section.
(Ord. 09-O-1952, passed 7-1-2009; Ord. 11-O-1999, passed 7-20-2011; Ord. 23-O-
2350, passed 2-15-2023)
Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.006 RESERVED.
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
§ 150.020 MAINTENANCE OF UNSAFE BUILDING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or
partnership or other entity to maintain, cause to be maintained, suffer or
allow any building or structure within the corporate limits of the city,
whether finished or unfinished, occupied or abandoned, to remain in a dangerous
and unsafe condition. A building has been boarded up or otherwise enclosed
shall not constitute a defense to a charge of violation of the provisions
hereof.
(Prior Code, § 150.40) (Ord. 78-O-971, passed 2-6-1978) Penalty, see §
150.999
§ 150.021 NOTICE TO OWNER TO PUT STRUCTURE IN SAFE CONDITION.
   In the event that the city, through its agents, servants and employees,
shall become aware of the existence of a building or structure located within
the corporate limits, whether completed or uncompleted, occupied or abandoned,
which is unsafe or dangerous, the Building Department shall cause the owner of
record thereof, together with all lien holders of record, to be served with
written notice by United States mail to put such structure in safe condition or
demolish same within 15 days. If, upon diligent inquiry, the identity or
whereabouts of such owners or lien holders cannot be ascertained, the notice
provided for herein shall be served upon the person or persons in whose name
the property in question was last assessed.
(Prior Code, § 150.41) (Ord. 78-O-971, passed 2-6-1978)
§ 150.022 FAILURE OF OWNER TO TAKE CORRECTION ACTION.
   In the event that the notice to repair or to demolish has not been acted
upon within the time prescribed in said notice, the city shall cause
application to be made to the Circuit Court of the county for an order
authorizing the repair or demolition of the offending structure. Following
acquisition of such order, the city shall proceed forthwith with regard to the
structure in accordance with the terms and provisions of such Circuit Court
order.
(Prior Code, § 150.42) (Ord. 78-O-971, passed 2-6-1978)
IMPACT FEES
§ 150.035 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   This subchapter is for the purpose of requiring that new construction and
developments pay a fair share of the cost of public facilities and services
through the imposition of an impact fee which will be used to finance, defray
or reimburse the city for all or a portion of the costs of public facilities
and services which serve each developments or new construction. The amount of
each impact fee shall be $5,000 for a single-family home and $5,000 for each
dwelling unit in a multiple-family structure. The impact fee for industrial or
commercial structures shall be calculated by the Building Department based on
the gross square footage of non-residential development, type of density or
intensity of use, trip generation or other appropriate methodology which
ensures that the fee is roughly proportional to the impact of the new
construction or development on public facilities and services. Those
calculations will be based on rules issued from time to time by the Building
Department. The city assumes responsibility for and will pay for with general
city revenues all public facility needs for existing developments.
(Prior Code, § 150.55) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.036 APPLICABILITY.
   Unless expressly excepted or exempted, this subchapter applies to all fees
imposed by the city to finance public facilities attributable to new
construction, including without limitation:
   (A)   Sewer connection charges;
   (B)   Water connection charges;
   (C)   Park and recreation fees;
   (D)   Drainage fees;
   (E)   Thoroughfare and bridge fees;
   (F)   School and child care fees;
   (G)   Library fees;
   (H)   Police and fire fees;
   (I)   Transportation improvement fees;
   (J)   Public art and cultural event fees; and
   (K)   Civic center fees.
(Prior Code, § 150.56) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.037 EXEMPTIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter do not apply to:
   (A)   Taxes and special assessments;
   (B)   Fees for processing development applications;
   (C)   Fees for enforcement of or inspections pursuant to regulatory
ordinances;
   (D)   Fees collected under development agreements;
   (E)   Fees imposed pursuant to a reimbursement agreement between the city
and a property owner for that portion of the cost of a public facility paid for
by the property owner which exceeds the need for the public facility
attributable to, reasonably related to and roughly proportional to the
development;
   (F)   Fees mitigating impacts on the environment; or
   (G)   Fees imposed, levied or collected by other governmental agencies
including subdivisions of state and Federal Government.
(Prior Code, § 150.57) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.038 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BENEFIT AREA. The geographic area within which impact fees are collected and
expended for a particular type of public service within such area.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. Land or facilities for the storage, treatment or
distribution of water, for the collection, treatment, reclamation or disposal
of sewage; for the collection and disposal of storm waters and for flood
control purposes; for purposes of transportation and transit, including without
limitation, streets, street lighting and traffic-control devices and supporting
improvements, roads, overpasses, bridges, airports and related facilities; for
parks and recreational improvements; for public safety, including police and
fire facilities; for schools and child care facilities; for libraries and
public art for public buildings of all kinds; and for any other capital
projects of the city. CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT also includes design, engineering,
inspection, testing, planning, legal land acquisition and all other costs
associated with construction of a public facility.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECT LIST. The list attached to the annual Council
resolution for each specific impact fee. The list shall describe the
approximate location, size, time of availability and estimated cost of each
capital improvement to be funded from impact fees.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. The five-year plan for improvements, adopted
annually by the Council, describing the approximate location, size, time of
availability and estimated cost of capital improvement projects and identifies
sources of funding for capital improvement projects.
   COLLECTION. The point at which the impact fee is actually paid over to the
city.
   COMMITMENT. Earmarking impact fees to fund or partially fund capital
improvements serving new construction projects.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms in a building or a portion of a room,
designed, intended to be used or actually used for occupancy by one family for
living and sleeping quarters and containing one kitchen only, and including
mobile homes, but not hotel or motel units.
   IMPACT FEE. Any monetary exaction imposed by the city as a condition of or
in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of
defraying all or some of the cost of or repayment of costs previously expended
from other city funds for capital improvements relating to the project.
   IMPOSED. To determine that a particular development project is subject to
collection of impact fees as a condition of development approval.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT OR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Includes any project undertaken for
the purpose of development, including without limitation a project involving
the issuance of a permit for construction, reconstruction or change of use, but
not a project involving the issuance of a permit to operate or to remodel,
rehabilitate or improve an existing structure, nor the rebuilding of a
structure destroyed or damaged by an act of God, nor the replacement of one
mobile home with another on the same pad if no dwelling unit is added.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. All development other than residential
development projects.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. Any development undertaken to create a new
dwelling unit or units.
(Prior Code, § 150.58) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.039 NOTICE AND HEARING REQUIRED TO ESTABLISH OR INCREASE.
   (A)   Prior to establishing or increasing of any impact fee, the City
Council shall hold a public hearing, at which oral and written testimony may be
given.
   (B)   Notice of the time and place of the public hearing, including a
general explanation of the matter to be considered, shall be published for a
minimum of ten days prior to the hearing in a newspaper regularly published at
least once a week. The period of notice commences upon the first day of
publication and terminates at the end of the tenth day.
   (C)   At least ten days prior to the public hearing, the city shall make
available to the public data showing the amount, or the estimated amount of the
impact fee and a summary of the basis for the calculation of the impact fee
amount.
   (D)   Council action to establish or increase any impact fee shall be taken
only by ordinance or resolution.
   (E)   Any costs incurred by the city in preparing for and conducting the
public hearing shall be a city expense.
(Prior Code, § 150.59) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.040 IMPOSITION, CALCULATION AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   Except as provided in this subchapter and any amendment of this
subchapter, the city shall impose impact fees as a condition of approval of all
new construction and development projects. No tentative or final subdivision
map, parcel map, grading permit, building permit, final inspection or
certificate of occupancy, or other development permit, may be approved unless
the provisions of this section have been fulfilled.
   (B)   Impact fees shall be imposed by including the following language in
any document of development approval: “Approval of those projects is
conditioned upon payment to the city of all applicable impact fees and
connection fees, as provided in the Municipal Code.”
   (C)   Impact fees shall be collected by the City Clerk at the time, and as a
condition of issuance of a building permit; except that, the connection fees
shall be collected at the time of application for connection to the utility
system.
(Prior Code, § 150.60) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.041 ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The city shall establish an impact fee account into which all impact
fees are deposited with three-fifths of the impact fee to be used by the city,
one-fifth to be donated to the school districts serving the city, one-tenth to
the Bradford-Anderson-Oglesby Public Library and one-tenth to the Markham Park
District.
   (B)   Each impact fee account shall be interest-bearing and the accumulated
interest shall become a part of the account.
   (C)   The funds of each impact fee account shall be expended as indicated
above.
(Prior Code, § 150.61) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006; Ord. 07-O-1881, passed
1-17-2007)
§ 150.042 USE OF PROCEEDS.
   Impact fees shall be expended only for the types of capital improvements for
legitimate city expenses, for which they were imposed, calculated and collected
and according to the time limits and procedures established in this subchapter.
Impact fees may be used to pay the principal, interest and other costs of
bonds, notes and other obligations issued or undertaken by or on behalf of the
city to finance its operations and improvements.
(Prior Code, § 150.62) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.043 REFUNDS.
   (A)   Except as described in division (B) below, upon application of the
property owner, the city shall refund that portion of any impact fee for which
no building was constructed. The refund shall be made to the then-current owner
or owners of lots or units of the development project.
   (B)   The city may refund, by direct payment, by offsetting the refund
against other impact fees due for development projects by the owner on the same
or other property or otherwise by agreement with the owner.
(Prior Code, § 150.63) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.044 AUDITS.
   (A)   The property owner of an industrial or commercial project may request
an audit to determine whether the impact fee imposed is roughly proportional to
or exceeds the rules established by the Building Department.
   (B)   The City Council shall then retain a qualified independent auditor and
he or she shall determine whether the fee is appropriate.
   (C)   The city may require, as a condition of the right to such an audit,
that the property owner pay for the cost of the audit and deposit with the city
a sum equal to the reasonable estimated cost of the audit.
   (D)   The decision of the independent auditor is final unless appeal to the
Council by the property owners as provided by this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 150.64) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.045 PROTEST AND APPEAL.
   (A)   A person may protest or challenge the imposition of a fee imposed
pursuant to this subchapter by filing with the City Clerk within ten days
following mailing of notice of the auditor’s decision to the appellant, a
written notice of appeal with a full statement of the grounds, and an appeals
fee of $200 or such other amount as may be fixed from time to time by
resolution of the City Council. The city may continue processing the
development application if the notice of appeal is accompanied with a bond or
other security in an amount equal to the impact fee.
   (B)   The appellant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the amount
of the fee was not calculated according to the procedures established in this
subchapter.
   (C)   At a regular meeting following the filing of the appeal, the City
Council shall fix a time and place for hearing the appeal and the City Clerk
shall mail notice of hearing to the appellant at the address given in the
notice of appeal. The hearing shall be conducted at the time and place stated
in the notice and the determination of the Council shall be announced at the
conclusion of the hearing or at the next regular meeting of the Council. The
determination of the City Council shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 150.65) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.046 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   Any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside or annul the
reasonableness, legality or validity of any impact fee must be filed and
service of process effected within 90 days following the date of imposition of
the fee or the final determination of the City Council, whichever is later.
(Prior Code, § 150.66) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.047 VARIANCE AND EXCEPTIONS.
   Petitions for variance and exceptions to the application of this subchapter
shall be made in accordance with the city’s code.
(Prior Code, § 150.67) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.048 AMENDMENT PROCEDURES.
   At least once each year, prior to the City Council adoption of the budget,
the City Treasurer shall report to the Council with:
   (A)   Recommendations for amendments to this subchapter and to other parts
of this code and to resolutions establishing impact fees; and
   (B)   Proposals for changes on impact fee rates and schedules.
(Prior Code, § 150.68) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
§ 150.049 CREDITS.
   (A)   A property owner who dedicates land or agrees to participate in the
assessment district or otherwise contributes funds for capital improvements, as
defined in this subchapter, may be eligible for a credit for such contribution
against the impact fee otherwise due.
   (B)   (1)   The City Engineer shall determine:
         (a)   Whether the contribution meets capital improvement needs;
         (b)   Whether the contribution will substitute for or otherwise reduce
the need for capital improvements anticipated to be provided, with impact fee
funds; and
         (c)   The value of the developer’s contribution.
      (2)   In no event, however, shall the credit exceed the amount of the
otherwise applicable impact fee.
   (C)   Any application for credit must be submitted at or before the time of
development project approval on forms provided by the city. The application
shall contain a declaration of those facts, under oath, along with the relevant
documentary evidence which qualifies the property owner for the credit.
(Prior Code, § 150.69) (Ord. 06-O-1870, passed 8-2-2006)
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRY
§ 150.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act, 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et
seq., as amended from time to time.
   CITY. The City of Markham, Cook County, Illinois.
   CLERK. The Clerk of the city.
   INTERESTED PARTY(IES). Any individual or organization or entity registered
in a specific registry who has registered in such registry and whose
registration has not been terminated in accordance with these registration
rules.
   REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT AREA. A redevelopment project area that:
      (1)   Is intended to qualify (or has subsequently qualified) as a
redevelopment project area under the Act; and
      (2)   Is subject to the interested parties registry requirements of the
Act.
   REGISTRATION FORM. The form appended to the ordinance codified herein or
such revised form as may be approved by the city consistent with the
requirements of the Act.
   REGISTRY or REGISTRIES. Each interested parties registry, and all such
registries, collectively, established by the city pursuant to § 11-74.4-4.2 of
the Act for any and all redevelopment project areas in the city.
(Ord. 07-O-1887, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 150.061 ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRIES.
   (A)   The city shall establish a separate interested parties registry for
each redevelopment project area, whether existing as of the date of the
adoption of these rules or hereafter established.
   (B)   The city shall establish a new registry whenever it has identified an
area for study and possible designation as a redevelopment project area, in any
event the process of establishing the new registry must be completed prior to
the deadline for sending any of the notices required by §
150.068 of this chapter of these rules or any other notices required by the Act
with respect to the proposed redevelopment project area.
(Ord. 07-O-1887, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 150.062 MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY.
   (A)   The registries shall be maintained by the Clerk or his or her
designee.
   (B)   In the event the city determines that an individual other than the
Clerk should maintain the registries, the city may transfer the responsibility
for maintaining the registries to such other department; provided that, the
city:
      (1)   Gives prior written notice to all interested parties not less than
30 days prior to such transfer; and
      (2)   Published notice of such transfer in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city.
(Ord. 07-O-1887, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 150.063 REGISTRATION BY RESIDENTS, ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   An individual seeking to register as an interested person with respect
to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration form to
the Clerk.
   (B)   An organization seeking to register as an interested person with
respect to a redevelopment project area must complete and submit a registration
form to the Clerk.
(Ord. 07-O-1887, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 150.064 DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   All individuals and organizations whose registration form and
supporting documentation complies with these registration rules shall be
registered in the applicable registry within ten business days after the
Clerk’s receipt of all such documents.
   (B)   The Clerk shall provide written notice to the registrant confirming
such registration.
   (C)   Upon registration interested parties shall be entitled to receive all
notices and documents required to be delivered under these rules or as
otherwise required under the Act with respect to the applicable redevelopment
project area.
   (D)   If the Clerk determines that a registrant’s registration form and/or
supporting documentation is incomplete or does not comply with these
registration rules, the Clerk shall give written notice to the registrant
specifying the defect(s) and the registrant shall be entitled to correct any
defects and resubmit a new registration form and supporting documentation.
(Ord. 07-O-1887, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 150.065 RENEWAL AND TERMINATION.
   An interested person’s registration shall remain effective for a period of
three years. At any time after such three-year period, the Clerk may provide
written notice by regular mail to the interested person stating that such
registration shall terminate unless the interested person renews such
registration with 30 days after the Clerk’s mailing of written notice. To renew
such registration, the interested person shall, within such 30-day period,
complete and submit the same registration form then required of initial
registrants operations in the city. The registration of all individuals and
organizations whose registration form is submitted in a timely manner and
complies with these regulation rules shall be renewed for an additional,
consecutive three-year period. If the Clerk determines that a registrant’s
renewal registration form is incomplete or does not comply with these
registration rules, the Clerk shall give written notice to the registrant at
the address specified in the renewal registration form submitted by such
registrant specifying the defect(s). The registrant shall be entitled to
correct any defects and resubmit a new registration form within 30 days after
receipt of the Clerk’s notice. If all defects are not corrected within 30 days
after the interested person’s receipt of the Clerk’s notice, the interested
person’s registration shall be terminated. Any interested person whose
registration is terminated shah be entitled to register again as if a first-
time registrant.
(Ord. 07-O-1887, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 150.066 AMENDMENT TO REGISTRATION.
   (A)   An interested party may amend its registration by giving written
notice to the Clerk by certified mail of any of the following:
      (1)   Change in address for notice purposes;
      (2)   In the case of organizations, a change in the name of the contact
person; and
      (3)   A termination of registration.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such notice, the Clerk shall revise the applicable
registry accordingly.
(Ord. 07-O-1887, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 150.067 REGISTRIES AVAILABLE FOR PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   (A)   Each registry shall be available for public inspection during normal
business hours.
   (B)   The registry shall include the name, address and telephone number of
each interested person and, for organizations, the name and phone number of a
designated contact person.
(Ord. 07-O-1887, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 150.068 NOTICES TO BE SENT TO INTERESTED PARTIES.
   Interest parties shall be sent the following notices and any other notices
required under the Act with respect to the applicable redevelopment project
area:
   (A)   Pursuant to § 11-74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of the availability of a
proposed redevelopment plan and eligibility report, including how to obtain
this information; such notice shall be sent by mail within a reasonable period
of time after the adoption of the ordinance fixing the public hearing for the
proposed redevelopment plan;
   (B)   Pursuant to § 11-74.4-5(a) of the Act, notice of changes to proposed
redevelopment plans that do not add additional parcels of property to the
proposed redevelopment project area, substantially affect the general land uses
proposed in the redevelopment plan, substantially change the nature of or
extend the life of the redevelopment project or increase the number of
inhabited residential units to be displaced from the redevelopment project
area, as measured from the time of creation of the redevelopment project area,
to a total of more than ten; such notice shall be sent by mail not later than
ten days following the city’s adoption by ordinance of such changes;
   (C)   Pursuant to § 11-74.4-5(c) of the Act, notice of amendments to
previously approved redevelopment plans that do not add additional parcels of
property to the redevelopment project area, substantially affect the general
land uses in the redevelopment plan, substantially change the nature of the
redevelopment project, increase the total estimated redevelopment project costs
set out in the redevelopment plan by more than 5% after adjustment for
inflation from the date the plan was adopted, add additional redevelopment
project costs to the itemized list of redevelopment project costs set out in
the redevelopment plan or increase the number of inhabited residential units to
be displaced from the redevelopment project area, as measured from the time of
creation of the redevelopment project, to a total of more than ten; such notice
will be sent by mail not later than ten days following the city’s adoption by
ordinance of such amendment;
   (D)   Pursuant to § 11-74.4-5(d)(9) of the Act, for redevelopment plans or
projects that would result in the displacement of residents from ten or more
inhabited residential units or that contain 75 or more inhabited residential
units, notice of the availability of the annual report described by § 11-74.4-5
(d) of the Act, including how to obtain the annual report; such notice shall be
sent by mail within a reasonable period of time after completion of the
certified audit report; and
   (E)   Pursuant to § 11-74.4-6(e) of the Act, notice of the preliminary
public meeting required under the Act for a proposed redevelopment project area
that will result in the displacement of residents from ten or more inhabited
residential units or which will contain 75 or more inhabited residential units;
such notice shall be sent by certified mail not less than 15 days before the
date of such preliminary public meeting.
(Ord. 07-O-1887, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 150.069 NON-INTERFERENCE.
   These registration rules shall not be used to prohibit or otherwise
interfere with the ability of eligible organizations and individuals to
register for receipt of information to which they are entitled under the Act.
(Ord. 07-O-1887, passed 4-18-2007)
§ 150.070 AMENDMENT TO RULES.
   These registration rules may be amended by the city subject to and
consistent with the requirements of the Act.
(Ord. 07-O-1887, passed 4-18-2007)
CODES ADOPTED; PERMIT FEES
§ 150.085 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR. An individual or organization that performs work contracted with
another individual (owner) or organization.
   HOMEOWNER. An individual that has purchased a property with intentions of
making it his, her or their primary residence for a period over six months.
   LANDLORD. A person who is the owner of a house, apartment, condominium, land
or real estate which is rented or leased to an individual or business, who is
called a tenant. See also PROPERTY INVESTOR.
   PROPERTY DEVELOPER. A person or company that makes money by building houses
or renovating existing properties for sale or rental.
   PROPERTY INVESTOR. A group or individual that has purchased properties with
the intentions of using the property as means of financial investments. He, she
or they will not use the property as their primary residence for a period over
six months.
   TENANT. A person or group that rents and occupies land, a house, an office
or the like from another for a period of time.
(Ord. 16-O-2155, passed 12-7-2016)
§ 150.086 BUILDING AND RESIDENTIAL CODES ADOPTED.
   (A)   Adoption. The city adopts the International Building Code 2015 and the
International Residential Code 2006.
   (B)   Homeowner permits.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the following must be
adhered:
         (a)   Must own and plan to reside within the property for at least six
months;
         (b)   The water bill must be current and all fines and liens imposed
by the city must be paid;
         (c)   Provide proof of valid homeowner insurance;
         (d)   Provide proof of residency (i.e., driver’s license, utility
bills); and
         (e)   Provide proof of ownership (i.e., deed, title, closing
statement).
      (2)   Homeowner allowed permits:
         (a)   Roofing;
         (b)   Siding;
         (c)   Flooring;
         (d)   Shed;
         (e)   Garage;
         (f)   Minor plumbing;
         (g)   Dry wall;
         (h)   Security door;
         (i)   Soffits/fascia;
         (j)   Gutter replacement;
         (k)   Window replacement;
         (l)   Driveway/sidewalk;
         (m)   Decks;
         (n)   Balcony; and
         (o)   Porch.
   (C)   Landlord/property investor permits.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the following must be
adhered:
         (a)   The water bill must be current and all fines and liens imposed
by the city must be paid;
         (b)   Provide proof of valid property insurance; and
         (c)   Provide proof of ownership (i.e., deed, title, closing
statement).
      (2)   Non-resident only permits:
         (a)   Minor roofing only;
         (b)   Siding;
         (c)   Flooring;
         (d)   Drywall;
         (e)   Shed;
         (f)   Garage (repair only);
         (g)   Security door;
         (h)   Soffits/fascia;
         (i)   Gutter replacement;
         (j)   Deck (repair only);
         (k)   Driveway;
         (l)   Window replacement;
         (m)   Porch (repair only);
         (n)   Balcony (repair only); and
         (o)   Sidewalk.
   (D)   General repairs.
Type Residential Commercial
Type                           Residential Commercial
Drywall                        $10         1.5% construction cost (minimum $40)
Floors (exception - tiling and $10         1.5% of construction cost (minimum
carpet)                                    $40)
Gutter replacement             $10         1.5% of construction cost (minimum
                                           $40)
Security door                  $10         1.5% of construction cost (minimum
                                           $40)
Siding                         $10         1.5% of construction cost (minimum
                                           $40)
Soffits/fascia                 $10         1.5% of construction cost (minimum
                                           $40)
Window replacement             $10         1.5% of construction cost (minimum
                                           $40)
 
   (E)   Fire and rehab repairs. The building permit will be based on 1.5% of
the total construction cost in addition to all associated fees for the project.
A licensed and bonded contractor registered with the city is required for
repairs.
   (F)   Roofing.
      (1)   Fees; requirements.
 
Type                        Residential Commercial
Minor repair (up to a 4 x 4 $15         $50
section)
Re-roofing                  $30         1.5% of construction cost (minimum
                                        $50)
 
         (a)   May be completed by homeowner (must reside in the property for
six months);
         (b)   Contractors must have a state roofing license; and
         (c)   Roofing systems and installation should be in full compliance
with the 2006 International Residential Code, 2015 International Building Code
and city adopted ordinances and procedures. Installation must meet
manufacturer’s guidelines.
      (2)   Code requirements.
         (a)   Roof slope.
            1.   Shingle and tile roofs: four in 12. Shingle roofs less than
four in 12, but not less than two in 12, shall be applied in strict accordance
with the International Residential Code.
            2.   In lieu of cementing individual tabs, self-sealing shingles
listed by Underwriters’ Laboratories (UL) carrying their “wind-resistance”
label shall be used.
         (b)   Vents. Installation of additional roof vents may be required on
existing roofing systems. Soffit vents alone are found to be insufficient for
proper attic ventilation.
         (c)   Nails (fasteners).
            1.   Fastening materials for attaching roof coverings shall be
copper or hot-dipped galvanized.
            2.   Fastening materials shall be applied on a nail line, as
indicated from manufacturer’s specifications.
            3.   Each roofing shingle shall be fastened at a maximum distance
of one inch from each end. A minimum of four fasteners shall be applied per
each shingle.
            4.   A minimum of six fasteners shall be applied for each shingle
in high wind areas and/or on mansard roof construction. Note: staples are not
permitted and will not be an acceptable fastening device.
            5.   All exposed fasteners shall be covered with an approved
material, such as plastic cement.
         (d)   Headlap. Follow manufacturer’s specifications.
         (e)   Underlayment. Underlay shall be a minimum of 15-pound felt and
shall be installed to completely cover the entire roof sheathing system. All
roofs shall be installed with an approved ice/water protector to be applied
along eave line. It is recommended a minimum of two rows for soffits two feet
or less be installed. The 2006 IRC Code requires that the ice/water protection
extend a minimum of two feet beyond the interior of the exterior wall.
         (f)   Flashing. Approved corrosion-resistant flashing shall be
installed at junction of chimney and roof, roof and wall intersections, in all
roof valleys and around all roof openings (i.e., vent piping, flue pipes and
the like).
         (g)   Flashing in roof valleys.
            1.   Open roof valleys: open valleys shall be flashed with No. 28
gauge galvanized corrosion- resistant sheet metal and shall extend at least
eight inches from the centerline in each direction. Sections of flashing shall
be joined to provide an adequate water lock.
            2.   An approved ice and water protector shall be installed in all
roof valleys. Note: the installation of roofing shingles over existing roofing
shingles (re-roof) on existing structures may be exempt from this requirement.
         (h)   Re-roofing. Not more than two layers of shingles shall be
applied to a roofing system. Note: for re-roofing applications where new
roofing shingles are applied over an existing roof shingle system, flashing in
the roof valleys or the installation of an ice and water protector are not
required.
         (i)   Clean and dry sheathing. Regardless of the structure, the entire
roof sheathing system shall be completely clean and dry prior to the
application of any roofing material.
   (G)   Shed.
      (1)   Permit fee: $30;
      (2)   An updated copy of plat of survey indicating location of the
project. Sheds must be constructed a minimum of five feet from all property
lines. The maximum height is 15 feet;
      (3)   Two sets of project drawings and a written scope of work (if
applicable);
      (4)   If project requires excavation, a J.U.L.I.E. locate will be
required before digging;
      (5)   Only up to 120 square feet;
      (6)   A pre-inspection is required for the installation of a shed. If the
shed is erected on a cement slab, an inspection will be required before the
pour. Sheds located in rear yards shall be located a minimum of two feet from
the principal structure or any other accessory building. The area between the
structures shall be kept clear of any equipment, materials or debris; and
      (7)   Roofing requirements shall comply with 2006 International
Residential Code.
   (H)   Fence.
 
Residential Commercial Storage Yard
$50         $100       $150
 
      (1)   Must provide updated plat of survey and specifications for property
and project;
      (2)   The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators (J.U.L.I.E.)
location must be completed prior to the issuance of building permit;
      (3)   Fence may not exceed more than six feet in height on sides and
back. No higher than four feet in front of property;
      (4)   All holes must be dug a minimum of 42 inches;
      (5)   No cyclone, barbed wire, circular barbed wire or prison barbed wire
is allowed;
      (6)   No fence, wall or similar structure greater than four feet in
height shall be installed or erected along a street or right-of-way line, as
defined by the city’s Zoning Ordinance; and
      (7)   No fence, wall or similar structure having a density greater than
25% shall be built, installed or erected within 20 feet of the intersection of
lot lines adjacent to a street corner.
   (I)   Deck, balcony and porch.
      (1)   Permit fee: $50;
      (2)   Must provide updated plat of survey indicating the location of the
improvement shown to scale and the dimensions and square footage;
      (3)   Copy of a scaled dimensional drawing to include:
         (a)   Overall dimensions and height above grade;
         (b)   Piers depth, diameter and layout;
         (c)   Post size;
         (d)   Size of beams and girders;
         (e)   Size of joists;
         (f)   Decking detail;
         (g)   Guardrail, handrail detail;
         (h)   Step detail; and
         (i)   Schedule of materials.
      (4)   The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators (J.U.L.I.E.)
location must be completed prior to the issuance of building permit.
   (J)   Signs.
 
Type                   Fee
Non-illuminated        $40
Illuminated            $40 + inspection fee
Signs over 100 sq. ft. Additional $1.00/sq. ft.
 
   (K)   Driveway/sidewalk/stoop/parking lot.
 
Type            Residential                Commercial
New/replacement $75                        1.5% of construction cost (minimum
                                           $100)
Less than 50%   $50                        1.5% of construction cost (minimum
                                           $50)
Parking lot     1.5% of construction cost  1.5% of construction cost (minimum
                (minimum $200)             $200)
 
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Must provide updated plat of survey and specifications for
property and project;
         (b)   The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators
(J.U.L.I.E.) location must be completed prior to the issuance of building
permit; and
         (c)   Driveway must be made with either asphalt or concrete material.
A pre-pour inspection is required for concrete driveways.
      (2)   Driveway code requirements.
         (a)   Four inches concrete over four inches of compacted base;
         (b)   Six bag mix-drive apron minimum five-inch non-reinforced
concrete;
         (c)   Asphalt minimum: two-inch asphalt over six-inch compacted base.
Drive width shall not exceed 21 feet within three feet of front property line;
         (d)   The paved area after that point may be increased by no greater
than 45 degrees until the paved area reaches four feet into the residential
property side, including brick pavers or similar decorative features along the
sides of the driveway;
         (e)   When concrete is used to add to the existing driveway, No. 4
rebar shall be used to pin the new concrete;
         (f)   Minimum drive width is nine feet;
         (g)   Minimum walk width is three feet;
         (h)   Maximum side yard walk width shall be five feet; and
         (i)   Pitch of flat work shall be away from structure: concrete steps:
            1.   Maximum rise: seven and three-fourths-inch minimum run, ten
inches; and
            2.   Three-eighths-inch maximum variable on rise or run.
      (3)   Sidewalk code requirements.
         (a)   Material requirements.
            1.   Four inches concrete over four inches of compacted base;
            2.   Six bag mix-drive concrete;
            3.   Minimum walk width is three feet;
            4.   Minimum stoop width and depth is three feet;
            5.   Flashing where required by code;
            6.   Maximum side yard walk width shall be five feet; and
            7.   Pitch of flat work shall be away from structure.
         (b)   Concrete steps.
            1.   Three-eighths-inch maximum variable on rise or run;
            2.   Guardrail required if stoop is over 30 inches above grade;
            3.   Handrails: 38 inches high maximum space between balusters,
four inches;
            4.   Graspable hand rail required for stairs with four or more
rises: 34 to 38 above; and
            5.   Stair nose:
               a.   For residential, maximum rise: seven and there-fourths-inch
minimum, run ten inches; and
               b.   For commercial, maximum rise: seven-inch minimum, run 11
inches.
         (c)   Other information.
            1.   Total front yard coverage shall not exceed 40% of the front
yard.
            2.   Total rear yard coverage shall not exceed 40% of rear yard.
            3.   Pavers must be installed per manufacturer’s specs. Airborne
dust must be suppressed with water or alternative method.
   (L)   Demolition. A permit is required by the city when deconstructing,
destroying, razing, tearing down or altering or renovating any structure.
Alteration or renovation include the removal of any load bearing structural
member of a facility, the removal of an exterior wall or the removal or partial
removal of a structure.
 
Residential $100
Commercial  1.5% construction cost
 
      (1)   Must have a registered contractor with the city; and
      (2)   Must satisfy all requirements with the county’s Environmental
Control Department and all county ordinances and procedures.
   (M)   Garage.
 
Type            Residential                     Commercial
New/replacement $100 + associated fees based on 1.5% cost of construction
                work                            (minimum $100)
Overhead door   $15                             1.5% cost of construction
                                                (minimum $30)
Repair only     $30                             1.5% cost of construction
                                                (minimum $50)
 
      (1)   Must provide updated plat of survey and specifications for property
and project; and
      (2)   The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators (J.U.LJ.E.)
location must be completed prior to the issuance of building permit.
   (N)   Swimming pool.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   When installing a swimming pool or hot tub on the premises
capable of holding 24 inches of water, a building permit will be required.
         (b)   All contractor’s must be licensed and bonded with the city prior
to a permit being issued.
 
Above-ground $25
Hot tub      $50
In-ground    $100
 
      (2)   In-ground pool requirements.
         (a)   Concrete walk area around pool;
         (b)   Concrete area around diving boards; and
         (c)   Decking, if used.
      (3)   Above-ground pools. If decking is to be installed, requirements:
         (a)   Height from ground; and
         (b)   Types of materials to be used.
      (4)   Spas or hot tubs requirements. Defined as a hydro-massage pool or
tub for recreational or therapeutic use, not located in a healthcare facility,
designed for immersion of users and usually having a filter, heater and motor-
driven blower.
      (5)   Code requirements.
         (a)   Private swimming pools shall be operated for the exclusive use
of the residents of the zoning lot upon which they are located and their
invited guests. No private swimming pool shall be operated as a business or
private club.
         (b)   Pool and appurtenances shall be located at least eight feet from
all property lines as shown. Appurtenances include diving boards and bracings.
         (c)   Pool heaters, filters, concrete walls to be a minimum of five
feet from property line.
         (d)   Pools shall be a minimum of five feet from underground
electrical service.
         (e)   Pools shall be a minimum of ten feet from air conditioners and/
or electrical outlets, except for electric receptacle that is installed for
pool equipment.
         (f)   Pools are not allowed in side yards.
         (g)   Spas or hot tubs shall be located 8 feet from property line,
five feet from Com Ed lines, open on two sides for access.
         (h)   Spas and hot tubs shall comply with the same provisions as
defined for pools per the International Building Codes.
         (i)   Spas and hot tubs with locking type covers complying with ASTM-
ES 13-89 are exempt from the barrier and safety requirements.
      (6)   Fencing.
         (a)   Private or public in-ground or above-ground pools shall be
completely enclosed by a fence to make the pool inaccessible to small children.
This fence may also be located within the interior lot at least five feet from
the property line at a height of at least four feet, but not greater than six
feet, and shall consist of an open or semi-open type.
         (b)   Above-ground pools need not be enclosed by a fence of the type
described above if the pool has a deck fence or fence extending from the top of
the pool side wall to a height of seven feet from the surface of the ground.
         (c)   All fence openings or points of entry to the pool of either
above-ground or in-ground pools shall be equipped with gates or doors having
automatic latching devices placed at the top of the gate or door or otherwise
made inaccessible to small children.
      (7)   Demolition requirements for in-ground swimming pools.
         (a)   General. When demolition of an in-ground swimming pool is
necessary, a city permit is required. The concern is that an abandoned pool
will act as a bowl and unregulated backfill may create an area of super-
saturated soil which could prove to be a hazard to the public’s safety. The
other consideration is that there may be a future building on the site and the
uncompacted fill would not be adequate to sustain the loading and the new
structure would likely suffer structural damage.
         (b)   Submittal requirements. A copy of updated plat of survey
indicating:
            1.   Real property lines;
            2.   All buildings relative to property line;
            3.   Location of the pool relative to the property line and
structure; and
            4.   Access route to pool to carry out demolition and cleanup.
         (c)   Required inspections.
            1.   Rough grade to verify holes in bottom of pool shell;
            2.   In progress: 48 inches from finished grade. Verify disconnects
and backfill material; and
            3.   Final pool backfill complete, final grading complete.
         (d)   Code requirements.
            1.   The bottom of the pool’s shell shall have holes punched or
drilled completely through so water will be able to drain out of the bottom and
not accumulate in the pool. An inspection of the holes is required prior to
backfill;
            2.   Recommend the top 24 inches of the side walls be removed (18
inches minimum);
            3.   Pool shall be backfilled and compacted to a minimum of 90%
maximum density. No organic or other reducible material shall be incorporated
in fills. No rock or similar irreducible material with a dimension greater than
eight inches shall be buried or placed within 48 inches of the finished grade;
and
            4.   Disconnection and proper termination of the gas, water and
electrical lines will be required prior to final inspection.
   (O)   Gazebo/pergola.
      (1)   Permit fee. Permit fee: 1.5% of estimated cost of construction,
plus associated fees.
      (2)   Submittal requirements.
         (a)   An updated copy of the plat of survey; and
         (b)   Copies of drawings including elevations.
      (3)   Code requirements.
         (a)   The maximum allowable area for a gazebo, greenhouse or workshop
shall be 200 square feet or no more than 40% of the rear yard (including all
accessory structures within the rear yard), whichever is less.
         (b)   Changes in use of accessory structures must conform to all
applicable requirements of the Municipal Code.
         (c)   Pergolas would not fit in the 40% coverage rule unless they have
an impervious type floor and then if applicable the maximum size would only be
regulated by the 40% rule.
         (d)   The maximum height of a detached accessory structure shall be
measured at the front of the structure and from the top of the finished floor
to the highest point of the building, and shall be no taller than 15 feet in
height. In the event there are significant grade changes on the property as to
expose 18 inches or more of the foundation of the structure, a grading plan
shall be a required component of the building permit application.
   (P)   Retaining wall.
      (1)   Permit fee. Permit fee: 1.5% of estimated cost of construction and
a grading plan.
      (2)   Submittal requirements.
         (a)   An updated copy of the plat of survey; and
         (b)   Representative drawing indicating the location of the existing
and/or proposed wall on the property.
   (Q)   New construction.
      (1)   Permit fee is based on 1.5% of estimated cost of construction, in
addition to all associated fees related to the project;
      (2)   Must provide updated plat of survey for property; and
      (3)   The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators (J.U.L.I.E.)
location must be completed prior to the issuance of building permit.
   (R)   Room addition.
      (1)   Permit fee is based on 1.5% of estimated cost of construction, in
addition to all associated fees related to the project;
      (2)   Must provide sealed and signed architectural drawings;
      (3)   Must provide updated plat of survey for property; and
      (4)   The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators (J.U.L.I.E.)
location must be completed prior to the issuance of building permit.
   (S)   Plan review and inspection fees.
      (1)   The cost of a plan review is 1.35% of the building permit fee. If a
permit play review is necessary, the cost of a permit plat review is $1,000.
      (2)   The cost of onsite building permit review is $60 for residential
and $100 for commercial.
(Ord. 16-O-2155, passed 12-7-2016; Ord. 20-O-2250, passed 3-4-2020)
§ 150.087 MECHANICAL/HVAC CODE ADOPTED.
   The city adopts the International Building Code with any amendments made
thereof and the below amendments that are not in conflict with the
International Building Code:
   (A)   All furnaces, air conditioners and coils must have easy access for
servicing;
   (B)   Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors are mandatory;
   (C)   Furnace location, BTUs and efficiency;
   (D)   Air conditioner location, BTUs and SHEER;
   (E)   At least one supply and return grill in every room, except the kitchen
and bathroom: six-inch pipe or larger to each opening;
   (F)   Exhaust fan in bath to be vented to the outside;
   (G)   Kitchen exhaust fan for the hood to be vented to the outside;
   (H)   Any ductwork in the attic to be insulated with one-inch fiberglass
duct wrap:
      (1)   R-rating 6 or better;
      (2)   No bubble wrap; and
      (3)   Five feet of Flex Duct is allowed.
   (I)   Hi-efficiency furnace to be vented and air intake to outside through
roof or wall. Not more than 20 feet from outside wall to furnace;
   (J)   No common returns are allowed on furnace or air handler;
   (K)   Sprinkler head next to furnace and water heater:
      (1)   Fire damage, building rehab and new construction only; and
      (2)   Must use type L Copper water pipe.
   (L)   Floor drain near furnace and water heater;
   (M)   Furnace filter to have easy access. No doors or panels to remove
filter;
   (N)   No furnace, boiler, water heater to be in the crawl space/attic;
   (O)   No joist or stud sheeting. Hard pipe or flex duct to all supply or
return register openings; and
   (P)   (1)   Permit fees:
Type Residential (Replacement Only) Rehab/new Construction Commercial
                                    Residential
Type                    Residential        Rehab/new Construction Commercial
                        (Replacement Only) Residential
Air conditioner         $15                $15                    $50
Air handler             N/A                $5 EA                  $10 EA
Bath fans exhaust       N/A                $5 EA                  $10 EA
Boiler                  $25                $25                    $50
Chimney for furnace and N/A                $25                    $50
water heater
Clothes dryer           N/A                $15                    $50
Duct work return        N/A                $10                    $50
openings
Duct work supply        N/A                $10                    $50
openings
Furnace                 $25                $25                    $50
Gas piping              N/A                $5 EA                  $50
Kitchen exhaust fans,   N/A                $5 EA                  $10 EA
each
PVC vent for furnace    N/A                $5 EA                  $10 EA
and water heater
Roof tops HVAC          N/A                N/A                    $50
Unit heater             N/A                $15                    $50
Wall heater, gas or     N/A                $15                    $50
electric
 
      (2)   Inspection fees:
 
Inspection Fees            Residential Commercial
Rough                      $60         $100
Final                      $60         $100
1st re-inspection          $60         $100
Each subsequent inspection $60         $100
 
(Ord. 16-O-2155, passed 12-7-2016)
§ 150.088 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   Adoption. The city adopts the state’s Plumbing Code with any
amendments made thereof and the below amendments that are not in conflict with
the state’s Plumbing Code.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Main water supply.
            1.   One-inch minimum diameter type K copper; and
            2.   All underground fittings to be flared type or compression
type.
         (b)   Fixture water supply.
            1.   Type L copper to fixture area lead free joints;
            2.   Three-fourths-inch fixture supply line with air chambers at
each fixture;
            3.   New construction/room additions only; copper or galvanized
iron: lead free joints; and
            4.   All water supply piping underground inside of building must be
K Copper.
         (c)   Sewer waste lines; (below grade). Follow the state’s Plumbing
Code with any amendments made thereof;
         (d)   Sewer waste lines (above grade). Follow the state’s Plumbing
Code with any amendments made thereof;
         (e)   Sump pump well. Corrugated plastic:
            1.   Ejector discharge to grade level or rear yard when storm
drainage system is provided; and
            2.   Ejected to front yard area when trenching for ditches are
provided for storm water drainage.
         (f)   Ejector pumps pit. Pit to be fiberglass and sewage to be ejected
to sanitary sewer;
         (g)   Main sewer line. Six-inch PVC AMVET joints W/6” cleanout outside
building sewer tap, plus saddle;
         (h)   License. Department of Public Health certificate is needed for
plumbing contractor to apply for a permit along with a letter of intent listing
the services that will be provided; and
         (i)   Material. Water service material K-Copper required.
      (2)   Permit fees.
Type Residential Commercial
Type                    Residential  Commercial
Amount of plumbers bond $10,000 bond $10,000 bond
Plumbing fixtures       $10 EA       $25 EA
Sewer repair            $30          $60
Sprinkler head          $10          $35
Street opening          $1,000 bond  $1,000 bond
Underground sprinkler   $40          $100
Water heater            $15          $30
Water service material  K-copper     K-copper
 
      (3)   Water meter fees.
 
Meter Size Fee
3/4”     $200
1”       $250
1-1/2”   $420
2”       $550
3”       $1,600
 
      (4)   Tapping water mains.
 
Meter Size Fee
1”       $400 + meter cost
1-1/2”   $500 + meter cost
2”       $700 + meter cost
Over 2”  $700 + multiples of fees + meter cost
Sewer tap  $500 + opening fees + bonds
 
      (5)   Inspection fees.
 
Inspection Fees            Residential Commercial
Rough                      $60         $100
Final                      $60         $100
1st re-inspection          $60         $100
Each subsequent inspection $60         $100
 
   (B)   Repair, rehab. Such system or portions thereof to undergo repair or
re-installation due to fire damage, building rehab, remodeling and new
construction must use type L-copper water pipe and a sprinkler head by all
furnaces and water heaters.
   (C)   Installation. All plumbing sewer and fixtures are to be installed by a
state-licensed plumber. Per 225 ILCS 320/37 (from Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 111, par.
1135) of the state’s Plumbing License Law, “A letter of intent shall be
included with all plumbing permit applications. The letter shall be written on
the licensed plumber of record’s business stationery and shall include the
license holder’s signature and, if the license holder is incorporated, the
license holder’s corporate seal. If the license holder is not incorporated, the
letter must be notarized.”
   (D)   Fee. The fee for a water construction meter must be paid at the time
of payment for a permit if plumbing work is to be done.
(Ord. 16-O-2155, passed 12-7-2016)
§ 150.089 ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The city adopts the 2017 National Electrical Code with amendments made
thereof and the below amendments that are not in conflict with the 2017
National Electrical Code.
      (1)   All underground service must be encased in heavy wall steep pipe as
set forth in the 2017 National Electrical Code or any amendments thereof
regarding the same.
      (2)   Low voltage wires may be in P.V.C. (schedule #40) underground in
accordance with code regulations.
      (3)   Electrical service wires must be #2 on 300 amp service.
      (4)   Electrical systems requiring permit: such system or portions
thereof to undergo repair or re-installation due to fire damage, building
rehab, remodeling and new construction must be in accordance to the Electrical
Code and amendments set forth by the city. Electrical services less than 100-
amp capacity shall be deemed obsolete and not repairable. Such obsolete service
shall be upgraded.
      (5)   All BX and Romex wires must be removed.
      (6)   All electrical conductors used in building construction shall be of
copper. Aluminum conductors will not be permitted.
      (7)   All single-family dwellings from zero to 1,800 square feet shall
require 100-amp capacity electrical service and a 20-circuit space breaker
panel with main breaker. All single-family dwellings from 1,800 to 3,600 square
feet shall require 200-amp capacity electrical service and a 30-circuit space
breaker panel minimum with main breaker.
      (8)   All conduits installed through the roof must have metal flashing or
rubber boot.
      (9)   All holes drilled in walls must have fire block and caulk sealing
the pipe.
      (10)   Existing service upgrade requirements: one-half-inch driven ground
rod required at meter socket in addition to water system ground.
      (11)   Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors must be wired: new
construction, building rehab and fire damage.
   (B)   The general electrical fees are as follows.
      (1)   The fee for examination of plans be $30 per hour with a minimum
charge of one hour.
      (2)   Service entrance fee:
Type Residential Commercial
Type                      Residential Commercial
100 ampere service        $25         $50
200 ampere service        $50         $75
400 ampere service        $75         $100
600 ampere service        $100        $150
800 ampere service        $200        $300
1,000 ampere service      $250        $350
Over 1,000 ampere service $400        $500
 
      (3)   Circuits under 50 amperes: inspection fees of each nominal 15-
ampere and 20-ampere, two-wire, circuit, including fixtures, sockets or
receptacles, the fees shall be:
         (a)   Fifteen- and 20-ampere branch circuits:
 
0 - 50 circuits     $20
51 or more circuits $15
 
         (b)   Branch circuit exceeding 20 amperes:
 
All circuits $30
 
         (c)   The fee for motor or devices will be as follows:
 
1st motor or device $25
Each additional     $10
Service check fee   $60
 
   (C)   Permit fees:
Type Residential Commercial
Type                      Residential                Commercial
Alarm systems             $30                        $30
Antennas/cell tower       1.5% cost of construction  1.5% cost of construction
                          (minimum $50)              (minimum $100)
Carnivals                 $50                        $50
Fixtures                  $10 EA                     $25 EA
Floor, ceiling and wall   $2 EA                      $2 EA
openings
Garages (electric only)   $50                        1.5% cost of project
                                                     (minimum $50)
Inspections (rough/final/ $60                        $100
re-inspection)
Temporary wiring          $25                        $50
 
(Ord. 16-O-2155, passed 12-7-2016; Ord. 20-O-2250, passed 3-4-2020)
§ 150.090 EMERGENCY PERMITS.
   (A)   The city shall allow for an emergency work to be completed in the
extreme cases that a residence does not have working heat, water and sewer and
loss of power.
   (B)   Any person, firm, corporation or entity completing work must:
      (1)   Contact the Building and Housing Department via phone about
emergency situation (i.e., no heat, water and sewer and loss of power).
Voicemail must be left with the Building and Housing Department detailing
emergency situation;
      (2)   Submit to the Building and Housing Department by fax or e-mail the
scope of work prior to beginning work;
      (3)   All permits must be purchased on the next business day. An
emergency fee for $75 may be applied to the permit cost; and
      (4)   Final inspections when work is completed.
(Ord. 16-O-2155, passed 12-7-2016)
§ 150.091 CONTRACTOR/COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   The city shall adopt 625 ILCS 5/12-713, in which commercial trucks
used by construction contractors or subcontractors to display company name.
   (B)   Every second division vehicle operating commercially in the state that
is used by a construction contractor or subcontractor shall display on the side
of the vehicle or its trailer the name of the company for which it is employed.
The name shall be in letters at least two inches tall and one-half inch wide.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to any motor vehicle upon which is
affixed the insignia required under § 18c-4701 of the state’s Commercial
Transportation Law.
(Ord. 16-O-2155, passed 12-7-2016)
§ 150.092 CANCELLATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Cancellations where no work has been performed. In order to cancel a
permit where the work will not be taking place, the following must be
submitted:
      (1)   Letter from the contractor or permit holder requesting permit
cancellation and stating no work has been performed. The letter must include
the permit number, job address, reasons for cancellation and a contact name and
telephone number. If the contractor is no longer available or unwilling to
submit the letter, the request can be made by the property owner. If the permit
is valid at the time of request for cancellation and the permit holder is not
submitting the request, then the property owner will be required to complete a
cancellation letter. Please note that in cases where a cancellation letter is
required there will be a ten working day waiting period prior to cancellation.
Additionally, the Department will notify all interested parties (original
permit holders and all subsidiary permit holders) of the cancellation request;
      (2)   Original validated permit. Job set of plans (if applicable, must be
on the job site at the time of inspection); and
      (3)   If the permit is expired a fee of $60 is required at the time of
cancellation request. Following the receipt of the letter and payment of the
cancellation fee, if applicable, a field inspection will be scheduled for the
next business day to confirm that no work was performed. If the performance of
the inspection determines that work was not performed, the permit will be
canceled, However, if work is determined to have been performed an additional
inspection fee will be assessed against the permit. Additionally, one will be
required to complete the work covered under the scope of the permit and obtain
all mandatory inspections. If the permit has expired, one will be required to
have it re-issued prior to proceeding with the work and obtaining the mandatory
inspections. Further, the Department will issue a notice of violation and open
a case in our regulation system to ensure appropriate action is taken. Failure
to do so may result in the issuance of a violation notice or ticket requiring
payment of a fine and correction of the violation. Please be advised that the
request will not be accepted if any of the required documentation is missing or
in cases where work has commenced as evidenced by an inspection result entered
in the computer system. In these cases, the work must be completed and
mandatory inspections obtained. If the permit has expired, it must be reissued
prior to request for mandatory inspections.
   (B)   Cancellations where work has been performed. In the unique instances
where work has been removed or the work was superseded by another permit, the
following must be submitted:
      (1)   A letter from the permit holder certifying that the work was
removed or superseded by another permit number (provide specific permit
number). The letter must include the permit number, job address and a contact
name and telephone number. If the contractor is no longer available or
unwilling to submit the letter, the request can be made by the property owner;
      (2)   For cases where the work has been removed, the applicant is
required to have the job copy of the plans at the site. An inspection will be
performed to verify the work has been removed. Following the performance of the
inspection, if it is determined the work was removed, then the permit will be
canceled. However, if the work still exists an additional inspection fee will
be assessed against the permit. Additionally, one will be required to complete
the work covered under the scope of the permit and obtain all mandatory
inspections. If the permit is expired, one must have the permit reissued prior
to obtaining mandatory inspections. Further, the Department will issue a notice
of violation and open a case in the regulation system to ensure appropriate
action is taken. Failure to do so may result in the issuance of a civil
violation notice or ticket requiring payment of a fine and correction of the
violation;
      (3)   In cases where a permit has been superseded by a new permit, the
requesting party must submit copies of the permit and plans relating to the old
and new number. An inspection may be scheduled for further determination of the
work performed. Once the Department is satisfied that there is a duplicate, the
permit will be canceled; and
      (4)   If the permit is expired, a fee of $60 is required at time of
cancellation request.
   (C)   Request to surrender permits where the contractor/qualifier is no
longer going to perform work on the project. A contractor who is no longer
going to perform work on a project must send the Department a letter advising
of this fact and include a copy of the permit. The letter must include the
permit number, job address and an explanation as to why the permit is being
surrendered.
   (D)   Cancellations when the owner will hire a new contractor. The owner of
the property will need to submit a written cancellation notice to the Building
and Housing Department. The cancellation notice needs to be signed by the owner
of the property and in cases where the change is for a subsidiary permit, then
by the general contractor as well. The signatures must be notarized.
(Ord. 16-O-2155, passed 12-7-2016)
§ 150.093 REFUND POLICY.
   (A)   The Building and Housing Department will only grant refunds only in
the cases where an error has occurred on the part of the Department, such as in
cases where the permit is issued for work outside the jurisdiction of the city
or of there was an overcharge of permit fees.
   (B)   Refunds will not be granted on requests involving:
      (1)   Permits which have expired;
      (2)   Permits under which work has commenced;
      (3)   Permits revoked by the Building Official or canceled by court
order; and
      (4)   When there is a change of contractor.
(Ord. 16-O-2155, passed 12-7-2016)
§ 150.094 OTHER CODES ADOPTED.
   (A)   Mechanical Code. The city adopts the 2015 Mechanical Code with any
amendments made thereof.
   (B)   Fuel Gas Code. The city adopts the 2018 International Fuel Gas Code
with any amendments made thereof.
   (C)   Existing Building Code. The city adopts the 2015 International
Existing Building Code with any amendments made thereof.
(Ord. 20-O-2250, passed 3-4-2020; Ord. 20-O-2265, passed 5-6-2020)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter, for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to a
fine not less than $25, nor exceeding $500. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed upon each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Any person guilty of violating §
150.002 of this chapter shall be fined no less than $50, nor more than $500,
for each offense and each separate day upon which each violation occurs shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   (1)   A person who fails to re-register the vacant property and/or pay
the renewal registration fee per §
150.005(D) of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $25 per
day which can accumulate up to a maximum amount $500 a year.
      (2)   In accordance with the Illinois Municipal Code, the city may place
liens against any properties that are not registered and it must maintain.
Furthermore, in accordance with the Illinois Municipal Code, the city may
foreclose on the liens. If the city forecloses on any aforementioned liens, it
may convey the property to a developer for an amount not less than the actual
costs incurred by the city to maintain the property.
   (D)   (1)   Any person, firm, corporation or entity that shall violate the
provisions of §§
150.035 through
150.049 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined in an amount
not exceeding $500 for each violation and a separate violation shall be deemed
to have been committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (2)   In the event that a violation is corrected in a timely manner, the
Building and Housing Department may, at its discretion, impose a penalty amount
of double the permit fee to take place instead or with the fine amount.
      (3)   If a person, firm, corporation or entity shall hinder the
inspection process by blocking, restricting and/or preventing access to the
property. The city shall constitute this as a violation of the provisions of §§
150.035 through
150.049 of this chapter and shall, upon conviction thereof, fine in an amount
not exceeding $500 for each violation, issue a stop work order and not issue a
certificate of occupancy until such time that the inspectors are able to access
the property unimpeded.
(Prior Code, § 150.60) (Ord. 87-O-1265, passed 3-18-1987; Ord. 87-O-1280,
passed 7-1-1987; Ord. 11-O-1999, passed 7-20-2011; Ord. 16-O-2155, passed 12-7-
2016)
CHAPTER 151: HOUSING REGULATIONS
Section
Property Maintenance Code
   
151.01   Property Maintenance Code adopted by reference
   
151.02   Purpose
   
151.03   Amendments
   
151.04   Compliance required
   
151.05   Nuisance abatement provisions
   
151.06   Chronic nuisance property
Additional Housing Regulations
   
151.15   Responsibilities of owners and occupants
   
151.16   Basic equipment and facilities
   
151.17   Light, ventilation and heating
   
151.18   Safe and sanitary maintenance
   
151.19   Space, use and location
   
151.20   Compliance with provisions
   
151.21   Determination of defects; placard
   
151.22   Vacation of condemned dwellings
   
151.23   Written approval required for habitation after dwelling declared unfit
   
151.24   Placard; removing or defacing prohibited
   
151.25   Hearing to be granted before Board of Health
   
151.26   Inspection of dwellings and premises; right of entry
   
151.27   Inspection of real property prior to sale, rental or transfer of title
   
151.28   Certification of structure establishing conformity with standards
required; inspection procedure
   
151.29   Enforcement of provisions; notice of violations; hearing
   
151.30   Transfer stamps requirement upon real estate transfer
Occupancy Regulations
   
151.45   Application
   
151.46   Reserved
   
151.47   Enforcement official
   
151.48   Inspections
   
151.49   Appeals
   
151.50   Certificate of occupancy
   
151.51   Sale or lease in absence of inspection
   
151.52   Procurement of warrant
   
151.53   Fees
   
151.54   Rules and regulations
 
   
151.99   Penalty
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 151.01 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   There is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the city, the
International Property Maintenance Code 2021 edition, as published by the
International Code Council, a copy of which is filed in the office of the City
Clerk, including all terms and provisions thereof, which terms and provisions
are hereby incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof as though
fully set forth, together with the amendments set forth in §
151.03 below.
(Prior Code, § 151.01) (Ord. 84-O-1138, passed 1-16-1984; Ord. 04-O-1790,
passed 3-17-2004; Ord. 21-O-2299, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. 24-O-2393, passed 7-
17-2024)
§ 151.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for safety, health, public welfare
through structural integrity and stability, means of egress, adequate light and
ventilation and protection to life and property from fire and hazards incident
to design, construction, repair, alteration, maintenance, removal or demolition
of buildings and structures, and to control the architectural design of
buildings or structures erected or to be erected within the corporate limits of
Markham.
(Ord. 21-O-2299, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 151.03 AMENDMENTS.
   The following additions, insertions, deletions, and changes are made to the
corresponding sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2021
edition as adopted in §
151.01 above:
   (A)   Subsection [A] 101.1 Title:
      Insert: The City of Markham.
   (B)   Subsection [A] 102.3 Application of other codes. (Applicability,
Application of other codes, deletion; and insertion, seventh line):
      Delete: “International Plumbing Code” in eighth line.
      Insert: "Current edition of the Illinois State Plumbing Code".
   (C)   Subsection [A] 103.1 Creation of Agency:
      Insert: The Building and Housing Department
      Add: The Director of Building and Housing or his designee shall be known
as the Code Official.
   (D)   Subsection [A] 104.3 Right of Entry. (Duties and Powers of The Code
Official, Right of Entry):
   (E)   Subsection [A] 105.3.1 Search Warrant in Absence of Consent. (Duties
and Powers of The Code Official, Search Warrant in Absence of Consent, new
subsection):
      Add: If the code official, after a reasonable attempt to obtain consent
does not receive consent to enter a dwelling, structure or property subject to
the code as described in subsection 105.3, the Code Official may seek in the
circuit court of Cook County, a search warrant pursuant to subsection 105.3.2
of this code. An owner, occupant or other person in charge of a dwelling,
structure or property subject to the provisions of this code, who is presented
with a search warrant obtained pursuant to this section, shall not refuse,
impede, inhibit, interfere with, restrict, or obstruct entry and free access to
any part of the structure or premises where an inspection authorized by the
search warrant sought to be made.
   (F)   Subsection [A] 105.3.2 Procurement of Search Warrants. (Duties and
Powers of the Code Official, Procurement of Search Warrants, new subsection):
      Add: A search warrant sought pursuant to subsection 105.3.1 shall be
sought in the circuit court of Cook County. The court may consider any of the
following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its
decision as to whether a warrant shall be issued:
         (a)   Eyewitness account of violation.
         (b)   Citizen complaints.
         (c)   Tenant complaints.
         (d)   Plain view violations.
         (e)   Violations apparent from city records.
         (f)   Property deterioration.
         (g)   Age of property.
         (h)   Nature of alleged violation.
         (i)   Similar properties in the area.
         (j)   Documented violations on similar properties in the area.
         (k)   Passage of time since last inspection.
         (l)   Previous violations on the property.
   (G)   Subsection [A] 111.10. Unsafe buildings prohibited. (Unsafe Structures
and Equipment, Unsafe buildings prohibited, new subsection):
      Insert:
         (a)   It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any
structure classified as unsafe, or contains unsafe equipment, or is unfit for
human occupancy as defined by the Property Maintenance Code and adopted city
standards.
         (b)   It shall be unlawful to permit the occupancy of any structure or
premises that is classified as unsafe, or contains unsafe equipment, or is
unfit for human occupancy as defined by the Property Maintenance Code and
adopted city standards.
         (c)   Declared a nuisance:
            1.   Any property or premises declared unsafe or unfit for human
occupancy shall have proper notice served to the owner in the manner described
in the code.
            2.   Additionally, there shall be posted in a conspicuous place at
the property or premise a copy of such notice. The notice to detail a time
frame for compliance with the cade and the remediation of the violations
expected.
            3.   Upon failure to comply within the time granted the Director of
Building and Housing or his/her designee shall order the property to be posted
and placarded.
               a.   Notice to state that the property is unsafe or unfit for
human occupancy and is order of the Director of Building and Housing or his/her
designee condemned.
               b.   It shall be unlawful for anyone to occupy or permit to be
occupied any property or premises that has been posted and placards affixed.
            4.   Abatement of the nuisance required.
               a.   The owner or owners of any property or premises having been
served proper notice shall abate the violation or violations by the razing of
the structure or parts thereof to the ground, or by rebuilding, repairing, or
renovating the structure to a condition that effectively eliminates the listed
violations in accordance with published codes, standards or ordinances so as to
eliminate the unsafe or unfit conditions enumerated.
            5.   Failure to correct.
               a.   If the owner shall fail to abate the nuisance declared as
specified above within a reasonable time after service, publication or posting
of notice then the city shall abate such unsafe or unfit conditions by razing
the building, structure or part thereof to the ground.
            6.   Costs.
               a.   The razing may be done by employment of labor or by
contract: the salvage sold, and proceeds applied to the cost of razing and
costs proceeding to abate.
               b.   In the case proceeds received as set out above are
insufficient to pay costs of abatement, the owner shall be liable to the city
for the balance of the costs of razing.
               c.   Costs to be recovered in a suit of law, and in the case the
proceeds are more than the costs, the balance shall be paid to the owner or
deposited into the city treasury for the use of the owner.
   (H)   Section 112.1 Imminent danger.
      Add: Or when a building lacks sewer or water service.
   (I)   Subsection [A] 113.3 Failure to Comply. (Demolition, Failure to
Comply):
      Delete: Entire subsection.
      Insert: Whenever the owner of a property fails to comply with a
demolition order within the time period prescribed, the Code Official shall
immediately report such failure to comply to the corporate authorities. The
corporate authorities may demolish or cause the demolition of dangerous and
unsafe buildings or uncompleted and abandoned buildings within the city by
applying to the circuit court for an order authorizing such action to be taken
with respect to any such building if the owner or owners thereof, including the
lien holders of record, after at least 15 days written notice by mail to do so,
have failed to demolish it. Where, upon diligent search, the identity or
whereabouts of the owner or owners of any such building including the lien
holders of record is not ascertainable, notice mailed to the person or persons
in whose name such real estate was last assessed is sufficient notice under
this subsection. The cost of such demolition incurred by the City of Markham,
including court costs, attorneys’ fees and other costs related to the
enforcement of this subsection is recoverable from the owner or owners of such
real estate and is a lien thereon, which lien is superior to all prior existing
liens and encumbrances, except taxes. Within sixty (60) days after such
demolition, the City of Markham shall file notice of lien of such cost and
expense incurred in the office of the county recorder. The notice must consist
of a sworn statement setting out (1) a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification thereof, (2) the amount of money representing the
cost and expense incurred, and (3) the date or dates when the cost and expense
was incurred by the city or by the lien holder of record. Upon payment of the
cost and expense by the owner or persons interested in the property after
notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the city and the
release may be filed of record as in the case of filing a notice of lien. Where
the dangerous condition of a structure is deemed by the corporate authorities,
upon recommendation of the code official to constitute an imminent and
immediate danger to human life, the city may promptly raze or remove said
structure or a portion thereof which has been deemed to cause such a danger in
accord with applicable laws and procedures.
   (J)   Subsection [A] 113.5 Demolition or Structure Moving Permit.
(Demolition, Demolition or Structure Moving Permit, new subsection):
      Insert: A demolition or structure moving permit is required prior to any
such work occurring on property within the City of Markham. To obtain a permit,
the property owner or his authorized agent shall file an application for permit
on a form furnished by the city for that purpose, and shall include a signed
statement indicating the exact scope of demolition or structure moving work to
occur on the subject property. Prior to issuance of a permit, the person,
owner, agent, firm, or corporation engaged in the work of demolition or moving
a structure shall provide copy of license to perform such work. A valid
certificate of insurance in the amount of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00)
must be submitted specific to the property where demolition or structure moving
is to take place. A bond in the penal sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
with sureties to be approved by the Director of Building and Housing or his/her
designee, to indemnify, keep and save harmless the City of Markham against any
loss, cost, damage, expense, judgment, or liability of any kind whatsoever the
city may suffer, or which may accrue against, be charged or be recovered from
said city, or any of its officials from or by reason or on account of accidents
to persons or property during any such demolition or moving operations and from
or by reason or on account of anything done under or by virtue of any permit
granted for such demolition or moving operations.
      The bond in each case shall extend over the period of and cover all such
demolition or moving operation. Each certificate shall list the City of Markham
as the certificate holder. Prior to issuance of permit, the applicant shall
submit written evidence to the Director of Building and Housing or his/her
designee that the property for which such permit is to be issued has been
inspected and treated for vectors and vermin by a person or persons duly
qualified and licensed as exterminators in vermin and pest control. The
inspection and treatment for vectors and vermin shall be made and conducted
within forty-five (45) days preceding the commencement of demolition or moving.
Prior to issuance of permit, it is required that the city be provided a
certified inspection report from an Illinois licensed asbestos inspector
certifying that the property is clear of any asbestos hazards before commencing
demolition or moving, A separate permit from Cook County shall be required for
the removal of asbestos containing material, should inspection discover the
presence of asbestos containing material. Upon satisfactory report of removal
and disposal of asbestos containing material by an Illinois licensed asbestos
abatement contractor, the demolition or structure moving permit shall be issued
providing all other requirements for such permit have been met. Provisions
shall be made by the permit applicant to control erosion and dust during the
demolition or structure moving process. Safety fencing shall be required,
minimum forty-eight (48) to seventy-two (72) inches in height above grade
around the entire perimeter of the project area and shall be installed prior to
the commencement of work. Fees for all permits are subject to the current city
schedule of fees and bonds.
   (K)   Subsection [A] 113.6 Demolition and Removal of Structures.
(Demolition, Demolition and Removal of Structures, new subsection):
      (1)   Utilities. A demolition permit shall not be issued until the
applicant has obtained and presented written statements from utilities or
suppliers that electric, water, sanitary sewer and gas services to the building
or structure have been properly disconnected and secured.
      (2)   At the time of demolition if the water service and sewer are
located in the pavement both the water service and sewer shall be terminated
within the property line in accordance with the approved engineering standard.
      (3)   Municipal utilities such as water, sewer and storm drainage lines
shall be capped at the main lines unless special arrangements in writing have
been made with the appropriate city department. Capping of the water, sewer and
storm drainage lines at the mains if located in the street pavement, shall be
accomplished at the time of demolition of the property.
         (a)   Excavations occurring in the public right-of-way shall require a
separate right-of-way permit to be secured.
      (4)   A Cook County demolition permit is required for all primary
structures located on a property unless excerpted by Cook County ordinance.
      (5)   The application for demolition shall show all structures and
accessory structures including all footings, foundations and interior slabs
being removed, including but not limited to fences, paved parking surfaces,
retaining walls and the like. All footing, foundation or interior slabs shall
be removed as part of the demolition.
      (6)   Safeguarding demolition of buildings. Any person in the process of
demolishing buildings shall be responsible for the proper placing of warning
signs, lights, or other signals to denote all danger spots in and about the
building being wrecked. He or she shall make certain the excavation remaining
after completion of the demolition is filled in and leveled so as to remove all
hazards. When the area is to be again used for the construction of a building,
all debris and materials resulting from the demolition shall be removed and the
premises left in a clean condition.
      (6a)   Commence construction of a replacement building or structure on
such property within three days after demolition: or
         (a)   Fill and grade the property to the extent that no hazard or
attractive nuisance exists: remove all debris, construction materials and brush
from the property; install a chain link fence on the perimeter of the perimeter
of the former building site of the building or structure: and commence
construction of a replacement building or structure within 30 days after
demolition has been completed: or
         (b)   Fill and grade the property to an extent consistent with the
grade of the property prior to demolition and pre-existing drainage patterns,
as approved by the City Engineer; install and maintain a chain-link fence no
less than 48 inches in height on the perimeter of the property; and sow the
property with grass seed or other groundcover/landscaping so as to prevent
erosion of the soil within 30 days after demolition has been completed.
         (c)   Owner of record shall be responsible to maintain the property in
accordance with city property standards for grass, dumping, and the like.
         (d)   Failure to maintain property as required can result in legal
action by the city and/or the city performing the required maintenance at the
expense of the owner of record.
      (7)   Dust and airborne particle control shall be accomplished by the
watering down of the structure being demolished and the site thereof during
demolition and removal of debris, weather permitting, to that extent necessary
to reasonably control dust and other air borne particles. Such dust and air
borne particle control shall be accomplished by the use of one and one-half
inches hose connected to a hydrant water meter.
         (a)   Hydrant meters are available from the Water Department at a cost
to be set by the Water Department.
      (8)   The contractor shall contact the Building Department to schedule an
inspection during demolition to ensure proper dust and airborne particle
control is being performed.
   (L)   Section [A] 107 Means of Appeal. (Means of Appeal, delete entire
section and insert new section):
      Delete: Entire section.
      Insert: The city’s designated administrative hearing officer shall hear
and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the code
official relative to the application and interpretation of this code.
   (M)   Section 107.2 Limitations of Authority (Means of Appeal- Limitation of
Authority, delete and insert)
      Delete: “The Board”
      Insert: “The administrative hearing officer:”
   (N)   Section 107.3 Qualifications. (Means of Appeal- Qualifications, delete
entire section)
      Delete: entire section
   (O)   Section 107.4 Administration (Mans of Appeal- Administration, delete
and insert)
      Delete: “The Board”
      Insert: “The Administrative Hearing Officer”
   (P)   Subsection [A] 201.3 Terms defined in other codes. (General, Terms
defined in other codes, deletion, and insertion, fifth line):
      Delete: "International Plumbing Code" in fifth line.
      Insert: "Current edition of the Illinois State Plumbing Code".
   (Q)   Section 202 Definitions. (Definitions, additions):
      Add: Culvert. A tunnel carrying a stream or open drain under a roadway.
      Add: Dangerous Landscaping. Any tree or shrub, or limb or portion
thereof, which creates a risk of imminent danger or hazard to person or
property in that it has broken or fallen or threatens to fall or come in
contact with a building, neighboring property or overhead utility lines. Any
tree or shrub, or limb or portion thereof, that blocks safe passage of or
obstructs in whole or in part, streets, sidewalks, driveways, easements or
bicycle paths; or in that it falls or threatens to fall and block safe passage
after having become uprooted or unstable as a result of construction activity,
disease, age, severe weather or any other event.
      Add: Demolition and Construction Waste. Waste materials from the
construction or destruction of residential, commercial, or industrial
structures, including concrete, gravel, sand, soil, lumber or any type of
excess fill or construction spoils.
      Add: Ditch or Ditches. A narrow channel dug in the ground, typically used
for drainage alongside a road or the edge of a field.
      Add: Junk. Any discarded material, such as stoves, refrigerators,
furniture, cabinets, carpet, construction lumber, unsecured fencing, damaged,
martials that absorbed water, glass, automobile parts, toys, miscellaneous
appliances, or excessive amounts of materials other than garbage, rubbish or
refuse.
      Add: Refuse. Any solid waste material.
      Add: Vehicle. Any means in or by which someone travels, or something is
carried or conveyed; a means of conveyance or transport.
   (R)   Subsection 301.4 Boarding Up of Vacant Property. (General, Boarding Up
of Vacant Property, new subsection):
      Insert:
         (a)   All boarding up of vacant buildings or structures shall be done
in consultation with the Director of Building and Housing or his/her designee
and shall be constructed and covered in such a manner as to be visually
harmonious with the adjacent covering of the building and the character of its
environs. Broken doors or windows shall be boarded up. All boards or coverings
shall be painted black.
         (b)   The property owner shall correct broken door(s) and/or window(s)
within 30 days.
         (c)   If not collected within the 30-day period, a fine of not less
than $500 nor more than $2,000 shall be imposed for each offense and shall be
charged for each day the violation continues.
         (d)   The owner shall notify the Director of Building and Housing or
his/her designee of his intentions no later than ten days prior to the actual
boarding up or, in the event of an emergency need, immediately thereafter.
         (e)   The owner may apply to the Director of Building and Housing or
his/her designee for an extension of such time period.
         (f)   The owner or agent is responsible to repair visually offensive
defects to the building structure and surrounding buildings or fences on the
property, to keep the interior and exterior premises clean and the grass and
hedges trimmed and to maintain public and private walkways adjacent to the
property free of snow and debris.
         (g)   Posting of Responsible Agent:
            1.   Every residential, non-residential building, commercial, or
industrial building structures shall provide a placard indicating the name,
phone, address, and address of the person, owner, agent, firm, or corporation
responsible for maintenance and repair of the structure.
            2.   Such placard shall be conspicuously posted at the front of the
property.
            3.   Minimum size of placard shall be 8.5 inches by 11 inches.
            4.   Placard shall be weather resistant.
            5.   Lettering shall be a minimum of one inch in height and
centered horizontally across the placard. The label shall be of contrasting
material.
   (S)   Subsection 302.1 Sanitation. (Exterior Property Areas, Sanitation, new
additions):
      Add: Any storage of salt on the exterior of private property for use in
snow and ice control is prohibited. Exterior balconies and porches may not be
used as storage areas.
   (T)   Subsection 302.2.1 Drainage System Discharge. (Exterior Property
Areas, Grading and Drainage, Drainage System Discharge, new subsection):
      Add: The drainage system sump shall discharge to grade a minimum of three
(3) feet (914 mm) from the exterior wall of the building. Sump pump discharge
shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer. Splash blocks shall be required
at all sump pump discharge lines. Splash blocks shall be constructed of
concrete or other material acceptable to the Director of Building and Housing
or his/her designee and be designed to carry water at least three (3) feet (914
mm) but not more than five (5) feet from the exterior wall of the building. It
shall be mandatory to carry the water flow away from the direction of the
adjacent side lot so that the water will not empty onto such property as it
flows from the sump pump discharge. If an underground drainage system is used
to carry sump discharge water away from the building instead of using splash
blocks, there shall be an "air-gap" between the discharge pipe at the house
prior to entering the sump extension. Sump pump discharge shall be dispersed so
as not to saturate the ground or run off into adjacent properties. Sump pump
discharge water shall not accumulate on to public walkways.
   (U)   Subsection 302.2.2 Roof Drainage. (Exterior Property Areas, Grading
and Drainage, Roof Drainage, new subsection):
      Insert: Gutters and downspouts shall be installed on all roofing systems.
All gutters and downspouts shall be securely fastened to the building.
Downspouts shall not be connected to the sanitary or storm sewer. Splash blocks
are required at the bottom of downspouts and shall be construction of concrete
or other material acceptable to the Director of Building and Housing or his/her
designee and shall be designed to carry water at least three (3) feet (914 mm)
but not more than five (5) feet (1,523 mm) from the exterior wall of the
building. It shall be mandatory to carry the water flow away from the direction
of the adjacent side lot so that the water will not empty onto such property as
it flows from the downspout channel. If an underground drainage system is used
to carry downspout discharge water away from the building instead of using
splash blocks, there shall be an “air-gap” between the downspout discharge at
the house prior to entering the downspout extension. Downspout discharge shall
be dispersed so as not to saturate the ground or run off into adjacent
properties. Downspout discharge water shall not accumulate on to public
walkways.
   (V)   Subsection 302.2.3 Ditches and Culverts. (Exterior Property Areas,
Grading and Drainage, Ditches and Culverts, new subsection):
      All ditches and culverts, whether located on a private property or the
public way shall be graded with due regard to the existing surrounding terrain
so as to follow its grade to permit the normal flow of water and to assure the
best possible drainage. All ditches and culverts shall be free flowing and free
of obstructions and debris.
   (W)   Subsection 302.3.1 Repairs. (Exterior Property Areas, Sidewalks and
Driveways, Repairs, new subsection):
      Insert: Any area, by reason of its state of repair, constitutes a danger
to health or safety, shall be repaired or replaced. Hazards and unsanitary
conditions shall be eliminated.
   (X)   Section 302.3.2 Accumulation of Ice and Snow. (Exterior Property
Areas, Sidewalks and Driveways, new subsection):
      Insert: Every owner, lessee, tenant occupant or the person, firm,
corporation or other entity having charge of or control over any building or
lot in the city which abuts upon any public way for pedestrian traffic,
commonly referred to as a sidewalk, shall remove the snow and ice or
combination thereof from such sidwalk. In the event that such snow or ice or
combination thereof has become frozen and is incapable of removal without
damage to the pavement, the person or entity having charge or control of such
building or lot as aforesaid shall cause the accumulation to be placed in
removal condition or melted by the application thereto of salt or chemical
compounds which will not cause damage to the pavement.
   (Y)   Subsection 3.2.3 Maintenance. (Exterior Property Areas, Sidewalks and
Driveways, Repairs, new subsection):
      Insert: All residential driveways shall be properly maintained, including
sealcoating.
   (Z)   Subsection 302.4 Weeds. (Exterior Property Areas, Weeds):
      Delete: Entire subsection.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of any
real property to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other than trees, bushes,
flowers, or other ornamental plants to grow to a height exceeding six inches
within the city. Any such weeds, grass or plants exceeding such height are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and violation of this ordinance.
         (b)   Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, any plant of volunteer growth which is not cultured or specifically
grown for human food, any high growth of grass or plants that may conceal
garbage, rubbish, refuse, junk or other unhealthy deposits or any growth which
constitutes a fire hazard when dry or when the fire load density is great.
         (c)   Jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a
like kind found growing in any lot or tract of land in the city are declared to
be a nuisance and violation of this ordinance. It is unlawful to permit any
such weeds to grow or remain in any such place. (Former § 97.15)
         (d)   Noxious weeds shall be prohibited as required by the Illinois
noxious weed law (ILCS Ch. 505, Act 100, § 11), These weeds are common ragweed,
giant ragweed, Canada thistle, perennial sow thistle, musk thistle, marijuana
and perennial members of the sorghum genus. Also prohibited are exotic weeds as
required by the Illinois Exotic Weed Act (ILCS Ch. 525, Act 10). These weeds
are Japanese honeysuckle, multiflora rose and purple loosestrife.
      Exceptions to this subsection are as follows:
         (e)   Notice to abate nuisance. Notice to abate a violation of this
chapter shall be given by the city by posting a sign regarding the violation on
the premises of the property in violation. The sign shall be posted in a
conspicuous place near the main entrance of the structure. The posted sign
shall be at least eight and one-half inches in height and five and one-half
inches in width and at the top of thereof in large letters shall state the
words, “Notice to Abate.” The text of the notice shall contain a reference to
this section, and demand abatement of the nuisance within 24 hours. It shall be
unlawful for anyone to deface, tamper with, or remove the “Notice to Abate”
sign from the property where it is posted unless authorized by the city.
         (f)   Abatement. If, after a notice to abate is served, the owner,
occupant or person in control of the real estate does not abate the nuisance
within 24 hours of such notice, the city may undertake the removal and disposal
of plant growth in violation of this chapter. The city shall for the purpose of
abating the nuisance have the right of entry upon the respective property. The
costs incurred by the city for such removal shall be charged to the person or
entity owning, leasing, occupying or controlling such real estate. The removal
cost shall be the reasonable cost to the city in setting up, maintaining, and
operating the required equipment as well as the wages paid to the operators/
contractors and overhead paid on the equipment, personnel costs and an
administrative cost, in the amount of $100, which shall be included in the
calculation of the costs that shall be charged to and paid by the owner or
occupant. The city shall prepare an invoice for the cost and expense of removal
and forward said invoice to the owner or occupant with a demand for payment in
full within 30 days of the invoice.
         (g)   Failure to Remove Weeds from Premises; Lien Claim. In the event
payment is not received within 30 days of issuance of an invoice, the city may
file a notice of lien in the office of the Cook County recorder of deeds for
the charges incurred to abate the nuisance. The notice of lien shall be filed
within one year after the removal cost is incurred. If, for any one parcel, the
city engaged in any removal activity on more than one occasion during the
course of one year, then the city may combine any or all of the costs of each
of those activities into a single notice of lien.
         (h)   Foreclosure of Lien.
            1.   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
out: (1) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof, (2) the amount of the removal cost, and (3) the date or dates when the
removal cost was incurred by the city. Notice of the lien claim shall be
personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom the
prior year's tax bill was sent. The notice to the owner must include: (1) the
identification of the property at issue, (2) a summary of the statutory
authority authorizing the lien action, i.e., 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7 and 65 ILCS 5/
11-20-15, both as amended, (3) summary of this chapter, which implements the
statutory authority referenced prior hereto and for which the owner is charged
with violating and (4) a description of the removal activity.
            2.   The lien provided for by this section shall not be valid as to
any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to
the removal activity and prior to the filing of the notice of lien, or to any
mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such real
estate arose prior to the filing of the notice of lien.
            3.   A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to
foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanics' liens. An action to
foreclose a lien under this section must be commenced within two years after
the date of filing the notice of lien.
            4.   Upon payment of the lien cost by the owner of, or persons
interested in, the real estate after the notice of lien has been filed, the
city shall release the lien and the release may be recorded in the office of
the Cook County recorder of deeds.
            5.   The Corporation Counsel is authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings, in the name of the city, in any court having
jurisdiction over such matter, against any property for which abatement costs
remain unpaid 30 days after they have been rendered.
         (i)   Penalties. Notwithstanding any abatement costs that may be
incurred by a person or entity pursuant to this chapter, any person violating
any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$750 for each offense. Every day that a violation exists constitutes a separate
offense. Proceedings to enforce violations of this chapter may be initiated and
conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Markham Code
of Ordinances providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or
by any other means provided by law.
         (j)   The availability or imposition of any of the foregoing
penalties, fines and/or costs shall not limit or preclude any other remedy or
remedies by way of revocation, injunction or other relief available to the
city, either at law or in equity.
   (AA)   Subsection 302.4.1 Lawns and Hedges. (Exterior Property Areas, Lawns,
Trees, and Hedges, new subsection):
      Insert:
         (a)   All premises shall be appropriately maintained. Lawns, hedges,
bushes, trees and other vegetation shall be kept trimmed and prevented from
becoming overgrown and unsightly where exposed to public view or where such
vegetation may constitute a blighting influence on adjoining property.
         (b)   Any tree, bush, or branches that interferes with, obstructs,
tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous the free passage, use or vision in the
customary manner of any sidewalk, thoroughfare, street, or highway, or hanging
over any structure shall be removed, in the city is declared to be a nuisance,
and it shall be unlawful to permit any such tree or bush to grow or remain in
any such place in violation of this chapter.
         (c)   Any landscaping, visible from public property, that is
substantially dead, damaged, or characterized by uncontrolled growth, blocking
windows or doors, or presents a deteriorated appearance; uncultivated shrubs or
growth (whether growing or otherwise) higher than eight inches; or any dead
trees, bushes, shrubs or portions thereof are declared to be a nuisance, and it
shall be unlawful to permit any such tree, bush, shrub, or growth to grow or
remain in any such place in violation of this chapter.
         (d)   Notice to abate Nuisance. Notice to abate a violation of this
chapter shall be given by the city by posting a sign regarding the violation on
the premises of the property in violation. The sign shall be posted in a
conspicuous place near the main entrance of the structure. The posted sign
shall be at least eight and one-half inches in height and five and one-half
inches in width and at the top of thereof in large letters shall state the
words, "Notice to Abate." The text of the notice shall contain a reference to
this section, and demand abatement of the nuisance within 24 hours. It shall be
unlawful for anyone to deface, tamper with, or remove the "Notice to Abate"
sign from the property where it is posted unless authorized by the city.
         (e)   Abatement. If, after a notice to abate is served, the owner,
occupant or person in control of the real estate does not abate the nuisance
within 24 hours of such notice, the city may undertake the removal and disposal
of plant growth in violation of this chapter. The city shall for the purpose of
abating the nuisance have the right of entry upon the respective property. The
costs incurred by the city for such removal shall be charged to the person or
entity owning, leasing, occupying or controlling such real estate. The removal
cost shall be the reasonable cost to the city in setting up, maintaining, and
operating the required equipment as well as the wages paid to the operators/
contractors and overhead paid on the equipment, personnel costs and an
administrative cost, in the amount of $100, which shall be included in the
calculation of the costs that shall be charged to and paid by the owner or
occupant. The city shall prepare an invoice for the cost and expense of removal
and forward said invoice to the owner or occupant with a demand for payment in
full within 30 days of the invoice.
         (f)   Failure to Remove Weeds from Premises; Lien Claim. In the event
payment is not received within 30 days of issuance of an invoice, the city may
file a notice of lien in the office of the Cook County recorder of deeds for
the charges incurred to abate the nuisance. The notice of lien shall be filed
within one year after the removal cost is incurred. If, for any one parcel, the
city engaged in any removal activity on more than one occasion during the
course of one year, then the city may combine any or all of the costs of each
of those activities into a single notice of lien.
         (g)   Foreclosure of Lien.
            1.   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
out: (1) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof, (2) the amount of the removal cost, and (3) the date or dates when the
removal cost was incurred by the city. Notice of the lien claim shall be
personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom the
prior year's tax bill was sent. The notice to the owner must include: (1) the
identification of the property at issue, (2) a summary of the statutory
authority authorizing the lien action, i.e., 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7 and 65 ILCS 5/
11-20-15, both as amended, (3) summary of this chapter, which implements the
statutory authority referenced prior hereto and for which the owner is charged
with violating and (4) a description of the removal activity.
            2.   The lien provided for by this section shall not be valid as to
any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to
the removal activity and prior to the filing of the notice of lien, or to any
mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such real
estate arose prior to the filing of the notice of lien.
            3.   A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to
foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanics' liens. An action to
foreclose a lien under this section must be commenced within two years after
the date of filing the notice of lien.
            4.   Upon payment of the lien cost by the owner of, or persons
interested in, the real estate after the notice of lien has been filed, the
city shall release the lien and the release may be recorded in the office of
the Cook County recorder of deeds.
            5.   The Corporation Counsel is authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings, in the name of the city, in any court having
jurisdiction over such matter, against any property for which abatement costs
remain unpaid 30 days after they have been rendered.
         (h)   Penalties. Notwithstanding any abatement costs that may be
incurred by a person or entity pursuant to this chapter, any person violating
any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$750 for each offense. Every day that a violation exists constitutes a separate
offense. Proceedings to enforce violations of this chapter may be initiated and
conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Markham Code
of Ordinances providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or
by any other means provided by law.
         (i)   The availability or imposition of any of the foregoing
penalties, fines and/or costs shall not limit or preclude any other remedy or
remedies by way of revocation, injunction or other relief available to the
city, either at law or in equity.
   (BB)   Subsection 302.5 Rodent Harborage. (Exterior Property Areas, Rodent
Harborage, add to end of subsection):
      Add: Any storage or placement of materials on property within the city in
a manner which may harbor pest and wildlife infestation is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and in violation of this ordinance. Any type of infestation shall
immediately be abated.
   (CC)   Subsection 302.7.1 Removal or Rehabilitation of Accessory Structures.
(Exterior Property Areas; Accessory Structures, Removal or Rehabilitation of
Accessory Structures, new subsection):
      Insert: All dilapidated or collapsed accessory structures on any property
shall be removed or rehabilitated within 30 days after proper notification or
as may be allowed by extension from the Director of Building and Housing.
   (DD)   Subsection 302.8.1 Inoperable or Unlicensed. (Exterior Property
Areas, Motor Vehicles, Inoperable or Unlicensed, new subsection):
      Insert: All inoperable, unlicensed motor vehicles or motor vehicles not
displaying a current city sticker on public or private property, are hereby
declared to be a nuisance and a violation of this ordinance. "Inoperable motor
vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle from which the windows, fenders, bumpers,
doors, engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or on which the
windows, fenders, bumpers, doors, engine, wheels or other parts have been
altered, damaged, does not function as intended or otherwise so treated that
the vehicle is incapable of being driven.
   (EE)   Subsection 302.8.2 Motor Vehicle Parking. (Exterior Property Areas,
Motor Vehicles, Motor Vehicle Parking, new subsection):
      Insert: No motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, including but not limited
to trailers, cars, and watercrafts, shall be parked on any unpaved, grassy or
solid surface area of the property. The parking or storage of any vehicle
outside of a structure shall be placed on a properly constructed concrete,
asphalt or other surface approved by the City.
   (FF)   Subsection 302.10 Equipment Storage. (Exterior Property Areas,
Equipment Storage, new subsection):
      Insert: It is hereby declared a nuisance and a violation of this
ordinance for an owner of real estate within the city to store out in the open
on the exterior of private property construction equipment, snow removal
equipment or landscaping equipment. All yards, courts, or lots shall be kept
free from unsightly materials not appropriate to the area and debris, which may
cause a fire hazard or may act as a breeding place for vermin, wildlife,
insects, or constitute a location for rodent harborage.
   (GG)   Subsection 302.11 Landscaping. (Exterior Property Areas, Landscaping,
new subsection):
      Insert: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained and be
free from dead or dangerous landscaping including dead trees. Removal of dead
or dangerous landscaping from residential and non-residential property, a
replacement plan in compliance with city code and/or site specific development
ordinance regulations shall be submitted for compliance review.
   (HH)   Subsection 302.12 Screening of Outdoor Storage. (Exterior Property
Areas, Screening of Outdoor Storage, new subsection):
      Insert:
         (a)   In business and industrial zoning districts all storage, with
the exception of limited display of merchandise, as approved by the Director of
Building and Housing or his/her designee, shall be kept within the enclosed
building or obscured from public view by a solid fence or wall not less than
eight feet in height or by densely planted vegetation so designed and planted
as to be 75% opaque when viewed horizontally between two and eight feet above
ground level.
         (b)   In residential districts all outdoor storage for a continuous
period exceeding 15 days in length shall be enclosed or obscured from view as
required for storage in business and industrial districts.
            1.   Maximum fence height is six feet.
            2.   Storage of functional items as children's play structures,
firewood, and operable automobiles and bicycles shall be exempt from the
provisions of this section.
   (II)   Subsection 302.13 Storage in Commercial Building Windows. (Exterior
Property Areas, Storage in Commercial Building Windows, new subsection):
      Insert:
         (a)   In non-residential buildings, except for display merchandise, no
storage of materials, stock or inventory shall be permitted in window display
areas ordinarily exposed to public view unless such areas are first screened
from public view by drapes, Venetian blinds, or other rendering of such window
opaque to public view.
         (b)   All such screening of interiors shall be maintained clean and in
a good state of repair.
   (JJ)   Subsection 302.14 Fences and Retaining Walls. (Exterior Property
Areas, Fences and Retaining Walls, new subsection):
      Insert:
         (a)   All fences, retaining walls and similar structures shall be kept
in good repair, or be removed or replaced.
            1.   Fences shall be considered requiring maintenance when they
lean beyond 15 degrees from plumb.
         (b)   All fences shall be periodically treated with chemicals or paint
to retard deterioration, unless such deterioration is superficial deterioration
designed to enhance appearance.
         (c)   All fences shall be free from any grass, weeds, trees, bushes,
vegetation, or overgrowth of any kind.
   (KK)   Subsection 303.1.1 Regulation. (Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs,
Regulation, new subsection):
      Insert: Swimming pools are to be regulated by the current city ordinance
governing the maintenance, use and equipment of private swimming pools, spas,
hot tubs and portable or temporary pools in residential zoning districts where
it is more stringent than this code. All other installations shall be regulated
by this code and other applicable codes and ordinances.
   (LL)   Subsection 304.3 Premises Identification. (Exterior Structure,
Premises Identification):
      Delete: Entire subsection.
      Insert:
         (a)   All single-family residential buildings shall have approved
address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the
street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be not less than 4 inches (102 mm) in height with a minimum
stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
         (b)   All non-single-family residential buildings, condominiums,
commercial, industrial and non-residential buildings shall have approved
address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the
street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
Numbers shall be not less than 6 inches (152.4 mm) in height with a minimum
stroke width of 0.75 inch (12.7 mm).
      Exception: All apartments, condominiums, commercial, industrial and non-
residential buildings that is 100 feet or more from the road shall be not less
than 12 inches (304.8 mm) in height with a minimum stroke width of 1.5 inch
(38.1 mm).
   (MM)   Subsection304.10.1(Stairways, decks, porches and balconies, new
subsection)
      Insert: Exterior stairways, decks, porches and balconies may not be used
as storage areas.
   (NN)   Subsection 304.14 Insect Screens. (Exterior Structure, Insect
Screens, delete [DATE] and insert new section):
      Delete: [DATE].
      Insert: January 1 to December 31.
   (OO)   Subsection 304.18.1.1 Peephole. (Exterior Structure, Peephole, new
subsection):
      Insert: Peepholes at the entrance door shall be provide and maintained.
The peephole must be located so as to enable a person to view from the inside
of the entrance door any person immediately outside the entrance door.
   (PP)   Subsection 304.20 Non-operative Signs. (Exterior Structure, Non-
operative Signs, new subsection):
      Insert: All non-operative or broken electrical signs shall be repaired
or, with their supporting members, be immediately removed.
   (QQ)   Subsection 304.21 General Maintenance of Exterior Premises. (Exterior
Structure, General Maintenance of Exterior Premises, new subsection):
      Insert:
         (a)   The owner or operator shall keep the exterior of all premises
and every structure thereon including but not limited to walls, roofs,
cornices, chimneys, drains, towers, porches, landings, fire escapes, stairs,
store fronts, signs, windows, doors, awnings, marquees, and accessory structure
in good repair.
         (b)   All surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or protected with
other approved coating material where necessary for the purpose of preservation
and avoiding a blighting influence on adjoining properties.
         (c)   All obsolete signs shall be removed.
         (d)   All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose
shingles, crumbling stone or brick, peeling paint or other conditions
reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance, to the end that the
property itself may be preserved safely and fire hazards eliminated, and
adjoining property and the neighborhood protected from blighting influences.
   (RR)   Subsection 305.1 (Interior Structure, General, Add)
      Add: Interior storage. In a common area, patio, balcony, hallway,
stairwell or in any living areas, it shall be unlawful to:
         (1)   Accumulate and store building materials, lumber, boxes and
cartons, scrap metal, machinery, junk, flammable or hazardous materials or
devices in such quantities or in such a manner as to create a fire, health or
other hazard to the premises or persons residing therein;
         (2)   Store gasoline and similar combustible liquids; if stored in a
multi-family dwelling, must be locked in an approved fire resistant cabinet;
and
         (3)   Store a motorcycle, moped, gasoline powered lawnmower,
snowblower or other similar equipment which may contain a hazardous material
including, without limitation, gasoline.
   (SS)   Subsection 305.7 Moisture. (Interior Structure, add new subsection)
      Add: Moisture.
         (1)   All living areas shall be kept dry and free from exterior
moisture penetration.
         (2)   Building components, including enclosed cavities, which have
become wet for any reason, shall be dried adequately to prevent mold growth.
         (3)   All areas of a dwelling unit, including non-living areas part of
or adjacent to the dwelling unit, shall be kept free of significant water entry
or standing water. Measures must be taken to prevent moisture contact with
permeable building components or other materials.
   (TT)   Subsection 305.8 Window Coverings. (Interior Structure, Window
coverings, new subsection):
      Insert: All exterior facing windows shall be equipped with blinds,
shades, drapes, or curtains. Any other material used to cover windows is hereby
prohibited.
   (UU)   Subsection 307.1 Handrails and Guards.
      Handrails shall not be less than 34 in height or more than 38 in height
measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor
of landing or walking surface. Guards shall not be less than 36 inches in
height above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other
walking surface.
   (VV)   Section 308 Rubbish and Garbage. (Deletion and insertion, title):
      Delete: "Rubbish and Garbage".
      Insert: "Rubbish, Garbage and Storage".
   (WW)   Subsection 308.1 Accumulation of Rubbish, Garbage, or Storage.
(Rubbish, Garbage and Storage, Accumulation of rubbish, garbage, or storage
addition after third line):
      Add: It is hereby declared a nuisance and a violation of this ordinance
for an owner of real estate within the city to allow:
         (a)   Garbage, rubbish, junk, debris, refuse, construction material,
dead tree limbs, dead branches, dead twigs, dead sticks from trees, overgrowth,
grass clippings, or waste to remain outside in the open air upon that property.
All garbage rubbish, junk, refuse or construction material or waste must be
enclosed in containers. No container shall be stored in the front yard,
including that area between the building and front yard, or stored in the
corner-side or side yard of any property including that area between the
building and that yard.
         (b)   Accumulate and storage of demolition and construction waste,
junk or other materials or devices to create a fire, safety, health or hazard
to the premises or occupants in all common areas including limited common
areas.
         (c)   Storage of gasoline and similar combustible liquids in multi-
family dwellings shall be locked in an approved fire-resistant cabinet.
         (d)   Storage of a motorcycle, moped, gasoline powered lawn mower,
snowblower or other similar equipment which may contain a hazardous material
including.
         (e)   Notice to abate nuisance. Notice to abate a violation of this
chapter shall be given by the city by posting a sign regarding the violation on
the premises of the property in violation. The sign shall be posted in a
conspicuous place near the main entrance of the structure. The posted sign
shall be at least eight and one-half inches in height and five and one-half
inches in width and at the top of thereof in large letters shall state the
words, “Notice to Abate.” The text of the notice shall contain a reference to
this section, and demand abatement of the nuisance within 24 hours. It shall be
unlawful for anyone to deface, tamper with, or remove the “Notice to Abate”
sign from the property where it is posted unless authorized by the city.
         (f)   Abatement. If, after a notice to abate is served, the owner,
occupant or person in control of the real estate does not abate the nuisance
within 24 hours of such notice, the city may undertake the removal and disposal
of rubbish and garbage in violation of this chapter. The city shall for the
purpose of abating the nuisance have the right of entry upon the respective
property. The costs incurred by the city for such removal shall be charged to
the person or entity owning, leasing, occupying or controlling such real
estate. The removal cost shall be the reasonable cost to the city in setting
up, maintaining, and operating the required equipment as well as the wages paid
to the operators/contractors and overhead paid on the equipment, personnel
costs and an administrative cost, in the amount of $100, which shall be
included in the calculation of the costs that shall be charged to and paid by
the owner or occupant. The city shall prepare an invoice for the cost and
expense of removal and forward said invoice to the owner or occupant with a
demand for payment in full within 30 days of the invoice.
         (g)   Failure to remove rubbish and garbage from Premises; Lien Claim.
In the event payment is not received within 30 dys of issuance of an invoice,
the city may file a notice of lien in the office of the Cook County recorder of
deeds for the charges incurred to abate the nuisance. The notice of lien shall
be filed within one year after the removal cost is incurred. If, for any one
parcel, the city engaged in any removal activity on more than one occasion
during the course of one year, then the city may combine any or all of the
costs of each of those activities into a single notice of lien.
         (h)   Foreclosure of Lien.
            1.   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting
out: (1) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof, (2) the amount of the removal cost, and (3) the date or dates when the
removal cost was incurred by the city. Notice of the lien claim shall be
personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom the
prior year’s tax bill was sent. The notice to the owner must include: (1) the
identification of the property at issue, (2) a summary of the statutory
authority authorizing the lien action, i.e., 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7 and 65 ILCS 5/
11-20-15, both as amended, (3) summary of this chapter, which implements the
statutory authority referenced prior hereto and for which the owner is charged
with violating, and (4) a description of the removal activity.
            2.   The lien provided for by this section shall not be valid as to
any purchaser whose rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to
the removal activity and prior to the filing of the notice of lien, or to any
mortgagee, judgement creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such real
estate arose prior to the filing of the notice of lien.
            3.   A lien under this section may be enforced by proceedings to
foreclose as in the case of mortgages or mechanics’ liens. An action to
foreclose a lien under this section must be commenced within two years after
the date of filing the notice of lien.
            4.   Upon payment of the lien cost by the owner of, or persons
interest in, the real estate after the notice of lien has been filed, the city
shall release the lien and the release may be recorded in the office of the
Cook County recorder of deeds.
            5.   The Corporation Counsel is authorized and directed to
institute such proceedings, in the name of the city, in any court having
jurisdiction over such matter, against any property for which abatement costs
remain unpaid 30 days after they have been rendered.
         (i)   Penalties. Notwithstanding any abatement costs that may be
incurred by a person or entity pursuant to this chapter, any person violating
any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than
$750 for each offense. Every day that a violation exists constitutes a separate
offense. Proceedings to enforce violations of this chapter may be initiated and
conducted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Markham Code
of Ordinances providing for administrative adjudication of code violations or
by any other means provided by law.
         (j)   The availability or imposition of any of the foregoing
penalties, fines, and/or costs shall not limit or preclude any other remedy or
remedies by way of revocation, injunction or other relief available to the
city, either at law or in equity.
   (XX)   Subsection 308.3.3 Access to Garbage Storage Areas. (Rubbish and
Garbage, Disposal of garbage, new subsection):
      Insert: It shall be the responsibility of the owner to remove snow and
ice in such a manner as to allow ready access to garbage storage areas for
tenants and privates scavengers. 630.476.0131.
   (YY)   Subsection 404.4.4 Prohibited Occupancy. (Occupancy Limitations,
Bedroom and Living Room Requirements, delete section, insert)
      Insert: kitchens, living, family, dining rooms and non-habitable spaces
shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
   (ZZ)   Subsection 404.7.1 Equipment and Appliances. (Occupancy Limitations,
Food preparation, Equipment and Appliances, new subsection):
      Insert: All rental dwelling units shall be provided with a kitchen sink,
stove appliance and refrigeration appliance, each having a minimum clear
working space of 30 inches (762 mm). A mechanical ventilation system shall be
installed above the stove and be recirculating or discharge to the outdoors
through sheet metal ducts constructed of galvanized steel, stainless steel,
aluminum or copper. Such ducts shall have smooth inner walls, shall be
airtight, shall be equipped with a backdraft damper, and shall be independent
of all other exhaust systems.
   (AAA)   Subsection 404.8 New Occupancy in Existing Non-Residential Space.
(Occupancy Limitations, New Occupancy in Existing Non-Residential Space, new
subsection):
      Insert: No property, premises, building or tenant space within a non-
residential building shall be occupied or re-occupied without first having been
inspected by the City Building and Housing Department and the Fire Department
to ensure compliance with zoning, health, fire, safety, general welfare of the
public and any other applicable City ordinance requirements. This verification
of compliance is to be initiated through building permit application for an
occupancy inspection.
   (BBB)   Subsection [P] 502.5 Public Toilet Facilities. (Required Facilities,
Public Toilet Facilities, deletion and insertion, third line):
      Delete: "International Plumbing Code” in third line.
      Insert: "Current edition of the Illinois State Plumbing Code".
   (CCC)   Subsection [P] 505.1 General. (Water System, General, deletion and
insertion, seventh line):
      Delete: "International Plumbing Code" in seventh line.
      Insert: "Current edition of the Illinois State Plumbing Code".
   (DDD)   Subsection 602.3 Heat Supply. (Heating Facilities, Heat Supply,
delete [DATE] and insert new section):
      Insert: September 1 to June 1.
   (EEE)   Subsection 602.3 Heat Supply: Exceptions. (Heating Facilities, Heat
Supply, all exceptions and insert new section):
      Insert: 602.3.1 Minimum Daily Temperature. The minimum daily temperatures
between September 1 and June 1 shall be as follows below.
         (a)   Seventy-two (72) degrees Fahrenheit from 6:30 a.m. to 10:30 p.m.
         (b)   Sixty-five (65) degrees Fahrenheit from 10:30 p.m, to 6:30 a.m.
         (c)   Such temperatures shall be consistent throughout all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
      Insert: 602.3.2 Responsibility. It shall be the duty of the person,
owner, agent, firm, or corporation in charge of any premises used as a rental
property.
      Where there is a central heating plant controlled by the owner or such
persons in charge, to maintain and provide heat during the periods identified
in 602.3.1.
   (FFF)   Subsection 602.4 Occupiable Work Spaces. (Heating Facilities,
Occupiable Work Spaces, delete [DATE] to [DATE] and insert new section):
      Insert: September 1 to June 1.
   (GGG)   Subsection 604.2 (Electrical Requirements, Electrical Facilities,
add to end of subsection):
      Add: Each rental residential unit shall have a minimum electrical service
of at least 100 amps. where provisions are made for major electrical appliances
requiring 220-volt service such as room heaters, air conditioners, stoves,
washers and dryers, such units shall be on individual circuits.
   (HHH)      Subsection 605.5 Doorbell. (Electrical Equipment, Doorbell, new
subsection):
      Insert: A doorbell must be installed with the appropriate low voltage
transformers, front of dwelling,
   (III)   Subsection 606.1 General. (Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters,
General, add to end of subsection):
      Add: Elevators and conveying systems shall be maintained in conformance
with State of Illinois section 140 of the Elevator Safety and Regulations Act
(ILCS Ch. 225, Act 312, § 140) and the administrative rules (41 Ill. Adm. Code
1000). Elevator and conveying systems shall be maintained in compliance with
the following standards and guidelines:
         (a)   Safety code for elevators and escalators (ASME A 17.1-20 1 0/CSA
B44-1 0) and performance-based safety code for elevators and escalators (ASME
A17.7-2007/CSA B44.7-07).
         (b)   Guide for inspection of elevators, escalators and moving walks
(ASME A 17.2-2010).
         (c)   Safety code for existing elevators and escalators (ASME A 17.3-
2005) upgrades required by section 35(h) of the Elevator Safety Act shall be
completed in the time frame specified therein.
         (d)   Safety standard for platform lifts and stairway chair-lifts
(ASME A 18 1-2008).
         (e)   Standard for the qualifications of elevator inspectors (ASME
QELT-2010).
         (f)   Automated people mover standard (ASCE 21-05), part I, 2005/2006.
         (g)   Automated people mover standards (ANSHASCETT&D121.2-08), parts
2. 3 and 4. 2008.
   (JJJ)   Subsection 702.1.1: Mistaken Egress (Means of Egress, General, add
new subsection)
      Add: Mistaken egress. Any door, passage or stairway which is neither a
means of egress nor access to a means of egress, and which is so located or
arranged as to be mistaken for a means of egress, shall be properly identified
as to its use.
(Prior Code, § 151.02) (Ord. 84-O-1138, passed 1-16-1984; Ord. 04-O-1790,
passed 3-17-2004; Ord. 21-O-2299, passed 4-21-2021; Ord. 21-O-2306, passed 8-
18-2021; Ord. 21-O-2319, passed 12-1-2021; Ord. 22-O-2337, passed 9-7-2022;
Ord. 24-O-2393, passed 7-17-2024; Ord. 25-O-2422, passed 11-5-2025)
§ 151.04 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to design, construct, alter, enlarge, repair,
demolish, remove, use, or maintain any building or structure in the city in
violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter or any other applicable
city ordinance.
   (B)   Application to existing permits. This chapter shall not be construed
to extend to or affect any construction activity for which a permit was issued
or application for permit filed prior to the effective date hereof, except for
fees not yet due or payable, unless the Director of Building and Housing or
his/her designee determines that any provision of this chapter or the
regulations incorporated herein by reference should be applied for reasons of
zoning, health, fire, safety, general welfare of the public and any other
applicable city ordinance requirements.
(Ord. 21-O-2299, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 151.05 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Notice of violation; failure to comply, abatement by city. Any owner
and/or occupant of real estate located within the city upon which a nuisance or
violation as indicated by this chapter exists shall be sent or served a notice
stating the specific violation. If the violation has not been corrected within
seven days after receiving the notice, a citation will be issued by the city
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed
on each day which a violation continues to occur. The penalty for each offense
will be as indicated in this chapter. A court order will then be sought to
allow the city, or a duly authorized contractor, to enter upon the property to
abate the nuisance. The city will also seek reimbursement for abatement of the
nuisance by court order.
   (B)   Costs a lien.
      (1)   Any costs incurred by the city or a duly authorized contractor in
abating a nuisance, violation or any other charge imposed by the city under
this chapter shall be a lien upon the real estate in question as authorized
under the Illinois Municipal Code and shall be superior to all other liens and
encumbrances except tax liens: provided, that within 60 days after such cost
and expense is incurred, the city, or a contractor performing such services as
authorized by the city, in his or in its own name, files notice of lien in the
office of the County Recorder. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement
setting out: a) a description of the real estate sufficient for identification
thereof: b) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service: and c) the date or dates when such cost and expense
was incurred by the city. The lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose
rights in and to such real estate have arisen subsequent to the weed cutting or
property maintenance actions by the city and prior to the filing of the notice
of lien. The lien shall not be valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or
other lien or whose right in and to such real estate arises prior to the filing
of the notice.
      (2)   Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner or other persons
interested in such property after notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall
be released by the city or person in whose name the lien has been filed, and
the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of lien.
(Ord. 21-O-2299, passed 4-21-2021)
§ 151.06 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Property upon which three or more nuisance
activities have occurred within a six-month period as a result of any three
separate factual events that have been independently investigated by any law or
code enforcement agency. For the purposes of this section, the term NUISANCE is
defined to mean any condition or use of the premises or of building exteriors
or the adjoining premises and/or abutting and nearby public streets or alleys
which is detrimental to the property of others, which creates a disorderly
condition or which causes or tends to cause substantial diminution in the value
of other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located.
      NUISANCE ACTIVITIES. The following is a non-exhaustive list of activities
constituting a nuisance and subject to the definition of chronic nuisance
activities. Each activity will be reviewed on a case by case basis. This
definition is not intended to penalize tenants or landlords based upon contact
made to police or other emergency services with the intent to prevent or
respond to domestic or sexual violence or contact concerning an individual with
a disability fora purpose related to their disability.
      (1)   Any activity deemed a nuisance by this municipal code;
      (2)   Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1;
      (3)   Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.;
      (4)   Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1;
      (5)   Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2 and 720 ILCS
5/24-1.5;
      (6)   Gambling as defined by 720 ILCS 5/28-1;
      (7)   Possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substances as
defined by 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.
      (8)   Public indecency as defined by 720 ILCS 5/11-9;
      (9)   Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/
12-1 et seq.;
      (10)   Sexual abuse or related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-15 et
seq.;
      (11)   Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq.;
      (12)   Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq.;
      (13)   Possession, cultivation, manufacture, or delivery of cannabis as
defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.;
      (14)   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235
ILCS 5/1 et seq.;
      (15)   Criminal housing management as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1;
      (16)   Operating an illegal business;
      (17)   Structure unfit for human occupancy as defined in the city’s
Property Maintenance Code;
      (18)   Unsafe structure as defined in the city’s Property Maintenance
Code;
      (19)   Unlawful structure as defined in the city’s Property Maintenance
Code;
      (20)   Multiple and serious violations of the city’s Property Maintenance
Code continuing after disposition of a housing court complaint for those
violations; and
      (21)   Activity that constitutes a violation of a felony or class A
misdemeanor pursuant to a federal or state statute.
   (B)   Violations.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any property within the city to become or
remain a chronic nuisance property in violation of this section.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any owner and/or tenant to:
         (a)   Sufferer permit a property to become a chronic nuisance
property; or
         (b)   Allow a property to continue as a chronic nuisance property.
      (3)   Each day on which the violation of this section continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
   (C)   Review of nuisance activity–warning.
      (1)   The Chief of Police and/or the Director of Building and Housing or
their designee shall review reports of nuisance activities upon a property and
determine whethertwo or more nuisance activities have occurred on a property
within a six-month period.
      (2)   The Chief of Police or Director of Building and Housing or their
designee shall notify the owner, manager or other person in charge and the
tenant if the property is rented that the property is in danger of becoming a
chronic nuisance property. Notice shall be in writing and delivered by personal
delivery or U.S. mail to the taxpayer of record and the property and shall
contain:
         (a)   The street address of the potential nuisance property.
         (b)   A description of the nuisance activities that exist or have
occurred on the property.
         (c)   A warning that a third instance of nuisance activity will result
in a finding of a chronic nuisance property and the exercise of abatement
proceedings.
   (D)   Finding of chronic nuisance property.
      (1)   If, after notice as provided in division (C)(2), an additional
nuisance activity is reported upon the property, the Chief of Police or
Director of Building and Housing or their designee may declare the property to
be a chronic nuisance property. The Chief of Police or Director of Building and
Housing or their designee may commence proceedings to abate the nuisance
conditions in the Circuit Court of Cook County and/or administrative
adjudication proceedings.
      (2)   In the case of a chronic nuisance property that is a rental, the
crime-free housing coordinator may attempt to assist property owners in the
abatement of nuisances or which proceedings for the eviction of tenants that
have permitted, solicited, aided or abeted any nuisances on the property.
      (3)   The Chief of Police or Director of Building and Housing or their
designee my request that a landlord evict a tenant pursuant to the crime free
housing lease provision.
   (E)   Judicial remedies.
      (1)   If a court determines a property to be a chronic nuisance property,
the court may order that the property be closed and secured against all use and
occupancy for a period of not less than 30 days, but not more than 180 days or
the court may employ any other remedy deemed appropriate to abate the nuisance.
      (2)   In determining the remedy or remedies to employ, the court may
consider evidence of other conduct that has occurred on the property, including
but not limited to:
         (a)   Disturbance of neighbors;
         (b)   Occurrence of other nuisances on or from the property; or
         (c)   The property’s general reputation and/or the reputation of
persons in or frequenting the property.
      (3)   The court may authorize the city to physically secure the property
against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within the time
specified by the court. In the event that the city is authorized to secure the
property, all costs reasonably incurred by the city to affect the closure shall
be made and assessed as a lien against the property and a debt to the city.
      (4)   The Department of Building and Housing employee that affects the
closure shall prepare a statement of costs and the city shall thereafter submit
said statement to the court for its review. If no objection to the statement is
made within the period described by the court, a lien in said amount may be
recorded against the property.
      (5)   In addition, the violator shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $500 nor more than $750 per day, payable to the City of Markham, for each
day the owner or his or her agent had actual knowledge that the property was a
chronic nuisance property and permitted the property to remain a chronic
nuisance property.
      (6)   Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty
by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the city.
   (F)   Administrative hearing.
      (1)   The city may issue a property a citation under this section,
subject to administrative adjudication.
      (2)   The city shall be responsible for proving the existence of a
chronic nuisance property by a preponderance of the evidence. The party issued
the citation shall be permitted to rebut such evidence.
      (3)   The Administrative Hearing Officer shall determine whether or not
the property qualifies as a chronic nuisance property. If the property is
deemed a chronic nuisance property the Administrative Hearing Officer shall
either issue a fine not to exceed $750, order abatement, or both.
      (4)   The finding of the Administrative Hearing Officer and issuance of a
fine shall not preclude the city from pursuing additional judicial remedies.
(Ord. 23-O-2352, passed 3-15-2023)
ADDITIONAL HOUSING REGULATIONS
§ 151.15 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or
public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean
and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he or she occupies and controls.
   (C)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
or her rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish
containers required by this code.
   (D)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
or her garbage and other organic waste which might provide food for rodents, in
a clean and sanitary manner, by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities
or garbage storage containers required by §
151.16(F) of this chapter. It shall be the joint and several responsibility and
duty of the owner, landlord, tenant and occupant of all dwelling units in any
building containing more than one dwelling unit to supply the required garbage
disposal facilities as provided in §
151.16(F) of this chapter. In all other cases, it shall be the responsibility
of the occupant to furnish such facilities or containers.
   (E)   Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for
hanging all screens whenever the same are required under the provisions of this
chapter, except where the owner has agreed to supply such service.
   (F)   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall
be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling
containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such
extermination whenever his or her dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this division (F), whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a rat-
proof or reasonable insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the
dwelling units in any dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any
dwelling of two or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
   (G)   Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the
exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
(Prior Code, § 151.10) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.16 BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall obtain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a water system and sewer system of the city
or an adequate existing septic installation.
   (B)   Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a
person within the room and which is equipped with a flush water closet and a
lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected to the water
and sewer systems of the city or an adequate existing septic installation.
   (C)   Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy
to a person within the room, a bathtub or shower in good working condition and
properly connected to the water and sewer system of the city or an adequate
existing septic installation.
   (D)   Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower required
under the provisions of divisions (A), (B) and (C) above shall be properly
connected with both hot and cold water lines.
   (E)   Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage
containers in accordance with the provisions of this code.
   (F)   Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers in accordance with the provision of this code.
   (G)   Every dwelling shall have supplied water heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, are
properly connected with the hot water lines required under the provisions of
division (D) above, and are capable of heating water to such a temperature as
to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen
sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or shower at a temperature of not less than
120°F. Such supplied water heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the
requirements of this division (G) when the dwelling unit heating facilities
required under the provisions of §
151.18(E) of this chapter are not in operation.
   (H)   Every dwelling unit shall have a minimum of two safe, unobstructed
means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level.
(Prior Code, § 151.11) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964)
§ 151.17 LIGHT, VENTILATION AND HEATING.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight,
facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area measured between
stops for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area of such room.
Whenever walls or other portions of structure face a window of any such room
and such light obstruction structures are located less than three feet from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the rooms, such a
window shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total
window area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight type window in
the top of such room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at
least 15% of the total floor area of such room.
   (B)   Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which
can easily be opened or such other device as will adequately ventilate the
room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall be equal
to at least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight type window
size, as required in division (A) above, except where there is supplied some
other device affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Board of Health
and/or Director of Building and Housing.
   (C)   Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in divisions
(A) and (B) above; except that, no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with an
openable ventilation system which is approved by the Board and/or Director of
Building and Housing.
   (D)   Every habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least two
separate floor or wall type electric convenience outlets, or one such
convenience outlet and one supplied ceiling-type electric light fixture; and
every water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public
hall shall contain at least one supplied ceiling- or wall-type electric light
fixture. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be
connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner.
   (E)   Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly
installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition, and are capable
of safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water
closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a temperature of
at least 70°F, at a distance three feet above floor level, under ordinary
minimum winter conditions.
   (F)   Every public passageway and stairway in every multiple dwelling
containing five or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all
times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling
occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with
conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system
which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting.
   (G)   During that portion of each year from May 1 through October 31, for
protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects, every door opening
directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have supplied screens and
a self-closing device; and every window or other device with openings to
outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise be
supplied with screens.
   (H)   Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry
for rodents shall be supplied with a screen or such other device as will
effectively prevent their entrance.
(Prior Code, § 151.12) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.18 SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.
   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any
dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not
comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weather-tight and rodent-proof, shall be capable of affording privacy and shall
be kept in good repair.
   (B)   Every window, exterior door, and basement hatchway shall be reasonably
weather-tight, water-tight and rodent-proof and shall be kept in sound working
condition and good repair.
   (C)   Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of supporting
the load that normal use may cause to be place thereon and shall be kept in
sound condition and good repair.
   (D)   Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects,
leaks and obstruction.
   (E)   Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably impervious
to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
   (F)   Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is
required under this subchapter shall be so constructed or installed that it
will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory
working condition.
   (G)   No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this subchapter to be removed from
or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or occupied by
him or her, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary when
actual repairs or alterations are in process or during temporary emergencies
when discontinuance of service is approved by the Director of Building and
Housing.
(Prior Code, § 151.13) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.19 SPACE, USE AND LOCATION.
   No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements.
   (A)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor
space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
   (B)   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 30 square feet of floor space for each
additional occupant thereof.
   (C)   No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping room can be
had only by going through another sleeping room; nor shall room arrangements be
such that access to a sleeping room can be had only by going through another
sleeping room or a bathroom or water closet compartment.
   (D)   At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have
a ceiling height of at least seven feet; and the floor area of that part of any
room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum
permissible occupancy thereof.
   (E)   No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
   (F)   No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling
unless:
      (1)   The floors and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;
      (2)   The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes as required in §
151.17(A) of this chapter;
      (3)   Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area; and
      (4)   The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least
the minimum as required under §
151.17(B) of this chapter, except where there is supplied some other device
affording adequate ventilation and approved by the Board of Health and/or
Director of Building and Housing.
(Prior Code, § 151.14) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.20 COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS.
   The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such dwellings or
dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the following
requirements.
(Prior Code, § 151.15) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964)
§ 151.21 DETERMINATION OF DEFECTS; PLACARD.
   Any dwelling unit, which shall be found to have any of the following
defects, shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and shall be so
designated and placarded by the duly authorized inspector:
   (A)   One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or
vermin-infected that it creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the
occupants or the public or is a fire hazard, threatening damage to human life
or to neighboring property;
   (B)   One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the public;
and/or
   (C)   One which because of its general condition or location is unsanitary,
or a fire hazard, or otherwise dangerous, to the health or safety of the
occupants or of the public.
(Prior Code, § 151.16) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964)
§ 151.22 VACATION OF CONDEMNED DWELLINGS.
   Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation, and
so designated and placarded by the duly authorized inspector, shall be vacated
within a reasonable length of time, of not less than ten days, as ordered by
such inspector.
(Prior Code, § 151.17) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964)
§ 151.23 WRITTEN APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR HABITATION AFTER DWELLING DECLARED
UNFIT.
   No dwelling or dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit
for human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written
approval is secured from the Board of Health. The Director of Building and
Housing shall remove the placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding were based have been eliminated.
(Prior Code, § 151.18) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.24 PLACARD; REMOVING OR DEFACING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or dwelling
unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation and placarded,
except by orders of the Board of Health.
(Prior Code, § 151.19) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.25 HEARING TO BE GRANTED BEFORE BOARD OF HEALTH.
   Any person affected by any notice or order relating to condemning and
placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation may
request and shall be granted a hearing before the Board of Health under
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 151.20) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964)
§ 151.26 INSPECTION OF DWELLINGS AND PREMISES; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The Director of Building and Housing or his or her duly authorized
representative are authorized and directed to make inspections to determine the
condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and premises located
within the city, in order that they may perform their duties of safeguarding
the health and safety of the occupants of dwelling and of the general public.
For the purpose of making such inspections, the Director of Building and
Housing or his or her duly authorized representative are authorized to enter,
examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units,
rooming units and premises.
   (B)   The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming
unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Director of Building and
Housing or his or her duly authorized agent free access to such dwelling,
dwelling unit and rooming unit, and its premises, at all reasonable times for
the purpose of such inspection, examination and survey after written notice
stating the need has been given to the owner, owners or his, her or their agent
to determine whether buildings used in whole or part for purposes of human
habitation conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   On the first year anniversary date of registration or designation by
the city of the premises as a rental unit and on that date each year
thereafter, commencing in the year 2004, the Building Department of the city
shall conduct an interior and exterior inspection of all rental property in the
city. During the course of the month of May of each year, the owner of the
rental premises or his or her agent shall pay to the city the sum of $75 prior
to the completion of the inspection. Thereafter, a certificate of rental
occupancy inspection for that ensuing year shall be issued.
   (D)   From January 10 through February 20 of each year, commencing 1-10-
2005, the owner of any real property used as rental property within the city or
any area subject to jurisdiction of the city shall file a registration form as
provided by the city’s Building Department for each parcel of rental property
owned along with the payment of an annual registration fee of $10 for each
parcel so owned.
(Prior Code, § 151.21) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964; Ord. 04-O-1780, passed 1-21-
2004; Ord. 04-O-1789, passed 3-17-2004)
§ 151.27 INSPECTION OF REAL PROPERTY PRIOR TO SALE, RENTAL OR TRANSFER OF
TITLE.
   (A)   No later than 21 days prior to the sale, rental or transfer of title
of real property located within the city and within the area governed by the
city’s Building Department regulations, either party to the transaction shall
notify the city of such impending sale, rental or transfer of title to real
property and request an inspection pursuant to this section and the issuance of
an occupancy permit therefor.
   (B)   No person(s), group, business or otherwise shall be permitted to
occupy such real property unless a certificate of occupancy is issued on or
before the date of such transaction.
   (C)   The fee for the conduct of the necessary inspection shall be as
follows:
      (1)   (a)   For a one-family residence of not more than three levels
renting: a fee of $100; and
         (b)   For a one-family residence of not more than three levels
selling: a fee of $450.
      (2)   For a one-floor apartment or condominium, if ever permitted, within
a multi-floor apartment or condominium building: a fee of $450;
      (3)   For a one-story, free-standing structure designed for food or
beverage service: a fee of $650;
      (4)   For a one-story, free-standing storefront structure: a fee of $550;
and
      (5)   For a one-story, multi-storefront structure: a per-unit fee of
$850.
   (D)   The applicant for such inspection shall pay a filing fee of $50 at the
time of such application.
(Prior Code, § 151.22) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964; Ord. 67-O-675, passed - -
1967; Ord. 04-O-1781, passed 2-4-2004; Ord. 05-O-1825, passed 2-16-2005; Ord.
05-O-1830, passed 4-6-2005; Ord. 05-O-1839, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 05-O-1840,
passed 10-19-2005)
§ 151.28 CERTIFICATION OF STRUCTURE ESTABLISHING CONFORMITY WITH STANDARDS
REQUIRED; INSPECTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation
or association to convey or rent or cause to be conveyed or rented to any other
person, persons, firm, corporation or association any interest in real estate
situated within the geographical boundaries of the city, which is improved with
a structure or structures intended to be used for residence purposes without
first having obtained from the city a certificate evidencing such structure to
be in conformity with the minimum construction, health and safety standards of
this code. Any such certificate, once issued, shall remain valid for the
purpose of compliance with the requirements hereof for a period of 30 days next
following the date of issuance of such certificate.
   (B)   Any person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or association
desiring to secure certification of a structure as complying with the minimum
standards as set out in this chapter shall file with the city a request that
the premises for which such certification is sought be inspected. Such request
for inspection shall be accompanied by payment to the city the appropriate fee
as established herein for such inspection.
   (C)   Upon receipt by the city, of a request for such inspection, the
Director of Building and Housing shall inspect or cause to be inspected, the
premises in question and deliver to the party requesting same, either:
      (1)   A certification that the premises in question conforms to the
minimum construction, health and safety standards as set forth in this code; or
      (2)   A specification of those particular items that, by reason of their
existence, cause the property in question to fall below the minimum
construction, health and safety standards set forth in this code.
   (D)   (1)   In the event that a structure once inspected pursuant to the
provisions hereof shall have failed to meet the minimum standards of
construction, health and safety as aforesaid, the party requesting the initial
inspection may, upon the tender to the city of the additional inspection fee
provided for herein, request an additional inspection of the premises in
questions.
      (2)   Following such additional inspection of the premises in question,
the Director of Building and Housing shall advise the applicant of the results
of said inspection, as in the case of initial inspections pursuant to division
(C) above.
   (E)   Fees for inspection of residential structures pursuant to the
requirements hereof shall be as follows:
      (1)   For an initial inspection: the sum of $50;
      (2)   For subsequent inspections not exceeding two in number: the sum of
$30;
      (3)   For subsequent inspections beyond those provided for in division
(E)(2) above: the sum of $30 per inspection; and
      (4)   Subsequent or follow-up inspections necessitated by reason of
expiration of a certificate of inspection pursuant to the terms and provisions
of division (A) above: the sum of $30.
(Prior Code, § 151.23) (Ord. 87-O-1292, passed 9-16-1987; Ord. 01-O-1717,
passed 7-5-2001) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.29 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS; NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS; HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever the Director of Building and Housing or his or her duly
authorized representative determine that there are reasonable grounds to
believe that there has been a violation of any provision of this subchapter, he
or she shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor, as provided. Such notice shall:
      (1)   Be put in writing;
      (2)   Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued;
      (3)   Allow a reasonable time (not less than ten days) for the
performance of any act it requires;
      (4)   Be served upon the owner or his or her agent, or the occupant, as
the case may require; provided that such, notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such owner or agent, or upon such occupant, if a copy thereof is
sent by registered mail to his or her last known address; or if a copy thereof
is posted in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling affected by the
notice; and
      (5)   Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   (1)   Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this subchapter, or of any
rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the Board of Health; provided that, such person
shall file in the office of the Director of Building and Housing a written
petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within ten days after the date the notice was served.
      (2)   Upon receipt of such petition, the Board shall set a time and place
for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice thereof. At such
hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show
why such notice should be modified or withdrawn.
      (3)   The hearing shall be commenced not later than ten days after the
day on which the petition was filed; provided that, upon application of the
petitioner, the Board may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable
time beyond such ten-day period, if, in the judgment of the Board, the
petitioner has submitted a good and sufficient reason for such postponement.
      (4)   All hearings on any petition shall be open to the public.
   (C)   After such hearing, the Board shall sustain, modify or withdraw the
notice, depending upon its findings as to whether the provisions of this
subchapter have been complied with. If the Board sustains or modifies such
notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to
division (A) above shall automatically become an order if a written petition
for ten days after such notice is served. After a hearing in the case of any
notice suspending any permit required by this subchapter when such notice has
been sustained by the Board, the permit shall be deemed to be automatically
revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed with the Board within ten days
after such notice is served. The Director of Building and Housing or inspectors
serving the notice upon which a petition for review is filed shall be allowed
to be present, cross-examine witnesses and be cross-examined by petitioner.
   (D)   The petitioner may, if he or she so desires, furnish and pay a court
reporter acceptable to the Board, who shall transcribe all matters of his or
her hearing and furnish a copy to the Board. The Board shall make a finding of
facts, which finding of facts shall be reduced to writing. The decision of the
Board shall also be reduced to writing. All orders of the Board shall also be
reduced to writing. The Board shall prepare a record consisting of the notice,
the petition for a hearing, the statement of finding the facts, all decision
and orders of the Board and deposit the same in the office of the Director of
Building and Housing for public inspection.
   (E)   Whenever the duly authorized Inspector finds that an emergency exists
which requires immediate action to protect the public health, he or she may,
without notice of hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he or she deems necessary
to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subchapter,
such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is
directed shall comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Board
shall be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing, depending
upon his or her finding as to whether the provisions of this subchapter have
been complied with, the Board shall continue such order in effect, modify it or
revoke it.
(Prior Code, § 151.24) (Ord. 540, passed - -1964)
§ 151.30 TRANSFER STAMPS REQUIREMENT UPON REAL ESTATE TRANSFER.
   (A)   Transfer stamp required. No owner, agent or person in charge of a
single- or multi-family residential unit or structure or commercial or
industrial unit or structure or vacant lot or parcel of land (hereinafter
“applicable property”) shall sell, convey, quit claim, trade or otherwise
transfer same unless and until the grantor or seller obtains a city-issued
transfer stamp. The purpose of the transfer stamp is to evidence compliance
with the inspection, water meter reading and payment of all outstanding fees
required prior to the transfer of real estate as stated within this section.
This requirement shall be reflected on all real estate title insurance reports
and copies of this section shall be sent to all title insurance companies with
notice that a mandatory transfer stamp is required on any transfer of ownership
of real estate in the city. The transfer stamps are not transferable nor
refundable. The Cook County Clerk shall not record a deed unless a transfer
stamp is affixed to the deed.
   (B)   Transfer stamp requirements. The following are required before the
city may issue a transfer stamp:
      (1)   Payment by the seller of the inspection and transfer stamp fees, as
follows:
Residential sale property inspection    $200 (one re-inspection within 60 days)
fee                                     Expedited fee: $275
Commercial sale property inspection fee $300 (one re-inspection within 60 days)
                                        Expedited fee: $375
Residential sale re-inspection fee      $100 (required after 60 days and for
                                        all additional re- inspections)
Commercial sale re-inspection fee       $200 (required after 60 days and for
                                        all additional re- inspections)
                                        $100 (for each permanent index number)
Transfer stamp fee                      Expedited fee: $150 (for each permanent
                                        index number)
 
      (2)   A property inspection conducted by the Building and Housing
Department, as evidenced by a property inspection report.
      (3)   Payment of all outstanding taxes, liens, charges and/or fines owed
to the city for the property or in the name of the seller.
      (4)   A final water meter reading and payment of all charges due for
water and sewer based upon the final meter reading.
   (C)   Application. The owner of applicable property shall file an
application for a transfer stamp with the Building and Housing Department and
an application for final meter reading with the Water Department not less than
21 days prior to any applicable transfer of property under this section.
   (D)   Expedited applications. Applications made less than 21 business days
prior to the applicable transfer shall be subject to the expedited fees stated
herein.
   (E)   Inspection. An inspector in the Building and Housing Department will
be available at an appointed time as mutually agreed upon with the applicant to
inspect such dwelling or structure. If such inspection establishes that the
dwelling or structure complies with the minimum provisions of the city’s code,
then the city shall issue a passing property inspection report.
   (F)   Violation report, as-is affidavit, inclement weather affidavit. In the
event the property inspection shows the property does not meet the minimum
requirements of this code, the Building and Housing Department shall issue a
violation report.
      (1)   The buyer or transferee of the property shall be required to
execute an “as-is sale affidavit” and take responsibility for correcting the
violations listed within 30 days of transfer. The city may only extend the time
for completion of the violations in writing upon the request of the buyer or
transferee.
      (2)   If a property is purchased during inclement weather (October to
March) the buyer or transferee of the property shall be required to execute an
“inclement weather affidavit” and take responsibility for correcting the
violations listed by May 1 following the date of transfer. The city may only
extend the time for completion of the violations in writing upon the request of
the buyer or transferee.
      (3)   Failure to comply with the as-is affidavit or inclement weather
affidavit and repair all violations shall result in penalties including but not
limited to: the issuance of citations; nuisance abatement by the city or the
pursuit of additional legal and equitable remedies.
      (4)   Temporary certificate of occupancy. If the violation report does
not include any life safety violations, the Building and Housing Department may
issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a period of no more than six
months for the following reasons: an occupied property that is purchased with a
current tenant or a property that is purchased during inclement weather
(October to March). The city may extend a temporary certificate of occupancy
for an additional period of up to six months upon the written request of the
owner; provided that, the new owner, agent or person in charge of such unit or
structure has completed 50% or more of all necessary and required repairs. In
the event the violations enumerated in the violation report are not corrected
within the six-month duration of the temporary certificate of occupancy and any
agreed upon extension thereto, the temporary certificate of occupancy shall be
revoked and the owner shall be subject to all citations, fees, fines and legal
action available to the city.
   (G)   Disclaimer. The city does not warrant the condition of any property
inspected and shall not be responsible for any claims arising out of the
property or the condition thereof. The city does not warrant that all
deficiencies are listed in the inspection report and does not warrant anything
as to the condition of the property or the liability thereof. The issuance of
the inspection and transfer stamp and/or temporary certificate of occupancy
shall not operate as a waiver of any right of the city to prosecute an owner or
occupant of any real estate for any violation of any city ordinance.
   (H)   Exempt transfers. Where the city is the transferor of real estate, the
transaction shall be exempt from the requirements of this section and an exempt
transfer stamp shall be issued.
   (I)   Penalty. Any person, owner, agent, firm or corporation violating the
terms and provisions of this §
151.30 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750.
Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In
addition to the foregoing penalties, the city may also institute a civil action
against the violator to compel compliance with this § 151.30. In the event
civil action is necessary, then the city may recover reasonable attorney’s fees
and costs from the violator.
(Prior Code, § 151.25) (Ord. 06-O-1857, passed 5-3-2006; Ord. 06-O-1868, passed
7-5-2006; Ord. 08-O-1914, passed 4-2-2008; Ord. 19-O-2242, passed 12-4-2019;
Ord. 21-O-2307, passed 8-18-2021; Ord. 23-O-2374, passed 10-4-2023)
OCCUPANCY REGULATIONS
§ 151.45 APPLICATION.
   The procedural provisions of this subchapter shall apply upon the transfer
of interest, ownership or occupancy of one-family dwellings and annually for
other dwelling structures to secure and maintain the license required of
multiple unit dwellings.
(Prior Code, § 151.35) (Ord. 06-O-1863, passed 5-7-2006)
§ 151.46 RESERVED.
§ 151.47 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The enforcement official for this subchapter shall be the Director of
Building and Housing for the city unless otherwise specifically provided.
(Prior Code, § 151.37) (Ord. 06-O-1863, passed 5-7-2006)
§ 151.48 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Right of entry. In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare
of the public, the Director of Building and Housing is authorized to attempt at
any time to obtain consent to entry from any owner, occupant or other person in
charge of a dwelling or structure subject to this subchapter. Such owner,
occupant or other person in charge shall be informed that entry by the Director
of Building and Housing is sought for the purpose of making an inspection and
performing duties under this subchapter. Failure to give consent to entry under
this section shall not be punishable by fine or imprisonment. Notwithstanding
any other provisions of this code when the city conducts inspections of a
tenant’s apartment in a multiple-family dwelling or any other dwelling that is
not owner- occupied, the city must obtain the consent of such tenant or non-
owner occupant to conduct the inspection. If such tenant refuses consent, the
city may attempt to obtain a warrant pursuant to this subchapter.
   (B)   Inspection upon transfer. No owner, agent or person in charge of a
one-family dwelling or multiple- family apartment shall sell or allow any
person to occupy the same as a tenant or lessee unless the owner, agent or
person in charge of such dwelling or structure has notified the Building
Department of the intent to sell or lease such dwelling or structure. Notice
shall be in writing and must be received by the Building Department no later
than eight working days before the proposed sale or lease.
   (C)   Attempted inspection by the Director of Building and Housing.
      (1)   Upon receiving notice of the intent to sell or lease a dwelling or
structure as described in division (B) above, the Director of Building and
Housing shall attempt to inspect such dwelling or structure to determine
whether the dwelling or structure is in compliance with all of the provisions
of this code that pertain to health and safety. The Director of Building and
Housing shall attempt to make the inspection within five working days before
the date of the proposed sale or lease during a week or part thereof, when
normal business activities are carried on by the city. If the city fails to
complete the inspection within this time frame, the city shall not delay or
prevent a sale or lease of a dwelling or structure and shall not refuse to
issue any necessary water or transfer stamps. Failure to consent to an
inspection under this section shall not constitute an offense against the city
and shall not be punishable by fine or imprisonment, nor shall such failure to
consent prevent the sale or lease of a dwelling or structure.
      (2)   Any inspection conducted pursuant to this section shall be as
limited as possible to allow the Director of Building and Housing to inspect
the dwelling or structure to determine whether there are violations of the code
that pertain to health and safety. No later than two days before the Director
of Building and Housing is scheduled to conduct the inspection, the Director of
Building and Housing shall deliver to the owner and all occupants of the
structure or dwelling written notice that the includes the following:
         (a)   The date and time of the inspection;
         (b)   A statement identifying the area of the exterior or interior of
the structure or dwelling to be inspected and a listing of items that will be
inspected in each area;
         (c)   A statement that the owner, agent or person in charge has the
right to withhold his or her consent to the inspection;
         (d)   A statement that, if the owner, agent or person in charge
withholds his or her consent to the search, the city may not prevent the sale
or lease of a dwelling or structure, including by refusing to issue any
necessary water or transfer stamps; and
         (e)   A statement that the inspection shall be as limited as possible
to allow the Director of Building and Housing to inspect the dwelling or
structure to determine whether there are violations of this code that pertain
to health and safety related to electrical, plumbing, structural integrity,
security, heating and fire issues.
   (D)   Inspection by warrant. If the owner, agent, occupant or person in
charge of a dwelling or structure does not consent to the attempted inspection
described above, the Director of Building and Housing shall seek in the Circuit
Court of the county, a warrant according to the appropriate laws of the state.
The warrant shall be for the purpose of making an inspection to determine
whether the dwelling or structure is in compliance with all of the provisions
of this code that pertain to health and safety. The application for the warrant
must include a statement that the inspection will be as limited as possible to
determine whether there are violations of this chapter that pertain to health
and safety issues related to electrical, plumbing, structural integrity,
security, heating and fire safety issues. A warrant obtained pursuant to this
section shall be executed and an inspection shall be made no less than three
working days before the date of the proposed sale or lease. The term THREE
DAYS, in this instance, shall mean any three days during a week or part thereof
when normal business activities are carried on by the city. An owner, agent,
occupant or person in charge of a dwelling or structure who is presented with a
warrant obtained pursuant to this section shall not refuse, impede, inhibit,
interfere with, restrict or obstruct entry and free access to any part of the
dwelling, structure or premises where an inspection authorized by the warrant
is sought to be made.
   (E)   Annual inspection. It shall be the policy of the city to inspect all
rental or leased dwelling units or dwelling structures on an annual basis in
connection with the license requirement of this subchapter. Such inspection
shall comply with provisions of this subchapter.
   (F)   Qualifications. Individuals conducting inspections pursuant to this
subchapter shall be qualified to make such inspections.
   (G)   Duties of Director of Building and Housing. The Director of Building
and Housing shall provide an inspection report to the owner, agent, occupant or
other person in charge of a dwelling or structure upon completion of the
inspection that identifies those matters which must be remedied to comply with
the provisions of the code that pertain to health and safety. Upon any
reinspection, the City Inspector shall be entitled to confirm that such matters
have been properly remedied and that such remedial work has not created any new
conditions that do not comply with the provisions of this code that pertain to
health and safety issues, but the Director of Building and Housing shall be
prohibited from raising any new matter or requiring any further remediation not
contained in his or her original report if the conditions existed as of the
time of the original inspection. Reinspection must occur within five working
days after the city is notified that the dwelling or structure is ready for
reinspection.
(Prior Code, § 151.38) (Ord. 06-O-1863, passed 5-7-2006)
§ 151.49 APPEALS.
   Any person to whom any order required by this subchapter is directed shall
comply therewith. Such person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the
Appeals Board, be afforded a hearing as prescribed in this subchapter. The
Board of Appeals shall consist of the Building Commission. The Building
Commissioner shall act as Chairperson and will vote in the case under appeal
only if there is a tie vote. Depending upon the finding of the Board at such
hearing as to whether the provisions of this subchapter have been complied
with, the Board shall continue such order or modify or revoke it.
(Prior Code, § 151.39) (Ord. 06-O-1863, passed 5-7-2006)
§ 151.50 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Requirements. If an inspection has been made pursuant to this
subchapter, no owner, agent or person in charge of a one-family dwelling or
multiple-family apartment house shall sell, convey, transfer, assign or
otherwise dispose of ownership by any form of deed, document of conveyance or
assignment, either of title or of the beneficial interest in a trust of any
kind or otherwise, or by successor in interest through inter vivos conveyance
or through bequest or inheritance, or otherwise the property unless a water
stamp has been issued and/or allow any person to occupy the same as the owner
or as a tenant or lease unless the Building Department has issued a certificate
of occupancy for such dwelling or structure.
      (1)   A water stamp and/or certificate of occupancy shall be issued only
if:
         (a)   The Building Department has determined that the dwelling or
structure is in compliance with all the provisions of this code that pertain to
health and safety; and
         (b)   The owner has filed with the Building Department a roofing
certificate from a roofing contractor licensed and bonded with the state which
certificate provides substantially as follows:
            1.   The inspection of the roof reveals that the roof covering is
in satisfactory condition with no evidence of leaks; roof is water-tight, not
worn out and has an estimated physical life of three years; and
            2.   However, no roof certification shall be required if the owner,
agent or person in charge submits to the Building Department proof that the
roof has been replaced or repaired within 12 months from the date of the
proposed sale or lease.
      (2)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this subchapter, any owner,
agent or person in charge of a one- family dwelling or a multiple-family
apartment house shall be allowed to sell, convey, transfer, assign or otherwise
dispose of ownership by any form of deed, document of conveyance or assignment
either of title or of the beneficial interest in a trust of any kind, or
otherwise or by successor in interest through inter vivos conveyance or through
bequest or inheritance.
         (a)   If the owner, agent or person in charge of the dwelling or
structure has deposited in escrow an amount of money determined by the Building
Department to be sufficient to bring the dwelling or structure into compliance
with all of the requirements of this code that pertain to health and safety;
and
         (b)   The owner, agent, buyer, conveyee, assignee or successor in
title, ownership or interest, however accomplished, lessee or person in charge
of the dwelling or structure has entered into an agreement with the city
whereby the buyer, conveyee, transferee, assignee or successor in title,
ownership or interest, however accomplished or lessee agrees to bring the
dwelling or structure into compliance with the provisions of this code that
pertain to health and safety within the time period determined by the Building
Department, and the city agrees to immediately issue a water stamp and to issue
a certificate of occupancy upon completion of the repairs and remedial work
necessary to bring the dwelling or structure into compliance with the
provisions of this code that pertain to health and safety. No certificate of
occupancy shall issue until the dwelling or structure has been determined to be
in compliance with all the provisions of this code that pertain to health and
safety.
      (3)   The city shall not refuse to issue a water stamp and/or a
certificate of occupancy on any ground other than the building or dwelling is
not in compliance with the provisions of this code that pertain to health and
safety. By way of example, the city shall not refuse to issue a water stamp
and/or certificate of occupancy on any ground related to the city’s opinion
regarding cosmetics. As part of the inspection process, the city shall not
require owners, agents, buyers, lessees or persons in charge of the dwelling or
structure to make any cosmetic changes (e.g., painting walls, repairing carpet)
that are unrelated to legitimate health and safety concerns. The city shall not
administratively suspend the provisions of this subchapter that permit sale or
lease of dwellings or structures pursuant to this subchapter.
      (4)   Failure of the owner or buyer, conveyee, transferee, assignee or
successor in title, ownership or interest, however accomplished, or lessee to
fulfill the terms of the agreement in these sections hereof or to bring the
dwelling or structure into compliance with all the provisions of this code
identified in the inspection report that constitute a violation of this
subchapter, such violations continue until the dwelling or structure is in
compliance with the provisions of this code.
         (a)   If reasonable proof is not received by or shown to the Building
Department or another authorized representative of the city designated by the
governing body for the city within the period of time established by the
Building Department as the period of time for said repairs to be completed, the
city may elect to suspend water services to the premises pending proof of
completion of repairs. The city may, at its sole option and discretion, provide
for temporary water service to the premises as documents necessary and
appropriate for repairs to be made and completed to the dwelling or structure.
         (b)   With respect to a repair escrow, if reasonable proof that the
repairs have been completed is not received by or shown to the Building
Department or other authorized representative of the city designated by the
governing body of the city, within the escrow time period established by the
Building Department as the time period for said repairs to be completed, the
city at its sole and exclusive option, shall declare the escrow deposit
forfeited and/or shall issue a citation violation of this subchapter and/or
escrow agreement and shall use the escrow funds to secure, or repair the
structure so that it will be in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
         (c)   If after the lapse of the established time period for repair,
the city secures the repair of the structure, the city shall reimburse itself
from the retained repair escrow funds. No more than 15% of the escrow funds may
be used by the city for administrative expenses, which must directly relate to
the city’s efforts to coordinate, oversee or otherwise accomplish the repairs
that must be made pursuant to the agreement entered into pursuant to this
subchapter. Any unused portion of the retained proceeds shall be returned to
the buyer/owner or lessee.
         (d)   There shall be no liability on the part of, and a cause of
action shall not arise against the city or its agents or employees of the city
in the course of enforcing or complying or attempting to comply with the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Issuance of certificate shall not constitute a warranty. In issuing a
certificate of occupancy, the city does not intend to, nor does it warrant,
insure or guarantee to the holder thereof, to his or her assignee or other
interested party, that there are no violations of this code or laws of the
state.
(Prior Code, § 151.40) (Ord. 06-O-1863, passed 5-7-2006)
§ 151.51 SALE OR LEASE IN ABSENCE OF INSPECTION.
   If an inspection is not made pursuant to the requirements of this
subchapter, nothing shall prohibit the sale or lease of a one-family or
multiple-family apartment house unless an owner, agent or person in charge of
such dwelling or structure is interfering with or impeding an inspection
authorized by a warrant obtained pursuant to this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 151.41) (Ord. 06-O-1863, passed 5-7-2006)
§ 151.52 PROCUREMENT OF WARRANT.
   (A)   A search warrant in connection with this subchapter shall be sought in
the Circuit Court of the county. The court may consider any of the following
factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as
to whether a warrant shall issue:
      (1)   Eyewitness account of violation;
      (2)   Citizens’ complaints;
      (3)   Tenant complaints;
      (4)   Plain view violations;
      (5)   Violation apparent from city records;
      (6)   Property deteriorated;
      (7)   Age of property;
      (8)   Nature of alleged violation;
      (9)   Similar properties in the area;
         (10)   Documented violations on similar properties in the area;
         (11)   Passage of time since last inspection; and
         (12)   Previous violations on the property.
   (B)   The application for warrant shall specify the basis on which the
warrant is being sought and shall contain a statement that the inspection will
be as limited as possible to determine whether there are violations of this
code that pertain to health and safety issues related to electrical, plumbing,
structural integrity, security, heating and fire safety issues.
   (C)   The warrant shall provide that any inspection made pursuant to the
warrant shall be as limited in scope as possible to allow the inspector to
determine whether the structure or dwelling is in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter that pertain to health and safety related to
electrical, plumbing, structural integrity, heating and fire safety issues.
(Prior Code, § 151.42) (Ord. 06-O-1863, passed 5-7-2006)
§ 151.53 FEES.
   (A)   (1)   The fee for an inspection of a one-family dwelling shall be $25.
      (2)   The fee for inspection of a multi-family apartment house shall be
$25 per dwelling unit.
      (3)   The fee shall be double for any one-family dwelling or multiple-
family apartment if actions are taken that do not conform with other sections
of this subchapter.
      (4)   No fee shall be charged for any necessary reinspection of any
building or dwelling unless the non- owner occupant or person in charge of the
building or dwelling has failed to appear for two previous scheduled
inspections.
(Prior Code, § 151.43)
   (B)   Fees and fines set forth in the attachment to Ord. 04-O-1799 are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 04-O-1799, passed 3-21-2004; Ord. 06-O-1863, passed 5-7-2006)
§ 151.54 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Building Department shall be empowered to promulgate reasonable rules
and regulations not inconsistent with the terms and provisions of this
subchapter in order to enforce the provisions contained herein. Such rules
shall be in writing and copies of this subchapter, such rules and forms of
application and inspection reports shall be filed and available at the office
of the City Clerk and the Building Department.
(Prior Code, § 151.44) (Ord. 06-O-1863, passed 5-7-2006)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, owner, agent, firm, or corporation violating the terms and
provisions of §§
151.01 through
151.05 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750. Each
day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Should a
provision in
Chapter 151 conflict with that of §§
151.01 through
151.05, the most restrictive and punitive provision shall govern.
   (C)   Any person who violates any provision of §§
151.15 through
151.27 of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $10, nor
more than $200, and each day’s failure to comply with any such provision shall
constitute a separate violation.
   (D)   Any person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation or association
found guilty of violation of the provisions of §
151.28 of this chapter shall be fined a sum not to exceed $500.
(Prior Code, § 151.99)
   (E)   Reserved.
   (F)   (1)   The fine for violations of §
151.50 of this chapter shall be $750 per day for each day the violation remains
uncorrected.
(Prior Code, § 151.40)
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
§§
151.45 through
151.54 of this chapter or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof shall be guilty of an offense against the city, punishable by a fine of
not less than $50, nor more than $750, and such other penalties as may be
provided. Each day that a violation persists shall be deemed a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 151.45)
(Ord. 540, passed - -1964; Ord. 87-O-1292, passed 9-16-1978; Ord. 06-O-1857,
passed 5-3-2006; Ord. 06-O-1863, passed 5-7-2006; Ord. 06-O-1868, passed 7-5-
2006; Ord. 08-O-1914, passed 4-2-2008; Ord. 21-O-2299, passed 4-21-2021; Ord.
21-O-2306, passed 8-18-2021; Ord. 23-O-2374, passed 10-4-2023)
CHAPTER 152: NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION AREAS
Section
   
152.01   Establishment; purpose
   
152.02   Designation of neighborhood preservation areas
§ 152.01 ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established a Neighborhood Preservation Program:
   (A)   To prevent the deterioration of housing, neighborhood facilities and
abandonment of public ways by the city’s neighborhoods;
   (B)   To preserve, coordinate and concentrate maintenance efforts by the
city in designated neighborhoods;
   (C)   To promote private investment in those neighborhoods; and
   (D)   To promote community involvement in all such activities.
(Prior Code, § 152.01) (Ord. 79-O-1004, passed 4-2-1979)
§ 152.02 DESIGNATION OF NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION AREAS.
   (A)   The city has reviewed conditions in the community to determine which
neighborhoods within the city should be considered for designation as
neighborhood preservation areas and is developing appropriate programs for each
neighborhood so designated.
   (B)   (1)   After consultation with community representatives and following
open public hearings to consider the designation of such areas, the following
four areas are designated as neighborhood preservation areas:
         (a)   Neighborhood Preservation Area A, bounded by the city (west,
south), 159th Street and Interstate 57 (north) and the Illinois Tollway (I-294)
(east);
         (b)   Neighborhood Preservation Area B, bounded by the city limits
(north, east), Interstate 57 (west) and 159th Street (south);
         (c)   Neighborhood Preservation Area C, bounded by the city limits
(north, east) and the Illinois Tollway (I-294) (west); and
         (d)   Neighborhood Preservation Area D, bounded by the city limits
(west, north, east) and Interstate 57 (south, east).
      (2)   These four areas are more specifically shown upon a map which is
appended to the ordinance codified herein and made part of this chapter by
reference.
(Prior Code, § 152.02) (Ord. 79-O-1004, passed 4-2-1979)
CHAPTER 153: SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Definition
   
153.02   Compliance with applicable federal law required
Permit Requirements
   
153.15   Permit for construction; application; plans and specifications
   
153.16   Permit fees
   
153.17   Building permit required; conformance with provisions
   
153.18   Appeals
Satellite Specifications
   
153.30   Location of dished antenna
   
153.31   Support structure specifications
   
153.32   Lettering, numerals, symbols and the like prohibited on dish antenna
   
153.33   Color of paint on dished antennas restricted
   
153.34   Maintenance of antennas and support structures
   
153.35   Use of antenna in residential districts
   
153.36   Dismantling and removal of stations
Communications Antennas
   
153.50   License required
   
153.51   Permit required
   
153.52   Definition
   
153.53   Annual fees
   
153.54   License limitations
   
153.55   Exceptions
 
   
153.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Streets and Sidewalks, see
Ch. 98
   Telecommunications and Cable/Video Services, see
Ch. 119
   Zoning, see
Ch. 156
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 DEFINITION.
   As used in this chapter, DISH-TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL RECEIVING EARTH STATION
or DISHED SATELLITE, and hereafter called DISHED ANTENNAS, means an antenna of
dish shape installed for the purpose of receiving air-borne signals related to
communications from satellite transmissions.
(Prior Code, § 153.01) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986)
§ 153.02 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE FEDERAL LAW REQUIRED.
   The intended use shall be authorized under applicable federal law.
(Prior Code, § 153.02) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986)
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.15 PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION; APPLICATION; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Any owner of real estate who desires to construct, erect or maintain a
dished antenna on said real estate shall apply to the Building Commissioner for
the permit. A part-owner, occupant or renter must have written permission from
all owners of the lot, premises or parcel of land within the city on which such
construction, erection or maintenance is proposed.
   (B)   (1)   The applicant shall submit the permit application upon forms
provided by the Building Commissioner, together with: a plot plan of the lot,
premises or parcel of land; antenna specifications; materials; complete
dimensions; support structure details; proposed location in relation to
surrounding buildings, lot lines and utility wires and easement and landscape
screening.
      (2)   The application shall indicate the names of the owner or owners of
the subject property, the occupant of the subject premises, if different, and
the contractor or other person who will be permitted to construct or erect the
proposed earth station. Any non-owner contractor is required to be a licensed
contractor.
   (C)   All other provisions of the Building Code in Ch. 150 and the Zoning
Code in Ch. 156 of this code of ordinances shall apply to this chapter, except
insofar as they are in direct conflict.
(Prior Code, § 153.10) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986)
§ 153.16 PERMIT FEES.
   The fee for a dished antenna permit is $50, which fee shall include
inspections. This fee applies to all dished antennas.
(Prior Code, § 153.11) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986)
§ 153.17 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED; CONFORMANCE WITH PROVISIONS.
   No person shall erect or maintain a dished antenna in the city without
obtaining a building permit therefor, and without conforming to the provisions
of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 153.12) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986)
§ 153.18 APPEALS.
   Appeals from decision of the Building Commissioner to deny a permit to
construct or maintain a dished antenna may be made to the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 153.13) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986)
SATELLITE SPECIFICATIONS
§ 153.30 LOCATION OF DISHED ANTENNA.
   (A)   No dished antenna shall be erected in any front or side yard or within
ten feet of any lot line unless approved by the City Council.
   (B)   No dish antenna shall be erected on the roof top of any residential
structure, unless approved by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 153.20) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.31 SUPPORT STRUCTURE SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Only metal support, three-inch black pipe construction or equal, shall
be allowed for any dished antenna.
   (B)   Only a concrete base or caissons, depending on soil conditions, shall
be employed in line with the grade. The Building Commissioner shall have the
sole discretion to decide on whether concrete base or caissons are appropriate.
   (C)   The structure shall be designed to withstand wind force of a minimum
of 75 mph in a manner conforming with good engineering practices as approved by
the Building Commissioner.
   (D)   All outside electric must have a ground fault interrupter unless it is
low voltage.
   (E)   Direct burial of cable is permitted; a minimum of a 12-inch earth
ground cover over encased material.
   (F)   The dished antenna must be bonded to an eight-foot grounding rod, with
a minimum of seven and one- half feet imbedded in the ground and must comply
with the Electrical Code in Ch. 150 of this code of ordinances.
   (G)   The structure must be in conformity with the Electrical Code in Ch.
150 of this code of ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 153.21) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.32 LETTERING, NUMERALS, SYMBOLS AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED ON DISH ANTENNA.
   No lettering, numerals, symbols, pictorial signs or designed shall be
permitted on any surface of a dished antenna.
(Prior Code, § 153.22) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.33 COLOR OF PAINT ON DISHED ANTENNAS RESTRICTED.
   No dished antennas shall be painted in a color other than black or a neutral
tone.
(Prior Code, § 153.23) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.34 MAINTENANCE OF ANTENNAS AND SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   Dished satellite antennas and support structures shall be maintained in good
repair and structurally sound to ensure that the antenna and structure will not
be damaged due to winds or structural failure. All surfaces shall be maintained
in good condition, free of rust or corrosion.
(Prior Code, § 153.24) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.35 USE OF ANTENNA IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   (1)   The smallest practical size dished antenna shall be used, and in
any event, on single-family and single-story multiple residential property,
such dished antenna shall be of a size no greater than 12 feet in its maximum
diameter. The maximum height of a dished antenna installation shall be governed
by safety and aesthetic consideration as determined by the Building
Commissioner.
      (2)   No more than one dished antenna may be installed on a single-family
or single-story multiple residential property.
   (B)   Dished antennas may be located on the roof of a multiple residential
building with two or more stories, commercial buildings church buildings,
school buildings, manufacturing buildings or any other building if approval is
obtained from the Plan Commission of the city. Their maximum diameter shall be
12 feet.
(Prior Code, § 153.25) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.36 DISMANTLING AND REMOVAL OF STATIONS.
   If the residence, commercial structure, office building or other facility
upon which a dished antenna is located is sold or otherwise transferred, or the
dished antenna is in any way abandoned or neglected or becomes dilapidated, the
seller or transferor of such premises shall cause the earth station to be
dismantled completely, including all support structures and appurtenances, and
removed from the property. However, if the purchase contract or other means of
conveyance provides specifically for the dished antenna to remain in place for
use by the successive possessor of the property, and the dished antenna is in
acceptable condition, then this section shall not apply.
(Prior Code, § 153.26) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986) Penalty, see §
153.99
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS
§ 153.50 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a
communications antenna facility within the city without first securing an
annual license for the operation of such facility issued by the City Clerk for
the operation of such communications antenna.
(Prior Code, § 153.30) (Ord. 95-O-1522, passed 1-4-1995) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.51 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct and
operate a communications antenna facility in the city without first securing a
building permit from the city’s Building Department in compliance with all
applicable building and zoning rules, regulations and requirements.
(Prior Code, § 153.31) (Ord. 95-O-1522, passed 1-4-1995) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.52 DEFINITION.
   A COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA is an outside antenna used for the transmission of
signals by stations licensed by the Federal Communications Commission in the
several radio services other than the Radio Broadcast Services and/or for the
reception of signals transmitted by such stations.
(Prior Code, § 153.32) (Ord. 95-O-1522, passed 1-4-1995)
§ 153.53 ANNUAL FEES.
   The annual fee for a communications antenna license, which fee shall include
annual inspections of the structure, shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:
 
Antenna Height           Annual Fee
Between zero and 75 feet $1,000
Between 76 and 150 feet  $1,500
Between 151 and 250 feet $2,000
 
(Prior Code, § 153.33) (Ord. 95-O-1522, passed 1-4-1995)
§ 153.54 LICENSE LIMITATIONS.
   The city shall issue no more than five licenses and permits for the
construction and operation of communications antennas without further action by
the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 153.34) (Ord. 95-O-1522, passed 1-4-1995)
§ 153.55 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prevent the installation and
maintenance of antennas necessary for the operation of public authorities for
the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the community. Plans for
such antennas shall be reviewed by the city’s Plan Commission before such
installation.
(Prior Code, § 153.35) (Ord. 95-O-1522, passed 1-4-1995)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of §§
153.01,
153.02,
153.15 through
153.18 and
153.30 through
153.36 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of
not less than $25, nor more than $500. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or non-compliance occurs or
continues.
(Prior Code, § 153.99) (Ord. 86-O-1204, passed 1-15-1986)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Interpretation
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Comprehensive Plan adopted
Plat Procedure
   
154.15   Submittal of tentative plat
   
154.16   Referral of tentative plat to Plan Commission
   
154.17   Procedure for tentative plat
   
154.18   Submittal of final plat
   
154.19   Contents of final plat
   
154.20   Approval of final plat
Improvements
   
154.35   Street improvements
   
154.36   Water and sewer
   
154.37   Approval of public improvements
Administration
   
154.50   Director of Building and Housing to enforce provisions
   
154.51   Changes and amendments
   
154.52   Inspection at subdivider’s expense
   
154.53   Variances
   
154.54   Maps and plats
Cross-reference:
   Building Regulations, see
Ch. 150
   Comprehensive Plan, see §
150.006
   Housing Regulations, see
Ch. 151
   Public Works, see Title V
   Streets and Sidewalks, see
Ch. 98
   Zoning, see
Ch. 156
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 INTERPRETATION.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, such provisions
shall in every instance be held to be the minimum reasonable requirement
adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, comfort, morals and
welfare.
(Prior Code, § 154.01)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INSPECTOR. The Director of Building and Housing.
   LAND SUBDIVISION. Any change, resubdivision or rearrangement in the boundary
or division lines of a parcel of property or public thoroughfare, and it shall
have been surveyed by a registered state land surveyor and recorded with the
County Recorder.
   OFFICIAL PLAN. The Markham Official Plan.
   PLAN COMMISSION. The city’s Plan Commission.
(Prior Code, § 154.02)
§ 154.03 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Comprehensive Plan of Public Improvements, looking to the present
and future development of the city, which plan has been prepared and
recommended to the City Council by the Plan Commission, is adopted and made the
official plan of the city.
   (B)   The official plan, as adopted in this section, consists of the written
recommendations in reference to streets, alleys, easements and public grounds
as made by the Plan Commission and as incorporated in this chapter, each and
every map, chart and exhibit which is included in the recommendations of the
Plan Commission together with all notations, references and other matters shown
thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if the notations, references
and other matters set forth by such maps were fully described herein.
Specifically, the official plan includes:
      (1)   Map No. 1, titled “Official Plan, City of Markham, Cook County,
Illinois”, showing a comprehensive plan for streets, alleys and easements; and
      (2)   Subdivision regulations set forth in this chapter to regulate and
control the future physical development of the city.
(Prior Code, § 154.03)
PLAT PROCEDURE
§ 154.15 SUBMITTAL OF TENTATIVE PLAT.
   (A)   Any owner of land within the corporate limits of the city, or within
one and one-half miles of the corporate limits, wishing to divide the same into
building lots for the purpose of sale or assessment or both, or wishing to
dedicate streets and alleys or easements and other public lands for public use,
shall first submit to the city a tentative plat of subdivision in duplicate
blueprints.
   (B)   Such tentative plat shall meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Each tentative plat shall be drawn to the scale of 100 feet to one
inch. The tentative plat shall show the boundaries of the property to be
subdivided, section and half-section lines, existing permanent buildings, water
courses and other existing features pertinent to proper subdivision.
      (2)   All corporate boundary lines within or adjacent to the proposed
subdivision shall so be designated.
      (3)   Contour lines at intervals of not more than two feet shall be
shown.
      (4)   The width of roads, streets (with their names), alleys and
easements, dimensions of lots and blocks and building lines shall be shown. The
full width of streets bounding the proposed subdivision (with their names) and
the width and names of intersection streets in the property immediately
adjacent shall be shown. All streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the
proposed subdivision.
      (5)   The name of the proposed subdivision with the name of the owner,
sponsor or trustees shall be shown.
(Prior Code, § 154.15)
§ 154.16 REFERRAL OF TENTATIVE PLAT TO PLAN COMMISSION.
   The City Council shall by motion refer the tentative plat to the Plan
Commission and shall at the same time instruct the Inspector to collaborate
with the subdivider and the Plan Commission and prepare estimates of cost of
street grading and other public improvements as are required by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 154.16)
§ 154.17 PROCEDURE FOR TENTATIVE PLAT.
   (A)   (1)   The Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove the tentative
plat.
      (2)   If the tentative plat is not satisfactory as originally presented,
the Plan Commission may cause the subdivider to make such changes as may be
required by the Plan Commission and thereupon approve the same.
      (3)   Upon approval of the tentative plat, the following statement signed
by the Chairperson shall be stamped upon both copies thereof:
 

NOTICE OF TENTATIVE APPROVAL
   Notice is hereby given that the general plan of the subdivision shown in this plat has received tentative approval of the Plan Commission of the City of Markham, and that the Plan Commission is now ready
to receive the final plat for consideration.
 
   Date                                                                The Plan Commission of City of Markham, Cook County, Illinois
                                                                                                       
                        Chairperson
 
   (B)   One copy of the approved plat shall thereupon be returned to the
subdivider and the other copy shall be retained by the Plan Commission.
(Prior Code, § 154.17)
§ 154.18 SUBMITTAL OF FINAL PLAT.
   After the Plan Commission has approved the tentative plat as outlined in §
154.17 of this chapter, the subdivider shall submit to the Plan Commission a
final plat as described in §
154.19 of this chapter, together with the following supporting documents for
record:
   (A)   A grading plan and profiles approved by the Inspector and City
Engineer showing the existing centerline elevations of all streets and alleys
in the proposed subdivision and the centerline elevations of proposed
pavements. Elevations shall be referred to some permanent benchmark. Profiles
shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of 50 feet to the inch and a vertical
scale of five feet to the inch;
   (B)   A statement signed by the subdivider setting forth the public
improvements he proposes to make in the subdivision together with plans and
specifications approved by the Inspector and the City Engineer clearly
describing the same and agreeing to make the improvements at his or her own
expense (subject to the approval of the final plat by the City Council) within
the time limit fixed by the Plan Commission;
   (C)   A statement of approval signed by the Inspector and the City Engineer
certifying that the improvements described in the subdivider’s statement meet
the minimum requirements of this chapter and giving an estimate of costs of
such improvements, including cost of engineering and inspection;
   (D)   A duly completed and executed corporate completion bond posted with
the city by the subdivider in an amount equal to the Inspector’s and City
Engineer’s estimate and certified by the Corporation Counsel and City Engineer
as good, valid and enforceable by the city securing the satisfactory completion
of all public improvements in strict accordance with the description, plans and
specifications submitted by the subdivider and approved by the Plan Commission;
and
   (E)   Evidence satisfactory to the Plan Commission showing that all taxes
and special assessments due on the property to be subdivided have been paid.
(Prior Code, § 154.18) (Ord. 76-O-934, passed - -1976)
§ 154.19 CONTENTS OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   The final plat to be submitted to the Plan Commission shall be in
strict accordance with the approved tentative plat and shall be drawn by a
registered state land surveyor on tracing cloth to a scale of not less than 100
feet to one inch.
   (B)   The subdivider shall supply to the Plan Commission one reproducible
Mylar, plus ten blueprints of the final plat, which plat shall meet the
following requirements:
      (1)   The name of the proposed subdivision shall be shown;
      (2)   The date of preparation and a proper north sign shall be shown;
      (3)   A correct survey of the property proposed to be platted shall be
shown;
      (4)   A legal description of the property shall be given which includes
reference to the section, township and range, government section line and
corners, half section lines, the location and dimensions of all streets (with
their names), alleys, easements and all other lands to be dedicated to public
use; and the lines and dimensions of abutting roads and streets (with their
names), alleys and easements shall be shown;
      (5)   Street name signs of a type approved by the city, as specified in §
98.111 of this code of ordinances, shall be provided at all street
intersections. A diagram showing the general construction and material of these
signs shall be a part of the final plat. Street signs shall be located on the
northeast and southwest corners of each intersection;
      (6)   All streets shall be provided with a concrete curb and, when
required to be actually constructed, shall conform with such specifications as
may have been adopted by the City Council;
      (7)   Sidewalks must be provided for throughout each new subdivision and,
when required to be actually constructed, shall not be less than five feet wide
and not less than five inches in thickness and shall be composed of a concrete
mixture to be approved by the Director of Building and Housing;
      (8)   Street trees shall be planted throughout the entire subdivision.
Such trees shall be planted in the parkways not less than four feet from the
sidewalk or ten feet from the lot line when sidewalks are not provided, and
shall be not more than 50 feet apart, and shall be red oak, hard maple,
American elm, Chinese elm or English elm, sycamore, hackberry or American or
European linden;
      (9)   (a)   Surface drainage ditches shall be provided throughout the
subdivision, except when storm sewers are to be provided, and located on each
side of each street with a minimum distance of six feet from the edge of
surfaced street and street side of ditch. The following minimum dimensions
shall apply:
            1.   Depth: 18 inches;
            2.   Width, at bottom: 18 inches; and
            3.   Angle of bank with bottom: 60 degrees.
         (b)   All surface drainage ditches shall drain to the nearest drainage
ditches of the Calumet Union Drainage District or one of its recognized
tributaries capable of carrying the additional surface water. The official plat
shall show the direction of flow of all drainage ditches and their outlet to
the Calumet Union Drainage District.
      (10)   Culverts of concrete or vitrified tile of adequate strength or
corrugated steel construction having a minimum diameter of 18 inches shall be
located at all street intersections. The number of culverts at each
intersection shall be determined by the drainage requirements and shall be
shown on the official plat;
      (11)   (a)   All electric and telephone leads, mains, and conduit systems
shall be placed in the easements, or alleys, and only when such easements or
alleys are not so provided such leads, mains and conduit systems shall be
placed in the street right-of-way; and
         (b)   All electric and telephone leads, mains and conduit systems
shall be placed on the west side of all north and south easements, alleys or
streets and on the north side of all east and west easements, alleys or
streets.
      (12)   All lot lines shall be shown, lots and blocks numbered or
lettered; building lines and easements shall be shown and determined by
measurements;
      (13)   All necessary dimensions both linear and angular shall be shown.
Linear dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot, and all
deflections, angles, radii, arcs and central angles of all corners along the
property line of each street shall be shown;
      (14)   The description and location of all survey monuments erected in
the subdivision shall be shown. Such monuments shall be either iron pipe not
less than one inch in diameter and 30 inches long, or stone or concrete not
less than four inches in diameter and 24 inches long. Permanent monuments shall
be erected at all street corners, at all points where street lines intersect
the exterior boundaries of the subdivision and at angle points of curves in
each street;
      (15)   Provisions shall be made for direct connections with the principal
existing streets in adjoining subdivisions;
      (16)   (a)   The plat shall have lettered upon it a statement of
dedication properly conveying all lands dedicated for any other public use, and
there shall be attached to the plat a certificate of title certifying the
ownership of all such lands to be so dedicated by the plat; and
         (b)   Every such plat shall, in addition to all streets, alleys and
parking areas, dedicate for public use or public grounds the equivalent of at
least one acre of land for each 15 acres of land or fraction thereof, or one
acre of land for each 75 building sites, whichever is the greater in area,
permissible under the county’s zoning regulations then in effect, if the area
shall be outside the city limits, or permissible under the regulations of the
Zoning Code in Ch. 156 of this code of ordinances then in effect, if the area
shall be within the city limits whichever shall be greater, such public lands
so dedicated to be in such location as may be approved by the Plan Commission;
provided, however, that, if the land so required to be dedicated under the
requirements of this section is less than one acre and if the Plan Commission
shall so recommend, the City Council may waive the dedication of any land for
public purposes other than the requirements for streets and alleys.
      (17)   All proper certificates, seals and signatures as required by law
shall be shown;
      (18)   Section line streets shall be not less than 100 feet wide; half
section line streets not less than eight feet wide. The Indian Boundary Line or
George Brennan Highway shall be not less than 200 feet wide. Outside the
corporate limits of the city, the street or highway widths shall be as required
by the county’s Map Department;
      (19)   Where alleys are provided they shall be not less than 20 feet
wide;
      (20)   Where no alleys are platted, easements not less than ten feet wide
shall be provided across the rear of all lots for any and public utilities. The
easements shall be so laid out that a proper continuity may be had for such
utilities from block to block; and
      (21)   Building setback lines shall be shown on all plats, as required by
the Zoning Code in Ch. 156 of this code of ordinances or the county.
(Prior Code, § 154.19) (Ord. 76-O-930, passed 7-19-1976; Ord. 76-O-934, passed
- -1976)
§ 154.20 APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Approval of final plat by Plan Commission.
      (1)   When the Plan Commission has approved the final plat, the following
official stamp shall be stamped or lettered upon the final plat, signed by the
Chairperson of the Plan Commission and attested by the Secretary:
 
 
   Approved by the Plan Commission of the City of Markham, Cook County, Illinois, this       day of               , 20          A.D.
 
   Signed                                                           , Chairperson
 
   Attested                                                         , Secretary
 
 
      (2)   The Plan Commission shall then transmit the approved final plat to
the City Council, together with a letter of transmittal calling the Council’s
attention to all variations (if any) approved by the Plan Commission and
setting forth its reasons for approving the same, and conveying to the Council
such other information concerning the final plat as the Plan Commission may
deem necessary.
      (3)   With approved final plat, the Plan Commission shall also transmit
to the City Council the subdivider’s agreement with respect to improvements,
the Inspector’s and City Engineer’s approval of improvements and all plans,
specifications, estimates, completion bonds and all other documents,
certificates and papers pertaining to the final plat and the subdivision
platted thereon.
   (B)   Final approval by City Council.
      (1)   When the City Council is satisfied with the final plat and with all
improvements, conditions and documents pertaining to the subdivision platted
thereon, the City Council shall by resolution approve the plat and authorize
and direct the Mayor to affix the Council’s stamp of approval and to sign the
plat for and in the name of the city.
      (2)   The approval shall be attested by the City Clerk and sealed with
the corporate seal of the city.
   (C)   Recordation of approved plat.
      (1)   Upon approval of a plat as provided in this chapter, the Clerk or
such other official whom the City Council may from time to time designate shall
forthwith record such plat in the recorder’s office of the county.
      (2)   All costs incidental to such recordation shall be paid by the
submitting subdivider.
(Prior Code, § 154.20) (Ord. 76-O-934, passed - -1976)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.35 STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The subdivider shall, at his or her own expense, improve all streets
with a dust-proof surfaced roadway, complete with curb and gutter not less than
30 feet wide back to back, consisting of the following:
      (1)   A portland concrete cement pavement not less than eight inches
thick;
      (2)   A cement-bound macadam roadway not less than eight inches thick;
      (3)   A seven-inch cement-soil base (as approved by the Portland Cement
Association) with an asphalt surface (state highway specifications Sub-Class A-
1) not less than two and one-half inches thickness;
      (4)   A water-bound macadam base not less than seven inches in thickness
surfaced with not less than two and one-half inches of “built in place” dust-
proof asphalt surfacing (State Highway Department Sub-Class A-1); or
      (5)   Cement or other construction similar to contiguous streets wherein
conformity of construction shall more properly justify such type of street or
roadway improvement.
   (B)   Industrial streets shall be reviewed for additional design standards
to be approved by the City Engineer.
(Prior Code, § 154.30) (Ord. 76-O-930, passed 7-19-1976; Ord. 76-O-934, passed
- -1976)
§ 154.36 WATER AND SEWER.
   The subdivider of any proposed subdivision lying within the city limits
shall also provide at his or her own expense public improvements as follows.
   (A)   The water system of the city shall be extended throughout the entire
subdivision in such manner that every lot in such subdivision may be served by
means of a house connection within its own frontage.
   (B)   Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout the entire subdivision.
The hydrants shall in all respects meet the specifications for fire hydrants
set forth in §§
51.062 through
51.064 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   A complete system of sanitary sewers shall be provided and, when
required to be actually constructed, the construction shall conform to the
specifications adopted by the City Council and shall be constructed throughout
the entire subdivision in such a manner as to render the same accessible to
every lot within its own frontage. Such sewers shall be located in the
easements or alleys.
   (D)   A complete system of storm sewers shall be provided, and when required
to be actually constructed, shall extend throughout the entire subdivision and
shall be separate from the sanitary sewer system and constructed according to
specifications adopted by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 154.31)
§ 154.37 APPROVAL OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   All plans and specifications and contracts for public improvements required
by this chapter such as street paving, sidewalks, water systems and sewer
systems shall be approved by the Inspector and City Engineer before commencing
construction.
(Prior Code, § 154.32) (Ord. 76-O-934, passed - -1976)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.50 DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND HOUSING TO ENFORCE PROVISIONS.
   The Director of Building and Housing shall be Chairperson of the Plan
Commission and shall enforce the requirements of the official plan of the city.
The Inspector may call upon any other department or official of the city to
furnish him or her with such information or assistance as he or she may deem
necessary. It shall be the duty of all law enforcement officers, officers of
the Plan Commission, and whatever other city official appointed or elected, to
observe and report to the enforcing officer any violations of the requirements
of the Official Plan.
(Prior Code, § 154.45)
§ 154.51 CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS.
   The Plan Commission may from time to time prepare and recommend to the City
Council such changes in the Official Plan as may be deemed necessary by the
City Council, or by the Plan Commission. Such changes shall become part of the
Official Plan after their approval by the Plan Commission and their adoption by
the City Council as amendments to this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 154.46)
§ 154.52 INSPECTION AT SUBDIVIDER’S EXPENSE.
   All public improvements to be made under the provisions of this chapter
shall be inspected during the course of construction by the Inspector. The
salary and other costs in connection with the inspection shall be paid by the
subdivider.
(Prior Code, § 154.47)
§ 154.53 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Plan Commission may approve variations from these requirements in
specific cases which do not affect the general plan or the spirit of this
chapter.
   (B)   All such variations shall be communicated to the City Council in
writing with the reasons therefor before the final approval of the plat by that
body.
(Prior Code, § 154.48)
§ 154.54 MAPS AND PLATS.
   After 6-22-1944, no subdivision, whether by plat, metes and bounds, or other
division by the County Assessor or County Clerk affecting land within the
corporate limits of the city or in contiguous unincorporated territory outside
of and distant not more than one and one-half miles from such limits, shall be
legal, nor shall such subdivision or division however made, be entitled to
record, nor shall it be valid unless the subdivision shown thereon shall have
been drawn in the form of a plat, based upon survey made by a registered state
land surveyor, which plat shall provide for streets, alleys and public grounds
in conformity with the requirements applicable thereto in the official plan of
the city.
(Prior Code, § 154.49)
CHAPTER 155: MOBILE HOME PARKS
Section
General Provisions
   
155.001   Definitions
   
155.002   Exceptions
Licensing
   
155.015   License required
   
155.016   Permit required
   
155.017   Application for permit
   
155.018   Application for license
   
155.019   Application for permit to alter a mobile home park
   
155.020   Application to reduce number of sites
   
155.021   Relicensing
   
155.022   Issuance of permit or license
   
155.023   License fees
   
155.024   Revocation or suspension of license
   
155.025   City license
Operating Regulations
   
155.040   Parks to be operated under statutory regulations
   
155.041   Manager
   
155.042   Drainage
   
155.043   Minimum sites; access
   
155.044   Water supply
   
155.045   Sewage and water-carried wastes
   
155.046   Sewer connection for each mobile home
   
155.047   Garbage storage and disposal
   
155.048   Insect and rodent control
   
155.049   Fire extinguishers
   
155.050   Porches, carports and the like
   
155.051   Streets
   
155.052   Sanitary, electrical and safety appliances
   
155.053   Electrical outlets
   
155.054   Non-permanent shelters
   
155.055   Community kitchens
   
155.056   Buildings
   
155.057   Register
Administration and Enforcement
   
155.070   Applications on file
   
155.071   Records
   
155.072   Enforcement
   
155.073   Hearing upon refusal of permit or license or suspension or revocation
of license
 
   
155.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEPARTMENT. The State Department of Public Health, unless otherwise
indicated.
(210 ILCS 115/2.6)
   DEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A mobile home which does not have toilet and bath or
shower facilities.
(210 ILCS 115/2.3)
   IMMOBILIZED MOBILE HOME. A mobile home served by individual utilities,
resting on a permanent perimeter foundation which extends below the established
frost depth with the wheels, tongue and hitch removed and the home secured in
compliance with the Mobile Home Tie-Down Act, 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
(210 ILCS 115/2.10)
   INDEPENDENT MOBILE HOME. A mobile home which has self-contained toilet and
bath or shower facilities.
(210 ILCS 115/2.4)
   INDIVIDUAL UTILITIES. The provision for each mobile home of a separate
metered connection to electrical service, separately tapped water service from
an approved public water supply or a separate private water supply, and a
separately tapped connection to an approved public sewer system or a separate
private sewage disposal system.
(210 ILCS 115/2.8)
   MOBILE HOME. A structure designed for permanent habitation and so
constructed as to permit its transport on wheels, temporarily or permanently
attached to its frame, from the place of its construction to the location, or
subsequent locations, at which it is intended to be a permanent habitation and
designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or more
persons. The term shall include manufactured homes constructed after 6-30-1976,
in accordance with the Federal National Manufactured Housing Construction and
Safety Standards Act of 1974, being 42 U.S.C. §§ 5401 et seq.
(210 ILCS 115/2.1)
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A tract of land or two or more contiguous tracts of land
upon which contain sites with the necessary utilities for six or more
independent mobile homes for permanent habitation either free of charge or for
revenue purposes, and shall include any building, structure, vehicle or
enclosure used or intended for use as a part of the equipment of such MOBILE
HOME PARK. Separate ownership of contiguous tracts of land shall not preclude
the tracts of land from common licensure as a mobile home park if they are
maintained and operated jointly. Neither an immobilized mobile home, nor a
motorized recreational vehicle, shall be construed as being a part of a MOBILE
HOME PARK.
(210 ILCS 115/2.5)
   PERMANENT HABITATION. A period of two or more months.
(210 ILCS 115/2.2)
   REVENUE PURPOSES. Includes, but is not limited to, moneys or other valuable
consideration paid by a tenant or lessee or paid by a contract purchaser
pursuant to a contract for deed, sale or purchase prior to the delivery of the
deed conveying legal title.
(210 ILCS 115/2.9)
   SITE. The lot on which the mobile home is located for permanent habitation.
(210 ILCS 115/2.7)
(Prior Code, § 155.01)
§ 155.002 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to include the state parks and
the term “mobile home park” shall not be construed to include buildings, tents
or other structures maintained by any individual or company on his, her or
their own premises and used exclusively to house his, her or their own farm
labor, or any military establishment of the United States or of the state
wherein a travel trailer or mobile home may be located or harbored, or any park
or state or county fairgrounds for a period during, immediately prior to and
immediately subsequent to the holding of the fair not to exceed a total of two
weeks in all, or the area or premises on any farm upon which are harbored
travel trailers, or mobile homes occupied by persons employed upon such farm
for not more than 120 days in any calendar year in the production, harvesting
or processing of agricultural or horticultural products produced on the farm,
or any park owned or operated by any municipality or county; provided, such
municipality or county shall meet sanitary and safety provisions, keep a
register and make reports, as required by this chapter or 210 ILCS 115/1 et
seq. for a licensee.
(210 ILCS 115/20) (Prior Code, § 155.02)
LICENSING
§ 155.015 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall establish, maintain, conduct or operate
a mobile home park after 4-30-1972, without a license therefor from the state’s
Department of Public Health. Subject to the requirements and limits of this
section, operating a mobile home park without a current license shall result in
a late fee of $50 for the first month of noncompliance and $100 per day
thereafter. Licenses issued under the Mobile Home Park Act are nontransferable.
If the mobile home park is sold, the application for a new license shall be
mailed to the Department and postmarked no later than ten days after the date
the deed for the transaction is recorded, as evidenced by the County Recorder’s
stamp on the deed. All license fees, including late fees and reinspection fees,
of the prior owner or owners must be paid before a license is issued. No late
fee shall be imposed as long as the new license is requested within the
timeframe specified. The current name, address, email address, and telephone
number of the licensee and mobile home park manager shall be displayed at all
times on the mobile home park property in a location visible to the public and
protected from weather. CONDUCT OR OPERATE A MOBILE HOME PARK, as used in this
chapter, shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, supplying or
maintaining common water, sewer or other utility supply or service, or the
collection of rents directly or indirectly from five or more independent mobile
homes. Such license shall expire April 30 of each year and a new license shall
be issued upon proper application and payment of any unpaid reinspection fees
and the annual license fee provided the applicant is in substantial compliance
with the rules and regulations of the Department. No late fee shall be imposed
as long as the renewal license is requested within the time frame specified.
(210 ILCS 115/3) (Prior Code, § 155.15) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.016 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall construct a mobile home park without
first obtaining a permit to do so. All permits to construct, all licenses to
operate and all permits to make alterations therein shall be prominently
displayed in the park office. All licenses issued under 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
shall be transferable only with the written consent of the Department;
provided, however, that, the Department may not withhold such consent where the
provisions of this chapter have been met. The new licensee shall provide to the
Department the information required in §
155.017(A), (C) and (E) of this chapter.
(210 ILCS 115/8) (Prior Code, § 155.16) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.017 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   In order to obtain a permit to construct a new mobile home park, the
applicant shall file with the Department a written application and plan
documents, including the following:
   (A)   The full name and address of the applicant or applicants, or names and
addresses of the partners if the applicant is a partnership, or the names and
addresses of the officers if the applicant is a corporation;
   (B)   The address, location and legal description of the tract of land upon
which it is proposed to construct, operate and maintain a mobile home park;
   (C)   The name of the mobile home park;
   (D)   Detailed plans and specifications sealed by a registered engineer or
architect licensed to practice in the state which include a general plot plan
of the mobile home park with all sites and structures shown, the water supply
system, the sewage disposal system, the electrical system, the fuel supply
system, the lighting system, the method of disposal of solid waste, all streets
and sidewalks, swimming and bathing facilities, fire hydrants and details of
all auxiliary structures;
   (E)   The number of mobile home sites proposed to be constructed or
licensed;
   (F)   A statement of the firefighting facilities, public or private, which
are available to the mobile home park; and
   (G)   A plan review fee, which is nonrefundable. For permits filed prior to
the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly, the
fee shall be $100. For permits filed on or after the effective date of this
amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly, the fee shall be $500.
(210 ILCS 115/4) (Prior Code, § 155.17)
§ 155.018 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   A mobile home park constructed prior 9-18-1987, but not licensed by the
Department shall not require a construction permit. A written application for
an original license shall be submitted to the Department which shall include
the information required in §
155.017(A), (B), (C), (E) and (F) of this chapter in addition to plans showing
the location of all structures and utilities at the mobile home park. A fee is
required and shall not be refundable. For mobile home parks constructed prior
to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly, the
fee shall be $100. For mobile home parks constructed on or after the effective
date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly, the fee shall be
$250.
(210 ILCS 115/4.1) (Prior Code, § 155.18)
§ 155.019 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO ALTER A MOBILE HOME PARK.
   An application for a permit to alter a licensed mobile home park shall be
submitted to the Department for any changes to the water, sewage, fuel or
electrical systems other than normal maintenance, the relocation of sites or
the expansion of the number of sites in the park. Detailed plans and
specifications shall be provided to show compliance with this chapter and the
promulgated rules. A plan review fee shall accompany the application. For
permits submitted prior to the effective date of this amendatory Act of the
101st General Assembly, the fee shall be $50. For permits submitted on or after
the effective date of this amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly, the
fee shall be $150. This fee shall not be refundable. Construction shall not
commence until a permit is issued.
(210 ILCS 115/4.2) (Prior Code, § 155.19)
§ 155.020 APPLICATION TO REDUCE NUMBER OF SITES.
   An application to reduce the number of licensed sites shall be submitted to
the Department no later than ten days prior to the proposed date of reduction.
The specific sites no longer required to be licensed, and either the method of
disconnecting the required utilities or a description of the method of
immobilizing the mobile homes shall be provided. If the reduction results in
less than five mobile homes remaining, the license shall be void if the
application is approved. No fee shall be required. The licensee shall be
responsible for ensuring that all utilities at vacated spaces are disconnected
or sealed, as prescribed by the Department.
(210 ILCS 115/4.3) (Prior Code, § 155.20)
§ 155.021 RELICENSING.
   A mobile home park whose license has been voided, suspended, denied or
revoked may be relicensed by submission of the application items required in §
155.017(A), (B), (C) and (E) of this chapter and an application fee which is
non-refundable. For applications submitted prior to the effective date of this
amendatory Act of the 101st General Assembly, the fee shall be $50. For
applications submitted on or after the effective date of this amendatory Act of
the 101st General Assembly, the fee shall be $250. Approval shall be issued if
an inspection of the park by the Department indicates compliance with this
chapter and 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq. and the rules promulgated pursuant thereto.
(210 ILCS 115/4.4) (Prior Code, § 155.21)
§ 155.022 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT OR LICENSE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a permit to construct a new mobile
home park, an application for an original license to operate and maintain the
same, or an application for a permit to alter a licensed mobile home park, the
Department shall, if the park is, or the proposed park will be, in conformity
with 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq. and the rules and regulations adopted by the
Department pursuant thereto, issue a permit to construct, a permit to alter or
an original license, as the case may be. If the application for a permit to
construct, a permit to alter or an original license is declined, the Department
shall give the reasons therefore in writing to the applicant; and if the
objections can be corrected, the applicant may amend his or her application and
resubmit it for approval.
   (B)   If a permit to construct or a permit to alter a park has been issued,
the applicant upon completion thereof shall notify the Department. The
Department shall then inspect the park and, if completed in accordance with the
approved plans, shall issue a license for the number of approved sites after
receipt of the required fee.
   (C)   A permit does not relieve the applicant from securing building permits
in municipalities or counties having a building code, or from complying with
any municipal or county zoning or other ordinance applicable thereto. Within
ten days of receiving an application for a permit to construct a new park or
expand a licensed park, the Department shall send a copy thereof, by certified
mail, to the county or municipality in which the proposed park is located.
Construction for which the Department has issued a permit shall not commence
until the applicant has received any required municipal or county building and
zoning approvals. No license to operate and maintain a mobile home park shall
be issued upon the Department’s being notified, within 60 days of the mailing
of the application to the municipality or county, as provided in this section
by a written certification from the municipal or county zoning board or
commission of any municipality or county that such park is in violation of any
municipal or county zoning or other ordinances and that such park was not in
existence at the time of the passage of such municipal or county zoning or
other ordinances. Upon certification from such municipal or county-zoning board
that such park has complied with the municipal or county zoning or other
ordinances and other requirements of 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq. have been met, such
license shall be issued. Within ten days after such park has complied with the
municipal or county zoning ordinance the municipal or county zoning board or
commission shall certify such compliance to the Department; provided, fees
charged by such municipality or county for such permits shall not exceed the
usual charge for the services provided by such municipality or county in
connection with such permits.
(210 ILCS 115/5) (Prior Code, § 155.22)
§ 155.023 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   (1)   In addition to the application fees provided for herein, the
licensee shall pay to the Department on or before March 31 of each year, an
annual license fee. The annual license fee shall be as follows:
         (a)   For 2025, $300 per mobile home park plus $15 for each mobile
home site in the park;
         (b)   For 2026, $300 per mobile home park plus $17 for each mobile
home site in the park;
         (c)   For 2027, $300 per mobile home park plus $19 for each mobile
home site in the park;
         (d)   For 2028, $300 per mobile home park plus $21 for each mobile
home site in the park;
         (e)   For 2029, $300 per mobile home park plus $23 for each mobile
home site in the park; and
         (f)   For 2030 and for each year thereafter, $300 per mobile home park
plus $25 for each mobile home site in the park.
      (2)   Annual license fees submitted after April 30 shall be subject to a
$50 late fee. If the mobile home park fails to pay its annual license fees by
April 30, the Department may in its reasonable discretion, impose a late fee of
$50 for the first month and up to $100 per day beginning on June 1 of the same
year until the fees are paid. The licensee shall also complete and return a
license renewal application by March 31 of each year.
   (B)   The licensee shall pay to the Department within 30 days of receipt of
notification from the Department the amount per additional mobile home park
site as set forth in this section for each additional mobile home site added to
his park under authority of a written permit to alter the park as provided in
Section 4.2 of this Act. Payment for the additional mobile home sites shall to
be made and an amended license applied for before occupancy of any mobile homes
on the additional mobile home spaces. The Department shall issue an amended
license to cover such additional mobile home sites, when they are to be
occupied before the end of the license year, for which an annual license has
been previously issued.
   (C)   Subsequent to the effective date of 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq., an
applicant for an original license to operate a new park constructed under a
permit issued by the Department shall only be required to pay one-fourth of the
annual fee if such park begins operation after January 31 and before May 1 of
such licensing year; or one-half of the annual fee if such park begins
operation after October 31 and before February 1 of such licensing year or
three-fourths of the annual fee if such park begins operation after July 31 and
before November 1 of such licensing year; but shall be required to pay the
entire annual fee if such park begins operation after April 30 and before
August 1 of such licensing year.
   (D)   Each license fee shall be paid to the Department and any license fee
or any part thereof, once paid to and accepted by the Department shall not be
refunded.
   (E)   The Department shall deposit all funds received under 210 ILCS 115/
1 et seq. in the state treasury.
(210 ILCS 115/6) (Prior Code, § 155.23)
§ 155.024 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.
   Any license granted hereunder shall be subject to revocation or suspension
by the Department. However, the Department shall first serve or cause to be
served upon the licensee a written notice in which shall be specified the way
or ways in which such licensee has failed to comply with the statute, or any
rules or regulations promulgated by the Department pertaining thereto. Said
notice shall require the licensee to remove or abate such nuisance, insanitary
or objectionable condition, specified in such notice, within six days or within
a longer period of time as may be allowed by the Department. If the licensee
fails to comply with the terms and conditions of said notice, within the time
specified or such extended period of time, the Department may revoke or suspend
such license.
(210 ILCS 115/7) (Prior Code, § 155.24)
§ 155.025 CITY LICENSE.
   In addition to the license provided in §
155.015 of this chapter, the city may provide for licensing of a mobile home
park within its corporate limits. Such license shall not serve to exempt such
park from the license and fee provided in §
155.015 of this chapter. The city may not charge a fee greater than $50 per
calendar year for such license.
(210 ILCS 115/18) (Prior Code, § 155.25)
OPERATING REGULATIONS
§ 155.040 PARKS TO BE OPERATED UNDER STATUTORY REGULATIONS.
   Each mobile home park licensed or to be constructed under the provisions of
this chapter and 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq. shall be operated and maintained in
accordance with the requirements of this subchapter and 210 ILCS 115/9.1
through 9.14.
(210 ILCS 115/9) (Prior Code, § 155.35)
§ 155.041 MANAGER.
   Every park shall be managed by a responsible individual whose name, address
and telephone number shall be on file at all times with the Department and
whose duty it shall be to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in a
clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and shall be responsible, with the
licensee, for any violation of the provisions of 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq. or this
chapter.
(210 ILCS 115/9.1) (Prior Code, § 155.36) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.042 DRAINAGE.
   No park shall be so located that the drainage of the park area will endanger
any water supply. All such parks shall be well drained. No waste water shall be
deposited on the surface of the ground within the mobile home park.
(210 ILCS 115/9.2) (Prior Code, § 155.37) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.043 MINIMUM SITES; ACCESS.
   (A)   Each site on which a mobile home is accommodated shall have a minimum
area of 2,600 square feet, provided that sites existing in parks or approved by
the Department for construction prior to 8-21-1967, shall contain an area of
not less than 1,000 square feet, and sites constructed between 8-21-1967 and 9-
18-1987 shall contain an area of not less than 2,100 feet.
   (B)   (1)   No mobile home shall be parked closer than five feet to the side
lot lines of a park, or closer than ten feet to a public street, alley or
building.
      (2)   Each individual site shall abut or face on a private or public
street.
      (3)   All streets shall have unobstructed access to a public street.
      (4)   There shall be an open space of at least ten feet adjacent to the
sides of every mobile home and at least five feet adjacent to the ends of every
mobile home.
(210 ILCS 115/9.3) (Prior Code, § 155.38) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.044 WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   An adequate supply of water of safe, sanitary quality, approved by the
Department shall be furnished at each park.
   (B)   Where water from other sources than that supplied by a city or village
is proposed to be used, the source of such supply shall first be approved by
the Department.
   (C)   Each mobile home shall have a connection to a public water system, a
semi-private water system, or a private water supply constructed in accordance
with the requirements of the Illinois Water Well Construction Code or the
Surface Source Water Treatment Code.
(210 ILCS 115/9.4) (Prior Code, § 155.39) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.045 SEWAGE AND WATER-CARRIED WASTES.
   (A)   All sewage and other water-carried wastes shall be disposed of into
the municipal sewerage system whenever the interceptor or sewer main of such
system is adjacent to the park.
   (B)   In parks in which such connections are not available, disposal shall
be into a private system which includes a sanitary means of disposal, the
operation of which creates neither a nuisance, nor a menace to health.
(210 ILCS 115/9.5) (Prior Code, § 155.40) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.046 SEWER CONNECTION FOR EACH MOBILE HOME.
   (A)   When a water carriage system of sewage is used each site shall be
provided with a sewer connection for the combined liquid waste outlet or
outlets of each mobile home.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of the park to provide
an approved type of water and odor tight connection from the mobile home water
drainage to the sewer connection, and it shall be the duty of the owner or
operator to make such connection and keep all occupied mobile homes, connected
to the sewer while located in the park.
   (C)   Sewer connections in unoccupied sites shall be so closed that they
will emit no odors or cause a breeding place for flies.
   (D)   No water or waste shall be allowed to fall on the ground from a mobile
home.
(210 ILCS 115/9.6) (Prior Code, § 155.41) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.047 GARBAGE STORAGE AND DISPOSAL.
   (A)   A sufficient number of adequate fly-proof and water-tight containers
in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the Department shall be
supplied for the storage of garbage, except where an adequate incinerator is
provided.
   (B)   Garbage containers shall be emptied at least once a week and shall not
be filled to overflowing, or allowed to become foul smelling or a breeding
place for flies.
   (C)   Garbage and rubbish shall be disposed of in a manner which creates
neither a nuisance nor a menace to health and which is approved by the
Department.
(210 ILCS 115/9.7) (Prior Code, § 155.42) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.048 INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL.
   Adequate insect and rodent control measures shall be employed. All buildings
shall be fly-proof and rodent-proof and rodent harborages shall not be
permitted to exist in the park or pathways. All mobile homes shall be skirted
to exclude rodents and provide protection to the homes’ utilities from the
weather.
(210 ILCS 115/9.8) (Prior Code, § 155.43) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.049 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS.
   (A)   Mobile homes in mobile home parks shall each be equipped with fire
extinguishers in working order, one in each end of the mobile home.
   (B)   Inspection of any such equipment and enforcement of any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant to this section shall be the duty of the state’s
Fire Marshal and local law enforcement agencies in the county or municipality
where the mobile home park is located.
(210 ILCS 115/2.9) (Prior Code, § 155.44) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.050 PORCHES, CARPORTS AND THE LIKE.
   Porches, carports, garages, sheds, awnings, skirting and auxiliary rooms
shall be constructed of materials specified by regulations.
(210 ILCS 115/2.10) (Prior Code, § 155.45) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.051 STREETS.
   All streets in every park must be maintained in a passable and reasonably
dust-proof condition at all times.
(210 ILCS 115/2.11) (Prior Code, § 155.46) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.052 SANITARY, ELECTRICAL AND SAFETY APPLIANCES.
   The management of every park shall assume full responsibility for
maintaining in good repair and condition all sanitary, electrical and safety
appliances in the park, and shall promptly bring such action as is necessary to
prosecute or eject from the park any person or persons who willfully or
maliciously damage such appliances, or any person or persons who fail to comply
with the regulations of this chapter or 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
(210 ILCS 115/2.12) (Prior Code, § 155.47) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.053 ELECTRICAL OUTLETS.
   Electrical outlets for each individual site shall be provided and the
installation shall be in accordance with all state or local codes and
ordinances.
(210 ILCS 115/2.13) (Prior Code, § 155.48) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.054 NON-PERMANENT SHELTERS.
   In no event shall a dependent mobile home, or non-permanent shelter or other
vehicle designed or used for sleeping purposes, other than an independent
mobile home, be permitted for occupancy at any time in a mobile home park.
(210 ILCS 115/2.14) (Prior Code, § 155.49) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.055 COMMUNITY KITCHENS.
   When community kitchens, dining rooms, laundries or other facilities are
provided, such facilities and equipment as are supplied must be maintained in a
sanitary condition and kept in good repair, and subject to such rules and
regulations as may be issued by the Department.
(210 ILCS 115/10.1) (Prior Code, § 155.50) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.056 BUILDINGS.
   All buildings constructed or altered, all plumbing and all electrical and
heating installations shall be in accordance with existing municipal and county
building ordinances and the rules and regulations of the Department.
(210 ILCS 115/10.2) (Prior Code, § 155.51) Penalty, see §
155.999
§ 155.057 REGISTER.
   A register shall be maintained by the manager of each mobile home park. Such
register shall include the name and address of the owner of each mobile home
and every occupant of such mobile home and the square feet of floor space
contained in such mobile home and the date of entry of such mobile home into
the park. The register shall be signed by the owner or occupant of the mobile
home. Any person furnishing misinformation for purposes of registration shall
be deemed guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. The registration records shall be
neatly and securely maintained, and no registration records shall be destroyed
until six years have elapsed following the date of registration. The register
shall be available for inspection upon request by all law enforcement officers
and by the Department.
(210 ILCS 115/13) (Prior Code, § 155.52) Penalty, see §
155.999
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.070 APPLICATIONS ON FILE.
   (A)   When the Department has approved an application for a permit to
construct or make alterations upon a mobile home park or the appurtenances
thereto or a license to operate and maintain the same, it shall retain the
original and keep a file thereof. The Department shall notify the clerk of the
municipality if the park is located within the limits of a municipality or the
County Clerk if said park is located outside the limits of a municipality of
all approved applications for construction of new parks or expansion of
licensed parks.
   (B)   The Department shall draft and supply all forms and blanks and specify
the number and detail necessary to obtain permits to construct or make
alterations upon parks; and for a license to operate and maintain such a park
according to this chapter or 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
(210 ILCS 115/11) (Prior Code, § 155.65)
§ 155.071 RECORDS.
   (A)   The Department shall keep a record of all mobile home parks; said
records to show the names and addresses of all parks, names and addresses of
the licensees, number of mobile home lots in each park, source of water supply,
system of sewage and garbage disposal; and any other information desired by the
Department.
   (B)   The Department shall supply licensees of all parks with any and all
health rules and regulations pertaining thereto made by the Department, and any
change or changes that may be made from time to time and such rules and
regulations shall be posted by the management of such park in a protected,
conspicuous place within the park.
(210 ILCS 115/12) (Prior Code, § 155.66)
§ 155.072 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Department shall enforce the provisions of 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto affecting health,
sanitation, water supply, sewage, garbage and waste disposal, and the
Department shall inspect, at least once each year, each mobile home park and
all the accommodations and facilities therewith. Such officials or officers are
hereby granted the power and authority to enter upon the premises of such parks
at any time for the purposes herein set forth.
   (B)   The Department may issue rules and regulations to carry out the
provisions of 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq. Such rules may contain provisions for the
Department to grant a waiver to a mobile home park, if the intent and purpose
of Ill. Rev. Stat. Ch. 111-1/2, §§ 711 et seq., are met.
   (C)   In the administration and enforcement of 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq., the
Department may designate and use full-time city or county health departments as
its agents in making inspections and investigations.
(210 ILCS 115/21) (Prior Code, § 155.67)
§ 155.073 HEARING UPON REFUSAL OF PERMIT OR LICENSE OR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION
OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person refused a permit to construct or alter a park or a license,
or whose license is suspended or revoked, shall have the right to a hearing
before the Department. A written notice of a request for such a hearing shall
be served upon the Department within 20 days of such refusal of a permit to
construct or alter or refusal of a license or suspension or revocation thereof.
The Director shall give written notice of such decision, by registered mail, to
the park operator or the applicant, as the case may be, within five days of
such refusal, suspension or revocation.
   (B)   The hearing shall be conducted by the Director, or a duly qualified
employee of the Department designated in writing by the Director as a Hearing
Officer.
   (C)   The Director or Hearing Officer may compel by subpoena or subpoena
duces tecum the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
books and papers, and administer oaths to witnesses. The hearing shall be
conducted at such place as designated by the Department, except that hearings
concerning the establishment, operation or licensing of a park in a county of
1,000,000 or more inhabitants shall be conducted in such county. The Director
shall give written notice of the time and place of hearing, by registered mail,
to the park operator or license applicant, as the case may be, at least ten
days prior to the hearing.
   (D)   The Director or Hearing Officer shall permit the applicant or licensee
to appear in person and to be represented by counsel at the hearing at which
time the applicant or licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to present all
relevant matter in support of his or her application for license or renewal of
license or in resisting the revocation thereof.
   (E)   In the event of the inability of any party, or the Department, to
procure the attendance of witnesses to give testimony or produce books and
papers, such party or the Department may take the deposition of witnesses in
accordance with the law pertaining to the taking of depositions in civil cases
in the circuit courts of this state. All testimony taken at a hearing shall be
reduced to writing, and all such testimony and other evidence introduced at the
hearing shall constitute a part of the record of the hearing.
   (F)   The Director shall make findings of fact in such hearing, and the
Director shall render his or her decision within 80 days after the termination
of the hearing, unless additional time is required by him or her for a proper
disposition of the matter. When the hearing has been conducted by a Hearing
Officer, the Director shall review the record before rendering a decision. It
shall be the duty of the Director to forward a copy of his or her decision, by
registered mail, to the park operator or applicant, as the case may be, within
five days of rendering such decision.
   (G)   Technical errors in the proceeding before the Director or Hearing
Officer or their failure to observe the technical rules of evidence shall not
constitute grounds for the reversal of any administrative decision unless it
appears to the court that such error or failure materially affects the rights
of any party and results in substantial injustice to him or her.
   (H)   All subpoenas issued by the Director or Hearing Officer may be served
as provided for in civil actions. The fees of witnesses for attendance and
travel shall be the same as the fees for witnesses before the Circuit Court and
shall be paid by the party to such proceeding at whose request the subpoena is
issued. If such subpoena is issued at the request of the Department, the
witness fee shall be paid as an administrative expense.
   (I)   In cases of refusal of a witness to attend or testify, or to produce
books or papers, concerning any matter upon which he might be lawfully
examined, the Circuit Court of the county wherein the hearing is held, upon
application of any party to the proceeding, may compel obedience by proceeding
for contempt as in cases of a like refusal to obey a similar order of the
Court.
   (J)   The Department shall not be required to certify any record or file any
answer or otherwise appear in any proceeding for judicial review unless the
party filing the complaint deposits with the Clerk of the Court the sum of
$0.95 per page representing costs of such certification. Failure on the part of
the plaintiff to make such deposit shall be grounds for dismissal of the
action.
(210 ILCS 115/22) (Prior Code, § 155.68)
§ 155.999 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter or 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.
shall, except as otherwise provided, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Each
day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense. The State’s Attorney of
the county in which the violation occurred, or the Attorney General shall bring
such actions in the name of the people of the state or may, in addition to
other remedies provided in 210 ILCS 115/1 et seq. bring action for an
injunction to restrain such violation, or to enjoin the operation of any such
mobile home park.
(210 ILCS 115/19) (Prior Code, § 155.99)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Short title
   
156.002   Interpretation; purpose
   
156.003   Definitions
District Boundaries
   
156.015   Use districts established
   
156.016   Location and boundaries of districts
   
156.017   Annexed land
Zoning Map; Standards
   
156.030   Short title
   
156.031   Purpose
   
156.032   Identification of maps and standards adopted by reference
   
156.033   Official map adopted by reference
   
156.034   Official standards adopted by reference
   
156.035   Use of maps and standards in other ordinances
   
156.036   Comprehensive plan adopted
   
156.037   Administration and enforcement of subchapter
R-1 One-Family Residential Districts
   
156.050   Application of provisions
   
156.051   Permitted uses
   
156.052   Conditional uses
   
156.053   Lot area
   
156.054   Yard specifications
   
156.055   Corner lot
   
156.056   Building height limitation
R-2 One-Family Residential Districts
   
156.070   Application of provisions
   
156.071   Permitted uses
   
156.072   Lot area
   
156.073   Yard specifications
   
156.074   Corner lot
   
156.075   Building height limitation
R-3 One-Family Residential Districts
   
156.090   Application of provisions
   
156.091   Permitted uses
   
156.092   Lot area
   
156.093   Yard specifications
   
156.094   Corner lot
   
156.095   Building height limitation
R-3A One-Family Residential District
   
156.110   Application of provisions
   
156.111   Permitted uses
   
156.112   Lot area
   
156.113   Yard specifications
   
156.114   Corner lot
   
156.115   Building height limitation
R-3B One-Family Town Home Residential District
   
156.130   District regulations
R-4 One-Family Residential District
   
156.145   Application of provisions
   
156.146   Permitted uses
   
156.147   Lot area
   
156.148   Yard specifications
   
156.149   Corner lot
   
156.150   Building height limitation
R-5A Group Houses and Garden Apartment Districts
   
156.165   Application of provisions
   
156.166   Permitted uses
   
156.167   Lot area
   
156.168   Yard specifications
   
156.169   Corner lot
   
156.170   Building height limitation
   
156.171   Location of backs of buildings
   
156.172   Parking regulations
   
156.173   Large-scale developments or planned unit developments
   
156.174   Variances not granted
C-1 Neighborhood Shopping Districts
   
156.185   Application of provisions
   
156.186   Permitted and special uses
   
156.187   District restrictions
   
156.188   Residential yards
   
156.189   Business yards
   
156.190   Building height limitation
C-2 Community Shopping Districts
   
156.205   Application of provisions
   
156.206   Permitted and special uses
   
156.207   District restrictions
   
156.208   Yard specifications
   
156.209   Building height limitation
L-1 Light Manufacturing Districts
   
156.220   Application of provisions
   
156.221   Permitted uses
   
156.222   District restrictions
   
156.223   Measurement of sound levels
   
156.224   Smoke and particulate matter
   
156.225   Prohibited uses
   
156.226   Lot area
   
156.227   Yard requirements
   
156.228   Building height limitation
   
156.229   Special uses
L-2 Light Manufacturing Districts
   
156.240   Application of provisions
   
156.241   Permitted uses
   
156.242   District restrictions
   
156.243   Prohibited uses
   
156.244   Yard specification
   
156.245   Building height limitation
   
156.246   Special uses
L-3 Motor Freight Terminal Districts
   
156.260   Application of provisions
   
156.261   Use of district described
   
156.262   Motor freight terminal use defined
   
156.263   Permitted uses
   
156.264   Area regulations
   
156.265   Accessory building or use
   
156.266   Issuance of permits
   
156.267   Special permit use for hot mix asphalt manufacturing and construction
contractors with outdoor storage facility
   
156.268   Method of granting special permit use for hot mix asphalt
manufacturing and construction contractors with outdoor storage facility
General Use Regulations
   
156.280   Establishment of permitted uses; certain uses prohibited
   
156.281   Conformance with provisions required
   
156.282   Erection of buildings and encroachments
   
156.283   Open spaces belong to one lot
   
156.284   Accessory buildings
   
156.285   Projections into yards
   
156.286   Location of fuel pumps
   
156.287   Fences
   
156.288   Removal of topsoil or fill materials prohibited; grading plan
   
156.289   Subdivision regulations to conform to lot requirements of district
   
156.290   Prohibited uses in all districts
   
156.291   Keeping of debris, junk and trash prohibited
   
156.292   Commercial fences
   
156.293   Storm doors
   
156.294   Grass sodding
   
156.295   Community residences
   
156.296   Cannabis businesses
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
   
156.310   Definitions
   
156.311   Off-street parking required
   
156.312   Plan for off-street parking; approval of Plan Commission; compliance
   
156.313   All-weather surfacing and illumination required
   
156.314   Commercial vehicle parking in residential district
   
156.315   Additions or enlargements of existing building or use
   
156.316   Mixed uses; number of spaces required
   
156.317   Schedule of parking requirements
   
156.318   Off-street loading space required
   
156.319   Surface requirement of loading area
   
156.320   Entrance and exit in commercial or manufacturing district
   
156.321   Loading space to be separate from parking area
   
156.322   Loading requirement in L-1 or L-2 Districts
Sign Regulations
   
156.335   Finding of facts
   
156.336   Protrusion or extension beyond property lines
   
156.337   Lighting and reflecting devices
   
156.338   Commercial messages
   
156.339   Animated and audible signs prohibited
   
156.340   Maintenance of structures after use has ceased
   
156.341   Specific regulations for certain districts
   
156.342   Exceptions
   
156.343   Outdoor advertising signs along expressways
   
156.344   “For sale” sign permit fee
   
156.345   Billboards and advertising structures
   
156.346   Roadside memorials
Non-Conforming Uses and Exceptions
   
156.360   Elimination of non-conformities
   
156.361   Abandonment of use
   
156.362   Non-conforming buildings and uses
   
156.363   Height exceptions
   
156.364   Area exceptions
Unit Development Plan
   
156.375   Residential Development Plan; approval of Plan; issuance of permit
   
156.376   Community Shopping Center Development Plan; approval by Board of
Appeals
Special Uses
   
156.390   Purpose
   
156.391   Authorization
   
156.392   Application for permit; additional requirement for planned
development
   
156.393   Hearings on applications; notice of hearings
   
156.394   Findings of fact and recommendation of Plan Commission
   
156.395   Standards for issuance of special use permit
   
156.396   Contents of special use permit
   
156.397   Conditions and guarantees
   
156.398   Final plats
   
156.399   Time limit for start of development of property
   
156.400   Continuing control of special use project
   
156.401   Fees
   
156.402   Issuance of permits
Amendments
   
156.415   Application for amendment
   
156.416   Notice of hearing
   
156.417   When owner shall file petition
   
156.418   Passage of protected amendment
   
156.419   Submittal of requests for amendment by Plan Commission to City
Council
   
156.420   Vote of City Council required for passage of amendment
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals
   
156.435   Establishment; membership
   
156.436   Meetings
   
156.437   Powers and duties
   
156.438   Variances; notice of hearing
   
156.439   Exercise of powers
   
156.440   Appeals
Administration and Enforcement
   
156.455   Director of Building and Housing to enforce provisions
   
156.456   Occupancy certificates
   
156.457   Plats to accompany application for building permit
   
156.458   Procedure to prevent violations
   
156.459   Fees
   
156.460   Availability of copies of chapter
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Zoning Regulations of the City”.
(Prior Code, § 156.001)
§ 156.002 INTERPRETATION; PURPOSE.
   (A)   In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to: be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of a
comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure
safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air;
to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of
population; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; and to promote the
public interest, health, comfort, convenience, safety or general welfare.
   (B)   (1)   It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate
or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or
issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, or
which shall be adopted, or issued, pursuant to law relating to the use of
buildings or premises, nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere with or
abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties.
      (2)   However, where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the
use of buildings or premises or upon height of buildings or requires larger
open spaces than are imposed or required by such ordinances, rules, regulations
or permits, or by easements, covenants or agreements that the provisions of
this chapter shall control.
(Prior Code, § 156.002)
§ 156.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building, the use of which is clearly
incidental to that of the main building or to the use of the land.
   ADJACENT. Nearby, but not necessarily touching.
   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare not more than 20 feet wide.
   APARTMENT. A suite of rooms, with cooking facilities and private bath and
toilet facilities, used for living purposes. Each APARTMENT is considered a
dwelling unit.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. A building containing apartments.
   AREA OF A SIGN. That area in square feet of the smallest geometric figure or
combination of regular geometric figures which figure or figures enclose both
the copy and facing of the sign.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. A place of business having pumps and/or storage
tanks from which liquid fuel and/or lubricants are dispensed at retail directly
into the motor vehicle. Sales and installation of auto accessories, washing,
polishing, inspections and cleaning, but not steam cleaning may be carried on
incidental to the sale of such fuel and lubricants.
   BASEMENT. A story, partly underground, which has not more than one-half its
height measured from finished floor to finished ceiling above the average grade
of the adjoining ground.
   BILLBOARD. Any structure or portion thereof upon which a sign or
advertisement used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making anything
known is displayed. This definition does not include any bulletin boards used
to display official court or public office notices.
   BLOCK. The property abutting on one side of a street between the two nearest
intersecting streets or other natural barriers.
   BOARDINGHOUSE. A dwelling in which three, four or five rooms are occupied as
guest rooms and in which food may be served to the occupants thereof. Any
dwelling in which more than five rooms are occupied as guest rooms is deemed to
be a hotel. A BOARDINGHOUSE does not include institutions for persons requiring
physical or mental care by reason of age, infirmity or disease.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls.
   BUILDING AREA. The total area, taken on a horizontal plane at the average
grade level, of the principal buildings and all accessory buildings, exclusive
of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the natural grade level
to the highest level of the roof surface of flat roofs, to the deck line of
mansard roofs or to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable,
gambrel or hip roofs. The BUILDING HEIGHT limitations of these zoning
regulations shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes,
monuments, water towers, chimneys, flues, vents, flag poles, radio towers,
television towers, public observation towers or airway beacons; nor to any
bulkhead, elevator, water tank or similar structure extending above the roof
and occupying an aggregate area of not greater than 25% of the horizontal
projected roof area.
   BUILDING LINE. A building line corresponds to the rear boundary of the front
yard.
   BUILDING, MAIN. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the
lot on which it is situated.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cannabis craft grower, cannabis
cultivation center, cannabis dispensary, cannabis infuser, cannabis processor,
or cannabis transporter, as herein defined.
   CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or business
that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry,
cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705 et seq. as
it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705 et seq.
or the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act, as they may be
amended from time-to- time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS DISPENSARY. A facility operated by an organization or business that
is licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation
to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business establishments for the
purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis
seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to purchasers or to qualified
registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705 et seq., and the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Program Act, as they may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS INFUSER. A facility operated by an organization or business that is
licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to directly incorporate
cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to produce a
cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705
et seq., as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   CANNABIS PROCESSOR. A facility operated by an organization or business that
is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to either extract
constituent chemicals or compounds to produce cannabis concentrate or
incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a product formulation to
produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS
705 et seq., as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS TRANSPORTER. An organization or business that is licensed by the
Illinois Department of Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a
cannabis business establishment or a community college licensed under the
Community College Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act 410 ILCS 705 et seq., as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. A passenger car, truck or bus designed and operated for
the purpose of monetary gain.
   CONTIGUOUS. In contact with.
   COURT. Any space other than a yard on the same lot with a building or group
of buildings, and which is unobstructed and open to the sky above the floor
level of any room having a window or door opening on such court. The width of a
COURT shall be its least horizontal dimension.
   DEPTH OF REAR YARD. The average horizontal distance between the rear line of
the main building and the centerline of the alley or easement, otherwise the
rear lot line.
   DISTRICT. A portion of the city within which certain regulations and
requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of
these zoning regulations.
   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. Any establishment where food or beverages are dispensed
and where such food or beverages are consumed on the premises, but not within a
building.
   DWELLING, THEATER. An open-air theater designed for viewing by the audience
from motor vehicles.
   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY. Containing one dwelling unit.
   DWELLING UNIT. A group of rooms or a room occupied or intended for human
occupancy.
   ELECTRIC SIGN. A sign served or energized with electric current for purpose
of illumination or for any other purpose.
   FAMILY. A group of one or more persons occupying a building and living and
cooking in a single dwelling unit. No unrelated group living and cooking in a
single dwelling unit shall consist of more than six persons, as distinguished
from a group occupying a lodginghouse or hotel.
   FRONTAGE. All property on one side of a street between two intersecting
streets or other natural barriers.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. An accessory building designed for occupancy by the
passenger motor vehicles of the family residing on the same lot. This may
include one commercial vehicle under one ton capacity. Non- commercial vehicles
of persons not resident on the lot may occupy up to one-half the capacity of
such garage.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. Any building, other than that as a private garage, as
defined above, used for the storage or care of motor vehicles, or where any
such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration,
hire or sale.
   GRADE, STREET. The elevation of the center of a street in front of the
center of a building as established by the City Engineer.
   GUEST ROOM. A room occupied for hire by one or more persons in which no
cooking facilities are provided.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Business activity conducted within any residential dwelling
and carried on by the inhabitants thereof, which business activity is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the residential dwelling for dwelling
purposes and does not change the character thereof. For purposes of this
section, a home occupation does not include individuals who work from their
home on a full or part time basis for an employer who maintains a separate
place of business.
   HOSPITAL. A place for the treatment or care of human ailments and unless
otherwise specified, the term includes sanitarium, clinic, maternity home, rest
home, homes for the aged and convalescent homes.
   HOTEL. A building other than a boardinghouse or a motel as defined in this
chapter which building contains more than five guest rooms.
   JUNKYARD. The use of a lot, or portion thereof, for the storage, keeping or
abandonment of junk, dismantled automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or
parts thereof including scrap metals, rags or other scrap materials.
   LAUNDRY, SELF-SERVICE. A building in which washing machines and/or dryers
are provided on a rental basis for use by individuals doing their own laundry.
   LIVING FLOOR AREA. The horizontal projected area of a residential dwelling
as measured by the exterior dimensions of the building, exclusive of garages,
carports, breezeways and porches.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group
of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and
unloading passengers, merchandise or materials.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a main building
together with its accessory building; the open spaces and parking spaces
required by these zoning regulations, and having adequate access to a public
street.
   LOT AREA. The total horizontal projected area within the lot lines of a lot.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot located at the junction of, and abutting on two or more
streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed 135 degrees. A
CORNER LOT shall be considered to be in that block in which the lot fronts.
   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines,
measured along a line joining the midpoints of the front and rear lot lines.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot having but one side abutting on a street.
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot, as defined in this section.
      (1)   FRONT LOT LINES. The front property line of a lot shall be
determined as follows.
         (a)   CORNER LOT. The front property line of a corner lot shall be the
shorter of the two lines adjacent to the streets as originally platted or laid
out. Where the lines are equal, the front line shall be that line which is
obviously the front by reason of the prevailing custom of the other buildings
in the block. If such front is not evident, then either may be considered the
front of the lot, but not both.
         (b)   INTERIOR LOTS. The front property line of an interior lot shall
be the line bounding the street frontage.
         (c)   THROUGH LOTS. The front property line of a through line of a
through lot shall be that line which is obviously the front by reason of the
prevailing custom of the other buildings in the block. Where such front
property line is not obviously evident, the Planning and Zoning Board of
Appeals shall determine the front property line. Such a lot over 200 feet deep
may be considered, for the purposes of this definition, two lots each with its
own frontage.
      (2)   REAR LOT LINES. The rear property line of a lot is that lot line
opposite to the front property line. Where the side property lines of a lot
meet in a point, the rear property line shall be assumed to be a line not less
than ten feet in length, lying within the lot and parallel to the front
property line. In the event that the front property line is a curved line, then
the REAR PROPERTY LINE shall be a line not less than ten feet long, lying
within the lot and parallel to a line tangent to the front property line at its
midpoint.
      (3)   SIDE LOT LINES. The side property lines of a lot are those lot
lines connecting the front and rear property lines of a lot.
      (4)   LOT WIDTH. The width of a lot shall be as follows:
         (a)   If the side property lot lines are parallel, the distance
between these side lines, measured at the building line; and
         (b)   If the side property lot lines are not parallel, the width of
the lot shall be the length of a line at right angles to the axis of the lot as
measured at the building line for the district in which the lot is located. The
axis of a lot shall be a line joining the midpoints of the front and rear
property lot lines.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot abutting two parallel or approximately parallel streets.
   MAINTENANCE. The replacing of a part or parts of a building, which have been
made unusable by ordinary wear or tear, or by the weather.
   MOTEL. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms or
apartments, each of which maintains a separate outside entrance, used primarily
for the accommodation of automobile travelers and providing automobile parking
space on the premises.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. A building containing two or more dwelling units.
   NON-CONFORMING BUILDING. A building or structure lawfully existing on 8-26-
1956, or at the time any amendments to this chapter became effective and that
does not conform with the use regulations of this chapter or such amendments as
they apply to the district in which it is located.
   NON-CONFORMING USE. A use on a lot, building or structure, lawfully existing
on 8-26-1956, or at the time of the adoption of any amendments to this chapter
which does not conform with the use regulations of this chapter as set out in
§§
156.260 through
156.266 of this chapter or such amendments as they apply to the district in
which the lot, building or structure is located.
   PARKING AREA, PRIVATE. An open area for the same use as a private garage.
   PARKING LOT. A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking space for five
or more vehicles for compensation or otherwise.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An area in the form of a rectangle, measuring not
less than nine feet in width and 20 feet in depth; and an additional 120 square
feet shall be provided for each parking space for maneuvering and access space
giving access thereto for the parking of, or temporary storage of, a passenger
automobile.
   PORCH, OPEN. A roof partially supported by columns, which shall be no larger
than 144 square inches nor closer together than four feet on centers, any
portion of which extending into a front or side yard shall have no enclosure by
walls, screens, lattice or other materials; which porch is used solely for
ingress and egress, and not for occupancy as a sleeping porch or washroom.
   PRIVATE USE. One which is restricted to the occupants of a lot or building
together with their guests, where compensation for such use is not received,
and where no business or commercial activity is associated with such use or
building.
   PROFESSIONAL USE. The rendering of service of a professional nature by:
      (1)   Architects, engineers and surveyors, who are licensed by the
state’s Department of Registration and Education;
      (2)   Doctors, osteopaths and dentists who are licensed by the state’s
Department of Registration and Education;
      (3)   Lawyers who are admitted to practice before the courts of the
states, and who are licensed by the state’s Department of Registration and
Education;
      (4)   Certified public accountants who are licensed by the state’s
Department of Registration and Education;
      (5)   Consultants and practitioners who are recognized by the appropriate
licensed professions described in this section: chiropractors; chiropodists;
Christian Science practitioners; optometrists and naturopaths, upon review of
references submitted to the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals.
   PROHIBITED USE. A use which is not specifically permitted or analogous to
those specifically permitted.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment other than a boardinghouse where meals which
are prepared therein may be secured by the public.
   ROOMING HOUSE. See BOARDINGHOUSE, as defined above.
   SCHOOL. A place of general instruction including college, but not including
business colleges, nursery schools, dancing schools, riding academies or
specialized trade or vocational schools.
   SERVICE STATION. See AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION, as defined above.
   SIGN. Any words, numerals, figures, devices, designs or trademarks by which
anything is made known, other than billboards or house numbers, such as are
used to identify an individual, firm, profession, business and are visible to
the general public.
   SLEEPING ROOM. A room other than a guest room, in which cooking facilities
are not provided.
   STORY.
      (1)   The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor above it, or if there is no floor above it,
then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.
      (2)   A basement, the ceiling of which is less than four feet six inches
above the average grade level, shall not be considered a STORY.
      (3)   A mezzanine floor shall be considered a STORY if it exceeds 40% of
the area of the floor next below it.
   STREET. A public thoroughfare or land dedicated for such purpose which
affords the principal means of pedestrian and vehicular access to abutting
property.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any
substantial change in the exterior walls or the roof, except such alterations
as may be required for the safety of the building.
   USE. The purpose for which land or premises or a building or structure
thereon is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or
maintained, let or leased.
   YARD. A required space other than a court on any lot, unoccupied by a
structure and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided
in this chapter, and measured as the minimum horizontal distance from a
building or structure, to the property line opposite such building line.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of
which is the horizontal distance measured along a line perpendicular to the
front lot line between the front lot line and the nearest part of a building
constructed or to be constructed on the lot.
   YARD, REAR. An open space (unoccupied, except for accessory buildings) on
the same lot with the main building, between the rear line of the main building
and the rear line of the lot, for the full width of the lot.
   YARD, SIDE. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with the main building
between the building and the side lot line and extending from the front yard to
the rear yard.
(Prior Code, § 156.003) (Ord. 20-O-2258, passed 3-18-2020; Ord. 21-O-2316,
passed 11-17-2021)
DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
§ 156.015 USE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   For the purpose of these zoning regulations, the city is divided into use
districts as follows:
   (A)   R-1 Districts: One-Family (single-family) Residential Districts;
   (B)   R-2 Districts: One-Family Residential Districts;
   (C)   R-3 Districts: One-Family Residential Districts;
   (D)   R-3A Districts: One-Family Residential Districts;
   (E)   R-4 Districts: One-Family Residential Districts;
   (F)   R-5A Districts: Group Houses and Garden Apartments;
   (G)   C-1 Districts: Neighborhood Shopping Districts;
   (H)   C-2 Districts: Community Shopping Districts;
   (I)   L-1 Districts: Light Manufacturing Districts;
   (J)   L-2 Districts: Light Manufacturing Districts; and
   (K)   L-3 Districts: Motor Freight Terminal Districts.
(Prior Code, § 156.015)
§ 156.016 LOCATION AND BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS.
   The locations and boundaries of the classes of districts are shown upon the
map, attached to and made a part of the Zoning Code of the city which became
effective 8-26-1956, being designated as “Zoning Districts, City of Markham,
Illinois”, and the map as subsequently amended and modified by ordinance and
all notations, references and other matters shown thereon, shall be as much a
part of this chapter as if the matters set forth by the map were fully
described in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.016)
§ 156.017 ANNEXED LAND.
   All territory which may be annexed to the city after 8-26-1956, shall
automatically be classed as lying and being in the R-1 District, until such
classification is changed by an amendment to these zoning regulations, as
provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 156.017)
ZONING MAP; STANDARDS
§ 156.030 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Official Map and
Standards Ordinance”.
(Prior Code, § 156.030)
§ 156.031 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter: to adopt an official map; to adopt and
designate official standards for the development and redevelopment of the
municipality; and to provide for the filing of copies of such maps and
standards in the office of the City Clerk for the information of the public.
(Prior Code, § 156.031)
§ 156.032 IDENTIFICATION OF MAPS AND STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   Previously printed maps and standards attached to the Zoning Code and
incorporated in this chapter by reference and made a part of this chapter shall
be identified by the following statement marked or stamped thereon: “Adopted by
reference as a part of the Official Map and Standards Ordinance passed on 3-6-
1969 by the City Council of the City of Markham, Illinois, approved by the
Mayor and attested by the City Clerk on 3-6-1969.”
(Prior Code, § 156.032)
§ 156.033 OFFICIAL MAP ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The following map attached to the Zoning Code and on file in the City
Clerk’s office, is incorporated by reference and adopted as a part of this
chapter and shall be known as the official map or parts thereof:
   (A)   Future annexations, land suitable for annexation and recommended
zoning, 3-6-1969;
   (B)   Major streets, proposed major streets and other connecting streets, 3-
6-1969; and
   (C)   Public grounds, proposed public parks, playgrounds, school sites and
other public grounds, 3-6-1969.
(Prior Code, § 156.033)
§ 156.034 OFFICIAL STANDARDS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   The standards attached to this chapter are incorporated by reference
and shall be known as the official standards of the city.
   (B)   These standards are found in this code as follows:
      (1)   Ch. 53, Waterworks and Sewerage System; Private Water and Sewer
System;
      (2)   Ch. 98, Streets and Sidewalks; and
      (3)   Ch. 154, Subdivision Regulations.
(Prior Code, § 156.034)
§ 156.035 USE OF MAPS AND STANDARDS IN OTHER ORDINANCES.
   The maps and standards adopted under §§
156.033 and
156.034 of this chapter may be adopted by reference to their titles in other
ordinances which regulate the development of the municipality without further
filing or publication, except where the statutes require otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 156.035)
§ 156.036 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ADOPTED.
   The “Markham Comprehensive Plan Update” prepared by Teska Associates, LTD.
dated June 19, 2024 and approved by the City Council on June 19, 2024 is the
Official Comprehensive Plan for the city.
(Prior Code, § 156.036) (Ord. 24-O-2391, passed 6-19-2024)
§ 156.037 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF SUBCHAPTER.
   Provisions of this chapter, including such maps and standards as are adopted
by reference, which also may be incorporated by reference in other regulator
ordinances shall be administered and enforced by the officers designated in
such regulatory ordinances. Those provisions of this chapter not incorporated
in other ordinances shall be enforced by the Mayor.
(Prior Code, § 156.037)
R-1 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 156.050 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The regulations set out in this subchapter shall apply to all R-1 Districts
and shall be subject to the provisions of §§
156.310 through
156.322,
156.335 through
156.345 and
156.360 through
156.364 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.050)
§ 156.051 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in an R-1 District:
   (A)   Customary accessory uses and buildings, including private garages. An
accessory building shall not include servants’ quarters, guest rooms or
sleeping rooms;
   (B)   One single-family dwelling on any lot or parcel, which dwelling shall
be of such size, bulk and construction as to contain on the first floor thereof
a minimum of 1,040 square feet of living floor area if such dwelling is of the
single floor design; or 900 square feet of living floor area on the first floor
if the dwelling is of the story and one-half or split-level design; or 800
square feet of living floor area on the first floor if the building is of the
two-story design;
   (C)   Temporary offices and/or construction sheds and uses incidental to a
construction project on approval of location, size and necessity, by the Mayor
and City Council, but only for the duration of such project, but not exceeding
12 months. Extension of such time limit may be renewed for six-month periods
upon a showing of necessity by the petitioner; and
   (D)   Truck gardening and other horticultural uses where no building is
involved; all subject to the applicable health and sanitation regulations of
this code and any other applicable ordinances of the city.
   (E)   Home occupations, subject to the following:
      (1)   All persons conducting a home occupation must first secure a
business license pursuant to Title XI of this city code.
      (2)   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling
unit or accessory building. All sales must be conducted entirely by mail,
telephone or the internet. In-person retail sales are prohibited.
      (3)   No more than 25% of the dwelling unit may be devoted to the home
occupation.
      (4)   The home occupation shall be incidental and subordinate to the
principal use of the building as a dwelling, and no alterations to the dwelling
unit may be made which change the character thereof.
      (5)   Only members of the immediate family occupying the dwelling unit
may be employed in connection with the home occupation.
      (6)   No signs related to the home occupation may be displayed.
      (7)   No mechanical or electrical equipment may be used except such types
as are customary for domestic, household or hobby purposes. No equipment which
creates noise vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference beyond
what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district shall be used.
      (8)   No hazardous materials may be used or stored on the premises of the
home occupation.
      (9)   No equipment or materials associated with the home occupation may
be stored outside the dwelling unit or accessory building. This includes heavy
equipment and trailers used for commercial purposes.
      (10)   No truck or commercial vehicle, other than a Class B truck or
Class B commercial vehicle as defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code or by
the Illinois Secretary of State, may be parked or stored in any residential
zoning district. All trucks greater than a Class B, heavy equipment, and/or
trailers used for commercial purposes shall be removed from residential
property and not allowed to be parked or stored in any residential zoning
district after January 1, 2024.
      (11)   The home occupation shall be limited to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
      (12)   The following home occupations are expressly forbidden:
         (a)   Barbershops and beauty parlors;
         (b)   Commercial stables;
         (c)   Veterinary hospitals;
         (d)   Poultry farms and kennels;
         (e)   Real estate offices;
         (f)   Restaurants; and
         (g)   Firearms dealing.
(Prior Code, § 156.051) (Ord. 21-O-2316, passed 11-17-2021)
§ 156.052 CONDITIONAL USES.
   The following may also be permitted upon approval of their location and
development by the Plan Commission:
   (A)   School, elementary and high (public or private);
   (B)   Churches and buildings usually associated with similar activities;
   (C)   Publicly-owned and operated parks, playgrounds and other recreation
uses, including eating and drinking, sales and service establishments accessory
to the use of the above. However, no such accessory use shall be located closer
than 100 feet to any adjacent residential property;
   (D)   Governmental and public utility buildings and facilities when
necessary for serving the surrounding territory; provided that, no public
business offices and no repair or storage facilities are maintained therein;
and
   (E)   Hospitals, clinics and sanitariums.
(Prior Code, § 156.052) (Ord. 85-O-1166, passed 3-18-1985; Ord. 86-O-1205,
passed 1-15-1986)
§ 156.053 LOT AREA.
   Each lot shall have a minimum width of 80 feet. The minimum lot area per
dwelling unit shall be 9,000 square feet. No building with its accessory
buildings shall occupy in excess of 30% of the area of an interior lot, nor in
excess of 30% of the area of a corner lot.
(Prior Code, § 156.053)
§ 156.054 YARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   There shall be a front yard having a depth not less than that
established by an existing main building on the nearest lot within 100 feet.
      (2)   However, on a lot between two lots each within 100 feet, which lots
have established front yards, then the minimum front yard shall be that
established by a line joining the nearest front corner of the main building on
one lot and the nearest front corner of the main building on the other lot.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall require that a front yard be more
than 35 feet in depth or to permit a front yard of less than 20 feet in depth.
On a lot that is not within 100 feet of a lot with an established front yard,
the front yard shall be not less than 25 feet.
   (B)   There shall be a rear yard of not less than 10% of the depth of the
lot. However, such rear yard shall be a minimum of ten feet in depth.
   (C)   (1)   Two side yards shall be provided for each lot.
      (2)   The combined width of the two side yards shall be not less than 25%
of the lot width, with a minimum width of eight feet for either side yard.
(Prior Code, § 156.054)
§ 156.055 CORNER LOT.
   Front yard requirements shall be complied with along both streets abutting
corner lots; except that, the depth of the yard abutting the side street need
not exceed 20 feet.
(Prior Code, § 156.055)
§ 156.056 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   No building shall be erected or altered to exceed 30 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 156.056)
R-2 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 156.070 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The following regulations set out in this subchapter shall apply to all R-
2 Districts, and shall be subject to the provisions of §§
156.310 through
156.322,
156.335 through
156.345 and
156.360 through
156.364 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.065)
§ 156.071 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in an R-2 District:
   (A)   One single-family dwelling on any lot or parcel which dwelling shall
be of such size, bulk, and construction as to contain on the first floor
thereof a minimum of 1,040 square feet of living floor area if such dwelling is
of the single-floor design; or 810 square feet of living floor area on the
first floor if the dwelling is of the story and one-half or split-level design;
or 720 square feet of living floor area on the first floor if the dwelling is
of the two-story design; and
   (B)   All uses permitted in the R-1 District.
(Prior Code, § 156.066)
§ 156.072 LOT AREA.
   (A)   Each lot shall have a minimum lot width of 70 feet.
   (B)   The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 8,000 square feet.
   (C)   No building with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of 30%
of the area of an interior lot, nor in excess of 30% of the area of a corner
lot.
(Prior Code, § 156.067)
§ 156.073 YARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The yard requirements specified in the R-1 Residence Districts shall
be the requirements for the R-2 Residence Districts as if the same were set
forth in this subchapter; except that, the side yard requirements shall be as
follows: two side yards shall be provided for each lot.
   (B)   The combined width of the two side yards shall be not less than 25% of
the lot width, with a minimum width of seven feet for either side yard.
(Prior Code, § 156.068)
§ 156.074 CORNER LOT.
   The corner lot requirements specified in the R-1 Residence District shall be
the requirements for the R-2 Residence District as if the same were set forth
in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.069)
§ 156.075 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   No building shall be erected or altered to exceed 30 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 156.070)
R-3 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 156.090 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to all R-3 Districts, and shall be
subject to the provisions of §§
156.310 through
156.322,
156.335 through
156.345 and
156.360 through
156.364 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.080)
§ 156.091 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in a R-3 District:
   (A)   One single-family dwelling on any lot or parcel, which dwelling shall
be of such size, bulk and construction as to contain on the first floor thereof
a minimum of 960 square feet of living floor area if such dwelling is of the
single-floor design; or 720 square feet of living floor area on the first floor
if the dwelling is of the story and one-half, split-level or two-story design;
and
   (B)   All uses permitted in the R-2 district.
(Prior Code, § 156.081)
§ 156.092 LOT AREA.
   Each lot shall have a minimum lot width of 60 feet. The minimum area per
dwelling unit shall be 7,200 square feet. No building with its accessory
buildings shall occupy in excess of 30% of the area of an interior lot, nor in
excess of 30% of a corner lot.
(Prior Code, § 156.082)
§ 156.093 YARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The yard requirements specified in the R-1 Residence Districts shall
be the requirements for the R-3 Residence Districts as if the same were set
forth under this subchapter; except that, the side yard requirements shall be
as follows: two side yards shall be provided for each lot.
   (B)   The combined width of the two side yards shall be not less than 25% of
the lot width, with a minimum width of six feet for either side yard.
(Prior Code, § 156.083)
§ 156.094 CORNER LOT.
   The corner lot requirements specified in the R-1 Residence District shall be
the requirements for the R-3 Residence District as if the same were set forth
under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.084)
§ 156.095 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   No building shall be erected or altered to exceed 30 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 156.085)
R-3A ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 156.110 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The following sections shall apply to all R-3A One-Family Use Districts and
shall be subject to the provisions of §§
156.310 through
156.322,
156.335 through
156.345 and
156.360 through
156.364 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.095) (Ord. 547, passed - -1964)
§ 156.111 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted in an R-3A District:
   (A)   One single-family dwelling on any lot or parcel, which dwelling shall
be of such size, bulk and construction as to contain on the first floor thereof
a minimum of 1,050 square feet of living floor area if such dwelling is of the
single-floor design; or 720 square feet of living area on the first floor if
the dwelling is of the story and one-half, split-level or two-story design; and
   (B)   All uses permitted in the R-3 District.
(Prior Code, § 156.096) (Ord. 547, passed - -1964)
§ 156.112 LOT AREA.
   (A)   Each lot shall have a minimum width of 57 feet.
   (B)   The minimum lot area per dwelling unit shall be 6,600 square feet.
   (C)   No building with its accessory buildings shall occupy in excess of 30%
of the area of an interior lot, nor in excess of 30% of a corner lot.
(Prior Code, § 156.097) (Ord. 547, passed - -1964)
§ 156.113 YARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   The yard requirements specified are:
   (A)   There shall be a rear yard of not less than ten feet in depth;
   (B)   Two side yards shall be provided for each lot;
   (C)   The total width of the yards shall not be less than ten feet with a
minimum of five feet for either side yard;
   (D)   There shall be provided a public utility easement of not less than six
feet as measured from the rear lot line; and
   (E)   No buildings shall be erected closer than ten feet from the rear lot
line.
(Prior Code, § 156.098) (Ord. 547, passed - -1964)
§ 156.114 CORNER LOT.
   The corner lot requirements specified in the R-1 Residence District shall
apply to R-3A Districts as if the same were set forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.099) (Ord. 547, passed - -1964)
§ 156.115 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   No building shall be erected or altered to exceed 30 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 156.100) (Ord. 547, passed - -1964)
R-3B ONE-FAMILY TOWN HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 156.130 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   There is hereby established Residential Housing District R-3B, One-Family
Town Home Residential District, with the following requirements.
   (A)   Such homes as are proposed shall have a minimum of 12,000 square feet
of living space.
   (B)   The lot size be a minimum of 524 feet wide with a depth of 105 feet.
   (C)   The setback on the west should be 25 feet from the lot line on Kedzie
Avenue, on the east side the setback should be ten feet from the lot line and
on the north and south the setback should be 25 feet from the lot line.
   (D)   The building height shall not exceed 30 feet.
   (E)   There should be a minimum of two parking spaces per unit and one
parking space per unit for guests.
   (F)   The 20-foot alley to the east of the lot should be vacated by the city
from 157th Street to 158th Street, with the developer and such successor
owners’ association as may be created responsible for black-topping and
maintenance of the former alley, the installation and maintenance of sewers
therein, in perpetuity, granting to the city a perpetual easement for
maintenance of such city facilities as may be underground therein and for
payment to the city of sewer fees for each living unit.
   (G)   The developer shall install a minimum of a six-inch water line from
the west side of Kedzie Avenue to the nearest location on the east side of
Kedzie Avenue, in accordance with state and county rules and regulations
regarding work on, under, above and upon Kedzie Avenue.
   (H)   The developer must improve 158th Street with black-topping as a part
of the project.
(Prior Code, § 156.105) (Ord. 04-O-1808, passed 8-4-2004)
R-4 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
§ 156.145 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The following regulations of this subchapter shall apply to all R-
4 Districts, and shall be subject to the provisions of §§
156.310 through
156.322,
156.335 through
156.345 and
156.360 through
156.364 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.110)
§ 156.146 PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in an R-4 District:
   (A)   One single-family dwelling on any lot or parcel, which dwelling shall
be of such size, bulk and construction as to contain on the first floor thereof
a minimum of 960 square feet of living floor area if such dwelling is of the
single-floor design; or 720 square feet of living floor area on the first floor
if the dwelling is of the story and one-half, split-level or two-story design;
and
   (B)   All uses permitted in the R-3 District.
(Prior Code, § 156.111)
§ 156.147 LOT AREA.
   Each lot shall have a minimum lot width of 45 feet. The minimum lot area per
dwelling unit shall be 5,400 square feet. No building with its accessory
buildings shall occupy in excess of 35% of the area of any interior lot, nor in
excess of 35% of a corner lot.
(Prior Code, § 156.112)
§ 156.148 YARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   The yard requirements specified in the R-1 Residence Districts shall be the
requirement for the R-4 Residence Districts as if the same were set forth in
this subchapter; except that, side yard requirements shall be as follows: two
side yards shall be provided for each lot. The total width of the two side
yards shall not be less than 15 feet; and neither of the side yards shall be
less than five feet in width.
(Prior Code, § 156.113)
§ 156.149 CORNER LOT.
   The corner lot requirements specified in the R-1 Residence District shall be
the requirements for the R-4 Residence District as if the same were set forth
in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.114)
§ 156.150 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   No building shall be erected or altered to exceed 30 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 156.115)
R-5A GROUP HOUSES AND GARDEN APARTMENT DISTRICTS
§ 156.165 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to all R-5A Districts and shall be
subject to the provisions of §§
156.280 through
156.290,
156.310 through
156.322,
156.335 through
156.345 and
156.360 through
156.364 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.125) (Ord. 545, passed - -1964)
§ 156.166 PERMITTED USES.
   The following are permitted in an R-5A District:
   (A)   All the uses permitted in the R-3 District;
   (B)   Dwelling designed to contain two or more living units, as defined in
division (C) below, to be used exclusively for dwelling purposes, not exceeding
two and one-half stories, or 30 feet in height, whichever is less, on any lot
or parcel, the dwelling shall be of such size, bulk and construction as to
contain a minimum of 450 square feet of living floor area for each efficiency
living unit, 600 square feet of living floor area for each one- bedroom living
unit, and an additional 100 square feet of living floor area for each
additional bedroom per living unit. In any dwelling designed to contain two or
more living units, not more than 25% of the total number of living units shall
be efficiency living units;
   (C)   The term LIVING UNIT referred to throughout this subchapter means any
room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable
unit with facilities that are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping
and eating, which contains but a single cooking facility; and
   (D)   An efficiency living unit shall not be occupied by more than two
persons.
(Prior Code, § 156.126) (Ord. 545, passed - -1964)
§ 156.167 LOT AREA.
   Each lot shall have a minimum width of 59 feet. The minimum lot area per
family unit shall be 1,900 square feet. No building with its accessory
buildings shall occupy in excess of 30% of the area of the lot.
(Prior Code, § 156.127) (Ord. 545, passed - -1964)
§ 156.168 YARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   The yard requirements specified in the proposed residential districts shall
be the requirements for the R-1 Residence District as if the same were set
forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.128) (Ord. 545, passed - -1964)
§ 156.169 CORNER LOT.
   The corner lot requirements in the R-1 Residence District shall be the
requirements of this district as if the same were set forth in this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.129) (Ord. 545, passed - -1964)
§ 156.170 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   No building shall be erected or altered to exceed 30 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 156.130) (Ord. 545, passed - -1964)
§ 156.171 LOCATION OF BACKS OF BUILDINGS.
   In those areas where the back, rear or service side of a building faces the
side lot line, rather than the rear lot line, permits shall be issued only for
pairs of such buildings, with the backs of each to be facing each other. The
minimum distance between any parts of adjacent buildings shall be 12 feet.
(Prior Code, § 156.131) (Ord. 545, passed - -1964)
§ 156.172 PARKING REGULATIONS.
   A minimum of one and one-fourth off-street parking spaces must be provided
for each family unit, the parking spaces to be located in the side or rear yard
and to be accessible by a driveway of not less than 12 feet in width to the
street, and must also conform to §§
156.310 through
156.322 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.132) (Ord. 545, passed - -1964)
§ 156.173 LARGE-SCALE DEVELOPMENTS OR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   All proposals containing more than four living units must be submitted to
the Plan Commission for approval before a building permit is issued. The
application must be accompanied by an overall development plan showing the use
or uses, dimensions and locations of proposed structures, of parking spaces and
of areas, if any, to be reserved for streets, parks, playgrounds, school sites
and other open spaces. Planned unit developments are a preferred form of
multiple-family development, and may offer substantial modifications in street
layout and land use. The tract or parcel of land involved must be either in one
ownership or the subject of an application filed jointly by the owners of all
the property included in the plan. The proposed development must be designed to
produce an environment of stable and desirable character, and must provide
standards of open and permanently reserved areas for off-street parking
adequate for the occupancy proposed, and at least equivalent to those required
by the terms of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.133) (Ord. 545, passed - -1964)
§ 156.174 VARIANCES NOT GRANTED.
   The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals shall not permit variations acting
to reduce the minimum living area or minimum lot area requirements of this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.134) (Ord. 545, passed - -1964)
C-1 NEIGHBORHOOD SHOPPING DISTRICTS
§ 156.185 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The following regulations in this subchapter shall apply to all C-
1 Districts and shall be subject to the provisions of §§
156.310 through
156.322,
156.335 through
156.345 and
156.360 through
156.364 of this chapter.
   (B)   The purpose of C-1 Neighborhood Shopping Districts is to allow
commercial retail stores, commercial establishments, service establishments and
professional offices that generate sales tax revenues, maintain the city’s
property tax base, and allow for convenient locations for the members of the
public in surrounding and nearby neighborhoods to shop, obtain services and
conduct business. The regulations concerning the C-1 Neighborhood Shopping
Districts are to be construed to prohibit all uses that are property tax
exempt.
(Prior Code, § 156.145) (Ord. 17-O-2180, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 156.186 PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   The following uses are permitted in a C-1 District:
      (1)   All general commercial and retail uses which supply commodities
primarily for residents of the surrounding neighborhood;
      (2)   Bakery shop (outlet);
      (3)   Barbershop or beauty parlor;
      (4)   Clothes cleaning pickup station;
      (5)   Cold storage lockers, excluding slaughtering;
      (6)   Delicatessen or meat market;
      (7)   Drugstore;
      (8)   Dry goods and notions;
      (9)   Florist;
      (10)   Grocery store;
      (11)   Hardware store;
      (12)   Laundry pickup station;
      (13)   Office business or professional;
      (14)   Restaurant, tea room, tavern (excluding dancing or similar
entertainment);
      (15)   Shoe repair;
      (16)   Self-service laundry; and
      (17)   Automobile painting, upholstering, repairing, reconditioning, body
and fender works. This use does not include the disassembly or removal of any
parts of any automotive vehicle for resale, nor resale of the entire vehicle as
junk. All automobiles leaving the premises must be in legal running condition.
   (B)   The following uses are special uses in a C-1 District:
      (1)   Where a particular C-1 District exceeds either 500 feet in its
greatest linear dimension or two acres in net area (excluding streets),
automobile service station for sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories
only; and where no repair work is done other than incidental service, the sale
of prepackaged foods and washing of automobiles, but not including steam
cleaning;
      (2)   (a)   Where a particular C-1 District exceeds either 500 feet in
its greatest linear dimension or two acres in net area (excluding streets),
automobile service stations may be located only at the following locations
within the city:
            1.   At the corners of 159th Street and Kedzie Avenue;
            2.   159th Street and Central Park;
            3.   159th Street and Crawford Avenue;
            4.   167th Street and Dixie Highway;
            5.   167th and Kedzie Avenue; and
            6.   167th and Crawford Avenue, with no restrictions in the number
of stations at any of the above locations.
         (b)   Only on the southwest corner of 159th and Spaulding Avenue and
only on the northwest corner of 159th and Fransico.
      (3)   Household appliance shop.
      (4)   Cannabis dispensary.
(Prior Code, § 156.146) (Ord. 622, passed - -1966; Ord. 74-O-867, passed - -
1974; Ord. 90-O-1372, passed 6-20-1990; Ord. 17-O-2180, passed 5-17-2017; Ord.
20-O-2258, passed 3-18-2020)
§ 156.187 DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS.
   The following restrictions apply to this district:
   (A)   Sales of second-hand merchandise or used merchandise is prohibited,
except in those cases where application is made to the office of the Mayor for
a permit for such sales. The Mayor may, in determining whether such permits
shall issue, require the applicant to provide relevant information with respect
to the nature of the proposed business of sale of second-hand or used
merchandise, the type or types thereof, the proposed manner of display and
operation and other relevant information. If the Mayor finds that the proposed
enterprise is in keeping with the best interest of the city and the commercial
development thereof, he or she shall issue such permit.
      (1)   Any permit for the sale of second-hand or used merchandise shall be
valid for a period ending with the expiration of the then current city business
license of the permittee. Application shall be made annually for such permit at
the time of application for renewal of the permittee’s city business license.
      (2)   (a)   The issuance of a permit pursuant to the terms and provisions
hereof shall be considered in the nature of a grant of privilege.
         (b)   In the event that any such business enterprise is conducted
other than a neat and orderly fashion, or other than consistent with sightly
and reasonable commercial practices, or other than consistent with the nature,
character and appearance of commercial enterprises engaged in the sale at
retail of new merchandise, or otherwise inconsistent with the best interest of
the city and the commercial development thereof, then the Mayor may suspend the
permit of said enterprises pending a hearing on the issue of whether such
permit shall be permanently revoked, or other sanctions, including a fine not
to exceed the sum of $500, shall be invoked.
         (c)   No such hearing shall be conducted by the Mayor, except upon
written notice to the permittee not less than five days prior to the
commencement of such hearing.
   (B)   All business or service or processing of stores set out in §
156.166 of this chapter, shops or businesses shall be conducted wholly within a
completely enclosed building, except for automobile parking and off-street
loading and sale of automotive fuel;
   (C)   Outdoor listings and displays are prohibited in any yard;
   (D)   The repair or processing of goods shall be limited to those which are
not objectionable by reason of odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, heat or
glare or water-carried waste;
   (E)   No more than two persons shall be engaged in fabrication, repair and
processing of materials; except that, this provision shall not apply to the
preparation of food in restaurants, cafés or soda fountains;
   (F)   All products produced, whether primary or incidental, shall be sold at
retail on the premises where produced;
   (G)   Outside storage of materials or supplies is prohibited;
   (H)   Any lighting must be so placed as to reflect the light away from lots
in residential districts; and
   (I)   No land or building shall be used or occupied as a motor freight
terminal.
(Prior Code, § 156.147) (Ord. 81-O-1059, passed 5-18-1981)
§ 156.188 RESIDENTIAL YARDS.
   Any residential use shall maintain the same yards required in this
subchapter for an R-3 District, except where dwelling units occupy the upper
floor of a building, the ground floor of which is used for business, the
minimum depth of the front yard shall be ten feet except as otherwise provided
under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.148)
§ 156.189 BUSINESS YARDS.
   (A)   Each main building, or portion thereof, serving as a business shall
have a front yard of not less than ten feet in depth; except that, no front
yard shall be required for any lot or lots in a block already partially
occupied with business buildings where no front yard or yards have been
provided.
   (B)   There shall be a rear yard of not less than 25% of the depth of the
lot, but such rear yard need not exceed 25 feet in depth.
   (C)   A side yard is not required, except where such use abuts upon the side
of a lot in an R District, in which case there shall be a side yard on the lot
in the C-1 District, the same as specified for the adjacent R District, and in
addition shall be fenced and screened from view from any adjoining lot in the R
District.
   (D)   Where the rear lot line of a corner lot in a C-1 District is in common
with or separated only by an alley from any line of a lot in a residence
district, a ten-foot side yard on the street side of such C-1 lot shall be
provided.
(Prior Code, § 156.149)
§ 156.190 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   No building shall be erected or altered to exceed 30 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 156.150)
C-2 COMMUNITY SHOPPING DISTRICTS
§ 156.205 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The following regulations set out in this subchapter shall apply to
all C-2 Districts and shall be subject to the provisions of §§
156.310 through
156.322,
156.335 through
156.345 and
156.360 through
156.364 of this chapter.
   (B)   The purpose of C-2 Community Shopping Districts is to allow commercial
retail stores, commercial establishments, service establishments and
professional offices that generate sales tax revenues, maintain the city’s
property tax base and allow for convenient locations for the members of the
public in the broader city community to shop, obtain services and conduct
business. The regulations concerning the C-2 Community Shopping Districts are
to be construed to prohibit all uses that are property tax exempt.
(Prior Code, § 156.160) (Ord. 17-O-2180, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 156.206 PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   The following uses are permitted in a C-2 District:
      (1)   Any uses permitted and regulated in C-1 Districts;
      (2)   Art or antique shop;
      (3)   Automobile sales and service conducted wholly within a completely
enclosed building;
      (4)   Bank;
      (5)   Bowling alley and billiards;
      (6)   Contractors, offices only (builders, carpenters, electricians and
the like);
      (7)   Confectionery store;
      (8)   Department, furniture or radio store, dress shop sales;
      (9)   Interior decorating store;
      (10)   Laundry (self-service and pickup agency);
      (11)   Liquor store;
      (12)   Men’s and women’s clothing sales;
      (13)   Money exchange;
      (14)   Music store;
      (15)   Newsstand or book shop;
      (16)   Non-manufacturing commercial laboratories;
      (17)   Photographic materials shop and/or photographic studio;
      (18)   Tailor and dressmaker;
      (19)   Tavern, cocktail lounge;
      (20)   Undertaking establishment;
      (21)   Upholstery shop;
      (22)   Veterinarian (wholly within enclosed building); and
      (23)   Household appliance shop.
   (B)   The following uses are special uses in the C-2 District:
      (1)   The sale at retail of used automobiles other than within a
completely enclosed building where such activity is carried on ancillary to and
in connection with the sale at retail of new automobiles conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building;
      (2)   Movie theater; and
      (3)   Cannabis dispensary.
(Prior Code, § 156.161) (Ord. 74-O-860, passed - -1974; Ord. 08-O-1937, passed
12-17-2008; Ord. 17-O-2180, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 20-O-2258, passed 3-18-2020)
§ 156.207 DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The district restrictions specified in the C-1 Districts shall apply
to the C-2 Districts as if the same were set forth in this subchapter; except
that, no more than ten persons shall be engaged at any one time in the
fabrication, repair and other processing of materials.
   (B)   This provision, however, shall not apply to the preparation of food in
restaurants, cafés or soda fountains.
(Prior Code, § 156.162)
§ 156.208 YARD SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Where all frontage is located in the C-2 District, a front yard of a
minimum of ten feet in depth shall be required.
   (B)   There shall be a rear yard of not less than 20 feet in depth, which
shall be fenced and screened from view.
   (C)   A side yard is not required, except where such use abuts upon the side
of a lot in an R District, in which case there shall be a side yard on the lot
in the C-2 District, the same as specified for the adjacent R District, and in
addition shall be fenced and screened from the view from any adjacent lot in
the R District.
(Prior Code, § 156.163)
§ 156.209 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   No building shall be erected or allowed to exceed 30 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 156.164)
L-1 LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
§ 156.220 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The following regulations of this subchapter shall apply to all L-
1 Districts and shall be subject to the provisions of §§
156.310 through
156.322,
156.335 through
156.345 and
156.360 through
156.364 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.175)
§ 156.221 PERMITTED USES.
   A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes in the
L-1 Light Manufacturing District:
   (A)   Any use permitted in the C-2 Commercial District; except that, new
residential structures shall not be permitted after 8-26-1956;
   (B)   The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of
such products as:
      (1)   Bakery goods;
      (2)   Candy;
      (3)   Cosmetics;
      (4)   Pharmaceuticals;
      (5)   Toiletries; and
      (6)   Food products (except fish and meat products, sauerkraut, vinegar,
yeast and the rendering or refining of fats and oils).
   (C)   The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or
merchandise from the following previously prepared materials:
      (1)   Bone;
      (2)   Cellophane;
      (3)   Canvas;
      (4)   Cloth;
      (5)   Cork;
      (6)   Feathers;
      (7)   Felt;
      (8)   Fiber;
      (9)   Fur;
      (10)   Glass;
      (11)   Hair;
      (12)   Horn;
      (13)   Paper;
      (14)   Plastics;
      (15)   Precious or semiprecious metals or stones;
      (16)   Previously prepared metals;
      (17)   Shell;
      (18)   Tanned leather;
      (19)   Textiles;
      (20)   Wood (excluding planing mill); and
      (21)   Yarns.
   (D)   The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic
products, using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by
electricity or gas;
   (E)   Assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices;
   (F)   Automobile painting, upholstering, repairing, reconditioning, body and
fender works;
   (G)   Creamery or bottling plant;
   (H)   Contractor’s equipment storage yard or plant, retail of equipment
commonly used by contractors;
   (I)   Laboratories, experimental or testing;
   (J)   Laundry, cleaning and dyeing works and carpet and rug cleaning;
   (K)   Lumberyard and coal yard;
   (L)   Plumbing or sheet metal shop;
   (M)   Wholesale business, storage and warehouses;
   (N)   The underground storage of petroleum and chemical products provided
such storage shall be maintained in strict compliance with all applicable
national and state standards for the storage of such materials; and
   (O)   There shall be the following additional uses permitted in the L-
1 District:
      (1)   Any and all municipal uses;
      (2)   Uses and activities related to municipal uses by non-municipal
operators;
      (3)   Outdoor sales of personal property for a period not in excess of
three days;
      (4)   The storage of abandoned and towed vehicles and items of seized
personal property;
      (5)   The erection of tents or other temporary structures for a period of
not more than 30 days;
      (6)   The storage of building, construction and roadway maintenance
supplies, indoors or out; and
      (7)   The permanent erection of outdoor advertising signs, if located
within 660 feet of an interstate expressway.
(Prior Code, § 156.176) (Ord. 74-O-874, passed - -1974; Ord. 98-O-1645, passed
6-17-1998)
§ 156.222 DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS.
   The following restrictions shall apply to this district.
   (A)   No land or building shall be used or occupied in any manner as to
create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable fire,
explosive, radioactive or other hazard; emit any noise or vibration, smoke,
dust, odor, noxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases, or particulate matter;
discharge any liquid or solid refuse or waste conducive to the breeding of
rodents or insects into any stream, ditch or other open area in a manner or
amount as to adversely affect the surrounding area.
   (B)   All operations permitted in the L-1 District shall be conducted wholly
within a completely enclosed building; and all raw materials, fuels, finished
products, machinery and equipment, including company-owned or operated trucks
and motor vehicles, shall be stored within an entirely closed building, or
within an area enclosed by a fence of an approved type and design. Liquids may
be stored in underground tanks, subject to the provisions of appropriate fire
and building codes.
   (C)   No operation shall be carried on that would produce heat or glare
perceptible from any property line of the lot on which the operation is
located.
   (D)   No lighting shall be of such a nature as to produce glare on public
streets or highways or neighboring property.
   (E)   No substance, other than oil, gas or electricity shall be used as
fuel.
(Prior Code, § 156.177)
§ 156.223 MEASUREMENT OF SOUND LEVELS.
   (A)   (1)   Sound levels shall be measured with a sound level meter and
associated octave band filter manufactured according to standards prescribed by
the American Standards Association.
      (2)   Measurements shall be made using the flat network of the sound
level meter.
      (3)   Impulsive type noises shall be subject to the performance standards
prescribed in this section; provided that, such noises shall be capable of
being accurately measured with such equipment.
      (4)   Noises capable of being so measured, for the purpose of this
subchapter, shall be those noises which cause rapid fluctuations of the needle
of the sound level meter with a variation of no more than plus or minus two
decibels.
      (5)   Noises incapable of being so measured, such as those of an
irregular and intermittent nature, shall be controlled so as not to become a
nuisance to adjacent uses.
   (B)   At no point on the boundary of a residence or business district shall
the sound intensity level of any individual operation or plant (other than the
operation of motor vehicles or other transportation facilities) exceed the
decibel levels in the designated octave bands shown on the following table:
Octave Band (Frequency Cycles Maximum Permitted Sound Level (decibels)
per Second)                   Along Residence District Along Business District
                              Boundaries               Boundaries
Octave Band (Frequency Cycles Maximum Permitted Sound Level (decibels)
per Second)                   Along Residence District Along Business District
                              Boundaries               Boundaries
0 to 75                       72                       75
75 to 150                     67                       70
150 to 300                    59                       63
300 to 600                    52                       57
600 to 1,200                  46                       52
1,200 to 2,400                40                       45
2,400 to 4,800                34                       40
Over 4,800                    32                       38
 
(Prior Code, § 156.178) (Ord. 610, passed - -1965)
§ 156.224 SMOKE AND PARTICULATE MATTER.
   (A)   The emission of smoke or particulate matter in such manner or quantity
as to endanger or be detrimental to the public health, safety, comfort or
welfare, is declared to be a public nuisance and is unlawful.
   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann
Chart, published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, shall be
employed.
      (2)   The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a density greater
than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart is prohibited at all times, except as
otherwise provided hereinafter.
   (C)   The emission from all sources within any lot area of particulate
matter containing more than 10% by weight of particles having particle diameter
larger than 44 microns is prohibited.
   (D)   (1)   Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from
such sources as storage areas, yards, roads and the like, within lot
boundaries, shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving,
oiling, fencing or other acceptable means.
      (2)   Emission of particulate matter from such sources, in excess of the
weight limitation hereinafter specified, is prohibited.
   (E)   (1)   The emission of more than eight smoke units per hour per stack
is prohibited, including smoke of a density in excess of Ringelmann No. 2.
      (2)   However, during one one-hour period in each 24-hour day each stack
may emit up to sixteen smoke units when blowing soot or cleaning fires.
      (3)   Only during fire-cleaning periods, however, shall smoke of
Ringelmann No. 3 be permitted, and then for not more than three minutes.
(Prior Code, § 156.179) (Ord. 610, passed - -1965) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.225 PROHIBITED USES.
   No building or area shall be used for any of the following uses:
   (A)   The cooking, distillation, processing and incineration of animal and
vegetable products, including, but not limited to, brewery, distillery, food-
canning plant, slaughterhouse, stockyards, fat rendering, soap manufacture,
glue manufacture, tannery, paper manufacture, wool-scouring and cleaning;
cotton textile sizing, scouring, bleaching, dyeing and similar operations;
paint and varnish manufacture, creosote and creosote products manufacture;
   (B)   The production of corrosive and noxious chemicals including, but not
limited to, acids, acetylene gas, ammonia, bleaching compounds;
   (C)   The production, processing and storage of coal, coal tar and asphalt
products including, but not limited to, coke manufacture, illuminating gas
production, petroleum refining, asphalt products, linoleum manufacture, oil-
cloth manufacture and roofing material manufacture;
   (D)   The extraction, preparation and processing of dust-producing mineral
products including, but not limited to, abrasives, cement, lime fertilizer,
plaster, crushed stone, stone-cutting products; mining of sand, gravel and
topsoil;
   (E)   The smelting and reduction of metallic ores including, but not limited
to, blast furnace, open hearth and electric furnace, Bessemer converter, non-
ferrous metal smelter;
   (F)   The manufacture and storage of explosive products, including, but not
limited to, dynamite and commercial explosives, TNT and military explosives and
fireworks;
   (G)   The use of hammer mills, ball mills, rolling mills or drop forges in
any industrial process;
   (H)   The storage of materials customarily stored in the open, such as junk,
paper and scrap metal; and/or
   (I)   No land or buildings shall be used as a motor freight terminal.
(Prior Code, § 156.180) (Ord. 74-O-874, passed - -1974) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.226 LOT AREA.
   No building for manufacturing purposes shall be constructed and no premises
shall be used for such purposes on any lot which has an area of less than
20,000 square feet, or which has a frontage of less than 100 feet on any public
street.
(Prior Code, § 156.181)
§ 156.227 YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The front lot yard shall have a minimum of 25 feet which shall
be used for either open landscaping and green areas or for service access to a
building or to a parking lot.
      (2)   Landscaped areas shall be done attractively with lawns, trees,
shrubs and similar treatment and shall be properly maintained in a sightly and
well kept condition.
   (B)   The rear yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
   (C)   The side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet from all side boundary
lines.
(Prior Code, § 156.182) (Ord. 74-O-748, passed - -1974)
§ 156.228 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   No building shall be erected or altered to exceed 30 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 156.183)
§ 156.229 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses are special uses in the L-1 District:
   (A)   Cannabis dispensaries;
   (B)   Cannabis craft growers;
   (C)   Cannabis cultivation centers;
   (D)   Cannabis infusers;
   (E)   Cannabis processors; and
   (F)   Cannabis transporters.
(Ord. 20-O-2258, passed 3-18-2020)
   L-2 LIGHT MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
§ 156.240 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The following regulations shall apply to all L-2 Districts and shall be
subject to the provisions of §§
156.310 through
156.322,
156.335 through
156.345 and
156.360 through
156.364 of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.195)
§ 156.241 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   All uses permitted and regulated in the L-1 Districts are permitted;
and
   (B)   The manufacture of concrete products.
(Prior Code, § 156.196) (Ord. 74-O-879, passed - -1974)
§ 156.242 DISTRICT RESTRICTIONS.
   The district restrictions specified in the L-1 Districts shall apply to the
L-2 Districts as if the same were set forth in this subchapter; except that,
open storage of all raw materials, fuel, finished products, machinery and
equipment, including company-owned or operated trucks and motor vehicles used
by the company solely for its purposes and incidental to light manufacturing
(specifically excluding therefrom motor freight terminal operations as
subsequently defined) are permitted; provided that, the area on which these
items are stored is enclosed by a fence of an approved type and design.
(Prior Code, § 156.197)
§ 156.243 PROHIBITED USES.
   The prohibited uses specified in the L-1 Districts shall also apply to the
L-2 Districts.
(Prior Code, § 156.198)
§ 156.244 YARD SPECIFICATION.
   (A)   (1)   The front yard shall be a minimum of 25 feet which shall be used
for either open landscaping and green areas or for service access to a building
or to a parking lot.
      (2)   Landscaped areas shall be done attractively with lawns, trees,
shrubs and similar treatment and shall be properly maintained in a sightly and
well-kept condition.
   (B)   The rear yard shall be a minimum of 15 feet.
   (C)   The side yard shall be a minimum of ten feet from all side boundary
lines.
(Prior Code, § 156.199) (Ord. 70-O-748, passed - -1970)
§ 156.245 BUILDING HEIGHT LIMITATION.
   No building shall be erected or altered to exceed 30 feet in height.
(Prior Code, § 156.200)
§ 156.246 SPECIAL USES.
   The following uses are special uses in the L-2 District:
   (A)   Cannabis dispensaries;
   (B)   Cannabis craft growers;
   (C)   Cannabis cultivation centers;
   (D)   Cannabis infusers;
   (E)   Cannabis processors; and
   (F)   Cannabis transporters.
(Ord. 20-O-2258, passed 3-18-2020)
L-3 MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL DISTRICTS
§ 156.260 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   The following definitions and regulations shall apply to all L-3 Districts.
(Prior Code, § 156.210)
§ 156.261 USE OF DISTRICT DESCRIBED.
   A motor freight terminal district is a use designed to accommodate large
scale trucking terminal operations on a minimum of 18 acres of land and
involving intrastate and interstate motor carriers, which activities are
incompatible with the great majority of other land uses and so are suitably
placed in a zoning district most compatible to such use and in a strategic
location for efficient coordination with the city’s planned streets and the
county and state thoroughfare and highway system.
(Prior Code, § 156.211) (Ord. 96-O-1564, passed 2-7-1996)
§ 156.262 MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL USE DEFINED.
   As a use specifically permitted in this subchapter, a MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL
DISTRICT is a building or buildings on an area of not less than 18 acres or an
area of not less than 18 acres in which freight brought by motor truck is
assembled and/or stored for outing in intrastate and interstate shipment by
motor truck.
(Prior Code, § 156.212) (Ord. 96-O-1564, passed 2-7-1996)
§ 156.263 PERMITTED USES.
   A building or premises shall be used only for the following purposes in the
L-3 Motor Freight Terminal District:
   (A)   Any use permitted in a C-1, C-2, L-1 and L-2 District other than new
residential use;
   (B)   Public utility and public services including uses such as, bus
terminals, off-the-street bus turnaround, bus garages and bus lots;
   (C)   Automobile service stations for the retail sale and dispensing of
fuel, lubricants, tires, batteries, accessories and supplies, including
installation and minor services customarily incidental thereto. Facilities for
chassis and gear lubrication and for washing are permitted only if enclosed in
a building;
   (D)   Battery and service stations;
   (E)   Cartage and express facilities;
   (F)   Dwelling units for watchmen and their families located on premises
where they are employed in such capacity;
   (G)   Garages and parking, auto and truck;
   (H)   Hotels and lodging houses;
   (I)   Motor freight terminal warehouses and repair shops;
   (J)   Motor vehicle service shops for passenger and commercial vehicles,
including body repair, automobile painting and engine rebuilding;
   (K)   Packing and crating facilities;
   (L)   Parcel delivery stations; and
   (M)   Special uses, as:
      (1)   Heliports;
      (2)   Signs as follows.
         (a)   In an L-3 District, business and advertising signs are permitted
without restriction; except that, the roof signs shall not project higher than
50 feet from the curb level, except as otherwise provided in this section, and
except as near public parks, major routes and residence districts.
         (b)   No signs shall be permitted within 400 feet of public parks or
main roadways (exclusive of access drives), of specified major routes if the
face thereof is visible therefrom and advertising signs located at greater
distance than 400 feet from such public parks, main roadways or major roads and
visible therefrom shall not exceed in gross area in square feet one-two-
hundredths times the square of the distance of such advertising signs from said
public parks, main roadways or major routes.
            1.   The designated 400 feet shall be measured from the centerline
of the streets bounding public parks or the boundary line of such public parks.
            2.   For the purposes of this section, parks and major routes shall
include public parks of five or more acres in area and all expressways and toll
roads.
         (c)   No advertising signs shall be permitted within 75 feet of any
property in a residential district.
      (3)   Cannabis dispensaries;
      (4)   Cannabis craft growers;
      (5)   Cannabis cultivation centers;
      (6)   Cannabis infusers;
      (7)   Cannabis processors; and
      (8)   Cannabis transporters.
(Prior Code, § 156.213) (Ord. 20-O-2258, passed 3-18-2020)
§ 156.264 AREA REGULATIONS.
   The owner of any tract of land within an L-3 area, comprising not less than
18 acres may submit to the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals of the city, a
plan for the use and development of the land, primarily for a motor freight
terminal area, which plan shall be processed in the manner prescribed in §§
156.375 and
156.376 of this chapter, and may be approved if the report of the city’s Plan
Commission shows that:
   (A)   The proposed motor freight terminal use involves an area of not less
than 18 acres;
   (B)   The area adjoins or is adjacent to existing or contemplated highways,
expressways, superhighways or superhighway systems, or on truck routes where
adequate paving is available for the carrying of heavy loads and easily
accessible to such highways, expressways or superhighways;
   (C)   The proposed use will not create nuisances to adjoining districts by
virtue of traffic conditions, inadequacy of streets, paving and accessibility
to the state and federal systems used in the conduct of the trucking business;
   (D)   The proposed motor freight terminal use is consistent with the intent
of the zoning regulations of the city to promote public health, safety and
general welfare; and
   (E)   The proposed motor freight terminal use provides that no building,
structure or other obstruction, except as allowed under this subchapter, nor
any off-street loading or unloading operation shall be located within 100 feet
of the boundary of any residential district, nor within 50 feet of the boundary
of any business or commercial district, unless such building, structure or
other obstruction is devoted to a permitted use other than motor freight
terminal, in which case such other provisions under the zoning regulations
applicable to such use shall be enforced.
(Prior Code, § 156.214) (Ord. 96-O-1564, passed 2-7-1996)
§ 156.265 ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE.
   An ACCESSORY BUILDING OR USE, for the purposes of this subchapter is one
that:
   (A)   Is subordinate to and serves a principle building or present use;
   (B)   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal building or
use served;
   (C)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupancy of
the principal building or use served; and
   (D)   Is located on the same lot or area as the use served.
(Prior Code, § 156.215)
§ 156.266 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   If the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals approved the proposed motor
freight terminal area plan, permits shall be issued as prescribed in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.216)
§ 156.267 SPECIAL PERMIT USE FOR HOT MIX ASPHALT MANUFACTURING AND CONSTRUCTION
CONTRACTORS WITH OUTDOOR STORAGE FACILITY.
   Pursuant to a special permit as set forth below, the following use to be
known as the hot mix asphalt manufacturing and construction contractors
facility use may be permitted in the L-3 Motor Freight Terminal District:
   (A)   Manufacture, production, processing and construction with hot mix
asphalt and hot mix asphalt related products;
   (B)   Manufacture, production, processing and construction with portland
cement including operation of a ready mix portland cement plant;
   (C)   Preparation and processing of aggregate mineral products including,
but not limited to, portland concrete cement, crushed stone, recycled concrete
and recycled asphalt products; and
   (D)   The outdoor storage of raw materials and products related to or part
of the hot mix asphalt manufacturing or construction process including, but not
limited to, the storage of recycled concrete and recycled asphalt products,
stone, sand, gravel and asphalt products.
(Prior Code, § 156.217) (Ord. 96-O-1564, passed 2-7-1996)
§ 156.268 METHOD OF GRANTING SPECIAL PERMIT USE FOR HOT MIX ASPHALT
MANUFACTURING AND CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS WITH OUTDOOR STORAGE FACILITY.
   (A)   Authority. The City Council may, in accordance with the procedures and
standards set out in this section and by ordinance duly adopted, grant a
special permit authorizing the use as a hot mix asphalt manufacturing and
construction facility with outdoor storage.
   (B)   Purpose. Special permit uses are those uses having some special impact
or uniqueness that require a careful review of their location, design,
configuration and special impact to determine the desirability of permitting
their establishment on any given site. They are uses that may or may not be
appropriate in a particular location depending on a weighing, in each case, of
the public need and benefit against the local impact and effect.
   (C)   Parties entitled to seek special permits. An application for a special
permit may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a contractual
interest in, the subject property.
   (D)   Standards for special permits.
      (1)   General standards. No special permit for hot mix asphalt
manufacturing and construction contractor facility with outdoor storage shall
be recommended or granted pursuant to this section unless the applicant shall
establish that:
         (a)   No undue adverse impact. The proposed use, drainage and
development will not have a substantial or undue adverse effect upon adjacent
property, the character of the area or the public health, safety and general
welfare;
         (b)   No interference with surrounding development. The proposed use
and development will be constructed, arranged and operated so as not to
dominate the immediate vicinity or to interfere with the use and development of
neighboring property in accordance with the applicable district regulations;
         (c)   Adequate public facilities. The proposed use and development
will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services such as
streets, public utilities, drainage structures, police and fire protection,
refuse disposal or the applicant will provide adequately for such services;
         (d)   No traffic congestion. The proposed use and development will not
cause undue traffic congestion nor draw significant amounts of traffic through
residential streets; and
         (e)   No destruction of significant features. The proposed use and
development will not result in the destruction, loss or damage of natural,
scenic or historic features of significant importance.
      (2)   Considerations. In determining whether the applicant’s evidence
establishes that the foregoing standards have been met, the City Council shall
consider:
         (a)   Public benefit. Whether, and to what extent, the proposed use
and development at the particular location requested is necessary or desirable
to provide a service and a facility that is in the interest of the public
convenience and that will contribute to the general welfare of the neighborhood
or community; and
         (b)   Mitigation of adverse impacts. Whether, and to what extent, all
steps possible have been taken to minimize any adverse effects of the proposed
use and development on the immediate vicinity through building design, site
design, landscaping and screening.
   (E)   Conditions on special permits. The City Council may impose such
conditions and limitations concerning use, construction, character, location,
landscaping, screening and other matters relating to the purposes and
objectives of this code upon the premises benefited by a special permit as may
be necessary or appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other
property and improvements in the vicinity of the subject property or upon
public facilities. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the
ordinance granting the special permit. Violation of any such condition or
limitation shall be a violation of this code and shall constitute grounds for
revocation of the special permit.
   (F)   Limitations on special permits.
      (1)   Subject to an extension of time granted by the City Council, no
special permit shall be valid for a period longer than two years unless a
building permit is issued and construction has actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion or unless the use is
commenced or has already been continued within that period.
      (2)   A special permit shall be deemed to authorize only the particular
use for which it was issued, and such permit shall automatically expire and
cease to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any reason, be
discontinued for a period of 24 consecutive months or more.
   (G)   Recognition of current use.
      (1)   The property located at 16222 South Western Avenue, Markham,
Illinois, consisting of 22.2 acres is currently being used as a hot mix asphalt
manufacturing and construction contracting facility and has been used as such
since 1952. That property is deemed to fulfill all the requirements of the
special use permit as set forth in division (D)(1) above in that such use has
demonstrated:
         (a)   No adverse impact;
         (b)   No interference with surrounding development;
         (c)   Adequate public facilities;
         (d)   No residential traffic congestion; and
         (e)   No destruction of significant natural, scenic or historic
features.
      (2)   Such facility at that location is desirable to provide a local
source of hot mix asphalt products for the community. All appropriate steps
have been taken to mitigate any adverse impacts on the local area. As such, the
use satisfies the considerations set forth in division (D)(2) above. The City
Council hereby adopts a special permit for use as a hot mix asphalt
manufacturing and construction contractors facility to the property located at
16222 South Western Avenue, Markham, Illinois, without conditions or special
limitations.
(Prior Code, § 156.218) (Ord. 96-O-1564, passed 2-7-1996)
GENERAL USE REGULATIONS
§ 156.280 ESTABLISHMENT OF PERMITTED USES; CERTAIN USES PROHIBITED.
   The use districts, regulations and the uses that are permitted in these use
districts are established by the ordinances codified in this chapter. Any use
that is not specifically permitted or analogous to those specifically permitted
is declared to be a prohibited use and unlawful. A use that is not permitted in
any district shall not be considered an accessory use in that district.
(Prior Code, § 156.225) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.281 CONFORMANCE WITH PROVISIONS REQUIRED.
   After 8-26-1956, all new buildings and other structures shall be erected and
all existing buildings and other structures shall be altered, enlarged or
moved, and all buildings, structures, land or premises shall be used, designed
or intended to be used only in accordance with the use, height, area, yard and
open space requirements of this chapter as permitted in the district in which
such buildings, structures, land or premises are located.
(Prior Code, § 156.226) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.282 ERECTION OF BUILDINGS AND ENCROACHMENTS.
   No building shall be erected, nor shall any open space surrounding any
building or otherwise required by these zoning regulations be encroached upon
or reduced in any manner, except in conformity to the yard lot area, open
space, building location and off-street parking and loading regulations
designated for the district in which such building or open space is located.
(Prior Code, § 156.227) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.283 OPEN SPACES BELONG TO ONE LOT.
   No yard, court or other open space provided about any building on a lot for
the purpose of complying with the provisions of these regulations shall be
considered as providing a yard, court or other open space for a building on any
other lot.
(Prior Code, § 156.228) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.284 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   (A)   On a through lot, no accessory building shall be erected or altered so
as to encroach upon the front yard required for the lot at the nearest street,
nor shall such building be closer to a side lot line than that required for a
main building in that district.
   (B)   In any residential district, no accessory building shall be erected or
altered in any rear yard such as to place any portion of the building closer
than five feet from the side lot line of a contiguous lot, or so as to place
any portion of the building in any public or utility easement.
   (C)   In any residential district, no accessory building shall be erected or
altered in any rear yard such as to place any portion of the building closer
than ten feet to the rear lot line or so as to place any portion of the
building in a public easement.
(Prior Code, § 156.229) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.285 PROJECTIONS INTO YARDS.
   Every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point
to the sky unobstructed; except that, architectural features, not including
vertical projections, may extend or project into a required yard not more than
three feet.
(Prior Code, § 156.230) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.286 LOCATION OF FUEL PUMPS.
   No motor fuel pumps for dispensing gasoline or diesel fuel shall be located
closer than 12 feet to a street property line.
(Prior Code, § 156.231) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.287 FENCES.
   (A)   No fence, wall or similar structure greater than four feet in height
shall be installed or erected along a street or right-of-way line or between a
required building line and a street or right-of-way line, as defined by this
chapter (Ord. 56-O-330).
   (B)   No fence, wall or similar structure, wherever located, shall be built
to a height greater than eight feet.
   (C)   No fence, wall or similar structure having a density greater than 25%
shall be built, installed or erected within 20 feet of the intersection of lot
lines adjacent to a street corner.
   (D)   No fence, wall or similar structure wherever located, shall have on
top of it cyclone barbed wire, circular barbed wire or prison barbed wire.
   (E)   Any owner of a fence, wall or similar structure having cyclone barbed
wire, circular barbed wire or prison barbed wire located on top of it at the
time of passage of Ord. 95-O-1526 shall have 120 days to remove such barbed
wiring from that structure.
   (F)   No fence, wall or similar structure shall be built, installed or
erected without first obtaining a building permit in the manner herein provided
for building permits for other structures.
   (G)   The Mayor and City Council may, after public notice and hearing,
authorize a variance in the height and density of any fence or wall or similar
structure and in respect to the location thereof whenever such fence, wall or
similar structure is to be erected for the purpose of enclosing premises used
for public utility or municipal purposes, and upon a finding that such variance
is reasonably necessary for the public convenience or welfare, and with respect
to other property concerning which it is found that there are practical
difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of this section.
(Prior Code, § 156.232) (Ord. 95-O-1526, passed - -1995) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.288 REMOVAL OF TOPSOIL OR FILL MATERIALS PROHIBITED; GRADING PLAN.
   No topsoil or fill material may be removed from any lot or parcel of land
within the city, nor may the topography of the land be changed in any manner
whatsoever other than that normally required for the construction of a building
or other structure, except upon submittal to and approval by the City Council
of a grading plan. The plan to be submitted in triplicate and drawn to a
horizontal scale of one inch equals 25 feet, with profiles drawn to a scale of
one inch equals five feet.
(Prior Code, § 156.233) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.289 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS TO CONFORM TO LOT REQUIREMENTS OF DISTRICT.
   A large lot may be subdivided into small lots; provided, such smaller lots
conform to the lot requirements of the district in which the lots are situated;
however, if a lot is divided into more than two lots, the Director of Building
and Housing shall not issue permits for same unless a recorded plat of such
subdivision shall be filed with the County Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 156.234) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.290 PROHIBITED USES IN ALL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, organization,
association or other entity to sell, or offer for sale, within any of the
zoning classifications or other firearm having an overall length of less than
26 inches and a barrel length of less than 18 inches.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, organization,
association or other entity to operate, use, maintain or construct any facility
for the discharge of firearms, commonly known as a shooting range or firing
range.
(Prior Code, § 156.235) (Ord. 82-O-1081, passed 3-15-1982) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.291 KEEPING OF DEBRIS, JUNK AND TRASH PROHIBITED
   (A) Prohibited activity. No person, corporation, firm or entity owning,
leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises within the jurisdiction of
the city shall maintain, keep or store on such premises any debris, junk,
junked vehicles, non-operational vehicles, trash or other abandoned or unused
property whether permanently or pending reuse or recycling, or for sale or
trade unless licensed by the city prior to 4-2-2008.
   (B) Temporary storage and height limitation. A premises may be temporarily
used for the storage of construction debris for the purpose of reuse, recycling
or removal for a period of not more than ten days. Authority to store such
material, to a height not exceeding 15 feet, for the ten-day period shall be
secured from the Building Department of the city upon application in writing,
prior to the delivery of such construction debris, by the person, corporation
or firm owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of the premises in
question.
   (C) Enforcement of section. Enforcement of this section may be accomplished
by the city in any manner authorized by this chapter or by law; and, in
addition, any person, who by reason of a violation of this section, suffers
special damages different from that suffered by other property owners may bring
an action to enjoin or otherwise abate an existing violation.
(Prior Code, § 156.236) (Ord. 95-O-1543, passed 9-6-1995; Ord. 96-O-1574,
passed 3-20-1996; Ord. 08-O-1916, passed 4-2-2008) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.292 COMMERCIAL FENCES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for an owner, renter, lessee or lessor of
commercial property within the city to erect a fence of any kind, temporary or
permanent, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building
Department of the city.
   (B)   Such proposed fence must meet all requirements of the Building
Department.
(Prior Code, § 156.237) (Ord. 05-O-1830B, passed 4-20-2005) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.293 STORM DOORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any contractor, owner, entity or other person to
construct structures of any sort within the corporate limits of the city or in
an area subject to the jurisdiction of the Building Department of the city
without the complete installation of metal storm doors at every entryway into
the structure prior to completion of the construction project.
(Prior Code, § 156.238) (Ord. 05-O-1831, passed 4-20-2005) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.294 GRASS SODDING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a contractor, owner, lessee or lessor or any
other person or entity which has obtained a building permit regarding property
within the city and all areas subject to the jurisdiction of the Building
Department of the city, to complete construction of a structure thereon,
whether or not offered for sale, lease or rental or other occupancy, without
the complete installation of grass sodding or other ground cover in all areas
of the lot from the structure to the lot line, including the parkway, prior to
the issuance by the Building Department of the city of a certificate of
occupancy.
   (B)   Should said structure not be offered for sale, lease or occupancy,
then this section must be complied with after the cessation of all substantial
outside construction activity.
   (C)   Any bare spots remaining must be part of a planned landscaping scheme.
(Prior Code, § 156.239) (Ord. 05-O-1834, passed 6-1-2005) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.295 COMMUNITY RESIDENCES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COMMUNITY RESIDENCE.
         (a)   A single dwelling unit occupied on a permanent basis by a group
of unrelated persons with handicaps and/or disabilities, plus paid professional
support staff provided by a sponsoring agency either living with the residents
on a 24-hour basis or available in accordance with the particular needs of the
residents; is state licensed; is registered with the city; and complies with
all applicable state and city codes, regulations and ordinances and with the
zoning regulations for the residential district it is located.
         (b)   COMMUNITY RESIDENCE does not include a residence which serves as
an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, persons whose primary
reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse or persons whose primary
reason for placement is treatment of a communicable disease.
      DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as
living quarters for one family only. Individual bathroom and complete single
kitchen facilities permanently installed to serve the entire family shall
always be included within each DWELLING UNIT.
      FAMILY. An individual or married couple and the children thereof with not
more then two other persons related directly to the individual or married
couple by blood or marriage; or a group of not more than five unrelated persons
living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
      HANDICAP. A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of such person’s major life activities, impairs their ability to live
independently or a record of having such an impairment or being regarded as
having such an impairment, but such terms does not include the current use of
or addiction to a controlled substance or treatment for the use or addiction to
alcohol.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Any individual whose disability:
         (a)   Is attributable to mental, intellectual or physical impairments
or a combination of mental, intellectual or physical impairments;
         (b)   Is likely to continue for a significant amount of time or
indefinitely;
         (c)   Results in functional limitations in three or more of the
following areas of major life activities:
            1.   Self-care;
            2.   Receptive or expressive language;
            3.   Learning;
            4.   Mobility;
            5.   Self direction;
            6.   Capacity for independent living; and/or
            7.   Economic self-sufficiency.
   (B)   Registration. Once a community residence license is issued by the
state for a dwelling unit, it must register with the city’s Building and
Housing Department. After the initial registration, this registration must be
completed annually before the end of June of each year thereafter, and it must
be updated whenever any of the information provided changes. The below
information will be included in the registration:
      (1)   The location of the community residence;
      (2)   The number of persons who will be residing on the premises;
      (3)   The name and address of the individual and if a firm, partnership
or association, the name of every member thereof and, in the case of a
corporation, the principal address of the corporation and name and address of
its officers who will be operating the community residence;
      (4)   The name of the person under whose management or supervision the
community residence will be conducted; and
      (5)   The number, experience and training of employees of the community
residence.
   (C)   Inspections.
      (1)   Every community residence shall be open at all reasonable times to
inspection by the Board of Health, the Director of Building and Housings and
the Fire Inspectors as often as is deemed necessary.
      (2)   Every community residence will be inspected once it opens, and
annually every year thereafter before the end of June, and every community
residence will be required to pay the inspection fee imposed by the city’s
Housing Department and the fee imposed by the city’s Fire Department
      (3)   Whenever an inspection of a community residence discloses that the
continued operation of such facility would be found to impose a public health
and safety concern, the state which issued the community residence license will
be immediately notified by the city.
   (D)   Spacing requirements. Community residences are subject to spacing
requirements of one per city block. In no event shall such facilities be
located closer than 1,200 feet to another as measured from the nearest property
line.
   (E)   Zoning. Community residences are permitted uses in all the districts
zoned residential.
(Ord. 11-O-1987, passed 5-18-2011)
§ 156.296 CANNABIS BUSINESSES.
   (A)   All cannabis business establishments require a special use permit and
shall be processed in accordance with §§
156.390 through
156.402 of this chapter.
   (B)   All cannabis business establishments must obtain a valid state license
to operate.
   (C)   The city may require the applicant to install building enhancements
such as security cameras, lighting, additional parking, or other improvements
as a condition of issuing the special use permit to ensure the safety of
employees and customers of the cannabis business establishments. Said
improvements shall be determined based on the specific characteristics of the
floor plan for a cannabis business establishment and the site on which it is
located.
   (D)   The city may approve the co-location of an adult-use cannabis craft
grower with processing organizations and/or dispensaries or co-location of
infusers with craft growers and/or dispensaries, subject to the provisions of
state law and the special use criteria within the city.
   (E)   Cannabis dispensaries:
      (1)   Shall not be located within 1,500 feet of another existing cannabis
dispensary;
      (2)   Shall not contain drive-through service; and
      (3)   Shall not be located within 500 feet of a preexisting public or
private school, daycare center, daycare home, residential care home, church or
place of worship.
   (F)   Cannabis cultivation centers:
      (1)   Shall not contain more than 210,000 square feet of canopy space for
plants in the flowering stage;
      (2)   Shall not be located within 1,500 feet of another existing cannabis
craft grower or cannabis cultivation center; and
      (3)   Shall not be located within 500 feet of a preexisting public or
private school, daycare center, daycare home, residential care home, church or
place of worship.
   (G)   Cannabis craft growers:
      (1)   Shall not contain more than 5,000 square feet of canopy space for
plants in the flowering stage;
      (2)   Shall not be located within 1,500 feet of another existing cannabis
craft grower or cannabis cultivation center; and
      (3)   Shall not be located within 500 feet of a preexisting public or
private school, daycare center, daycare home, residential care home, church or
place of worship.
   (H)   Cannabis infusers, cannabis processors, cannabis transporters:
      (1)   Shall not be located within 500 feet of a preexisting public or
private school, daycare center, daycare home, residential care home, church or
place of worship.
(Ord. 20-O-2258, passed 3-18-2020)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS
§ 156.310 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FLOOR AREA. The gross floor area and the open land area required for service
to the public as customers, patrons, clients or patients, including areas
occupied by fixtures and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise. It
does not include areas used as rest rooms, or areas or parts of areas used
principally for non- public purposes, such as storage, automobile parking,
incidental repairs, processing or packaging of merchandise, show windows or for
offices incidental to the management or maintenance of stores or buildings.
   OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE. An on-the-property space for the standing, loading
and unloading of vehicles to avoid undue interference with the public use of
streets, alleys and sidewalks. Such space shall be not less than 12 feet in
width and 30 feet in length, exclusive of access aisles and loading space, and
such loading space shall have a minimum overhead clearance of 14 feet.
   REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE. An area in the form of a rectangle
measuring not less than nine feet in width by 20 feet in depth, and an
additional 120 square feet shall be provided for each parking space as
maneuvering and access area. Each such space shall be accessible from streets
or alleys or private driveways or aisles leading to streets or driveways. In
any residential district, no required off-street parking space, except that
area required for access to such parking space, shall occupy any portion of a
front yard or a side yard.
(Prior Code, § 156.245)
§ 156.311 OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIRED.
   There shall be provided in all districts at time or erection or enlargement
of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space with
adequate access and egress to all spaces.
(Prior Code, § 156.246)
§ 156.312 PLAN FOR OFF-STREET PARKING; APPROVAL OF PLAN COMMISSION; COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   (1)   For the purpose of providing off-street parking spaces as
required in accordance with these zoning regulations, plans must be submitted
to, and approved by, the Director of Building and Housing before issuance of a
building permit. The plans shall show how the required off-street parking
spaces shall be arranged and shall indicate sufficient space for turning
maneuvers, as well as adequate ingress and egress to the parking area.
      (2)   Before issuance of a building permit, the Inspector shall obtain
the approval of the Plan Commission for all such plans requiring six or more
off-street parking spaces.
   (B)   Whenever a building permit has been granted and the plans so approved
for off-street parking, the subsequent use of such property is deemed to be
conditional upon the unqualified continuance and availability of the parking
provisions contained in such plan. Any use of such property in violation of
this chapter is deemed a violation of these zoning regulations. Should the
owner or occupant of any building to whom a building permit has been granted
containing off-street parking requirements so change the use to which such
building is put as to increase off-street parking as required under these
zoning regulations, it is unlawful and a violation of the zoning regulations to
begin or maintain such altered use until such time as the increased off-street
parking provisions of this section are complied with.
(Prior Code, § 156.247)
§ 156.313 ALL-WEATHER SURFACING AND ILLUMINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every parcel of land used as a parking space or a loading space after
8-26-1956, shall have an all- weather surface (asphalt or concrete surface).
   (B)   All public off-street parking spaces shall be illuminated, and all
lights used to illuminate the parking spaces shall be so arranged as to reflect
the light away from adjoining lots in residential districts.
   (C)   No signs other than those necessary for orderly parking control are to
be erected or displayed in any public parking area.
(Prior Code, § 156.248) (Ord. 18-O-2204, passed 8-1-2018)
§ 156.314 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE PARKING IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   No truck or commercial vehicle, other than a Class B Truck or Class B
Commercial Vehicle as defined in the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code or by the
Illinois Secretary of State, may be parked or stored in any residential zoning
district. All trucks greater than a Class B, heavy equipment and/or trailers
used for commercial purposes shall be removed from residential property and not
allowed to be parked or stored in any residential zoning district after January
1, 2024.
(Prior Code, § 156.249) (Ord. 21-O-2316, passed 11-17-2021)
§ 156.315 ADDITIONS OR ENLARGEMENTS OF EXISTING BUILDING OR USE.
   No addition or enlargement of an existing building or use shall be permitted
unless the parking requirements of these zoning regulations are met for the
entire building or use.
(Prior Code, § 156.250)
§ 156.316 MIXED USES; NUMBER OF SPACES REQUIRED.
   In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking
space shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed
separately as specified in this chapter, and the off-street parking space for
one use shall not be considered as providing the required off-street parking
for any other use.
(Prior Code, § 156.251)
§ 156.317 SCHEDULE OF PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   Automobile parking spaces shall be provided according to the following
schedule and shall be subject to the following schedule and conditions in any
district in which any of the following uses shall be established:
   (A)   Dwellings: one off-street parking space for each family unit;
   (B)   Places of public assembly including private clubs, lodges and
fraternal buildings not providing overnight accommodations; assembly halls,
auditoriums, skating rinks, dance halls, bowling alleys, theaters, stadiums,
gymnasiums, amusement parks, funeral homes, community centers, libraries: one
off-street parking space for each four seats provided for patron use and/or one
off-street parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area used as public
assembly but not containing fixed seats;
   (C)   Churches: one off-street parking space for each five seats and/or one
off-street parking space for each 90 lineal inches of pew space in such church;
   (D)   Restaurants, bars, taverns, nightclubs and all other similar dining
and/or drinking establishments: one off-street parking space for each 50 square
feet of floor area exclusive of kitchen, rest room and storage area;
   (E)   Motels and tourist homes: one off-street parking space for each guest
room, plus one additional space for the owner or manager;
   (F)   Medical or dental offices: five parking spaces per doctor engaged in
clinic;
   (G)   Banks, savings and loan associations, businesses or professional
offices: one parking space for each 125 square feet of floor area, plus one
space for each two employees;
   (H)   Furniture and appliance stores; wholesale stores; household equipment,
or furniture repair offices, or machine sales: one parking space for each 75
square feet of floor area;
   (I)   Barbershops and beauty parlors: three off-street parking spaces for
each operator;
   (J)   Retail stores: one parking space for each 75 square feet of floor
area;
   (K)   Community shopping district areas: one parking space for each 220
square feet of floor area;
   (L)   Motor freight terminals and local cartage companies: one space for
each two employees, based on the maximum number of persons to be employed for
any work period, plus one adequate space for each vehicle used in the conduct
of such operations;
   (M)   Manufacturing and industrial uses: one parking space for each two
employees based upon the maximum number of persons to be employed at any one
work period during the day or night, plus one adequate space for each vehicle
used in the conduct of such operation; and
   (N)   Schools, including elementary, junior high schools, high schools and
all other similar institutions of learning: one off-street parking space for
each two employees, based on the maximum number of persons to be employed for
any work period, plus one off-street parking space for each ten high school,
college or university students predicated upon the designed capacity of the
physical plant.
(Prior Code, § 156.252) (Ord. 77-O-962, passed 11-7-1977; Ord. 02-O-1735,
passed 6-5-2002; Ord. 02-O-1735, passed 6-5-2002)
§ 156.318 OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIRED.
   In the use of land for any purpose other than residential, no building or
structure shall be erected unless provision is made for the location on the lot
of off-street loading space on the basis of the following requirements: one
off-street loading space for each 20,000 square feet of gross floor area.
(Prior Code, § 156.253) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.319 SURFACE REQUIREMENT OF LOADING AREA.
   All area provided in accordance with the off-street loading requirements
shall be surfaced with a bituminous or other all-weather dust-free surface.
(Prior Code, § 156.254) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.320 ENTRANCE AND EXIT IN COMMERCIAL OR MANUFACTURING DISTRICT.
   Within any commercial or light manufacturing district, all vehicular
entrances and exits on public streets, alleys and highways shall be designed
and constructed in a manner to best facilitate the flow of traffic to and from
the premises and such entrances and exits shall be subject to the approval of
the traffic or highway authority having jurisdiction over the street or highway
on which they are located.
(Prior Code, § 156.255)
§ 156.321 LOADING SPACE TO BE SEPARATE FROM PARKING AREA.
   The off-street loading facilities required shall, in all cases, be on the
same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. In no
case shall the required off-street loading space be part of the area used to
satisfy the off-street parking requirements of these zoning regulations.
(Prior Code, § 156.256)
§ 156.322 LOADING REQUIREMENT IN L-1 OR L-2 DISTRICTS.
   No loading docks shall be erected within a L-1 or L-2 District unless the
front of such loading platform shall be set back at least 65 feet from the
property line abutting the street on which lot a dock fronts. No standing,
loading or unloading of vehicles shall be permitted where the vehicle extends
onto and stands in any dedicated street or alley during the loading or
unloading operation.
(Prior Code, § 156.257) (Ord. 70-O-748, passed - -1970) Penalty, see §
156.999
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 156.335 FINDING OF FACTS.
   It is hereby determined that, unless regulated as specified herein, the
number of signs and billboards in the city would be excessive and unduly
distracting to motorists and pedestrians, would create traffic hazards and
would reduce the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public. It is also
determined that the number of distracting signs and billboards ought to be
reduced to minimize the aforementioned effects, and that the signs and
billboards of least value to people within the city are those which carry
commercial messages other than the advertisement of any product, service,
event, person, institution, activity or business located on the lot where the
sign is located, or the sale or rental of such lot. It is also determined that
the regulations contained in this subchapter are the minimum amount of
regulation necessary to achieve its purposes.
(Prior Code, § 156.270) (Ord. 85-O-1177, passed 6-5-1985)
§ 156.336 PROTRUSION OR EXTENSION BEYOND PROPERTY LINES.
   In no case shall any sign or billboard protrude or extend beyond the
property lines of the lot on which it is erected.
(Prior Code, § 156.271) (Ord. 85-O-1177, passed 6-5-1985) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.337 LIGHTING AND REFLECTING DEVICES.
   In no case shall any artificial light or reflecting device connected or used
with a sign or billboard be located or displayed where such light or device
competes for attention with, or may be mistaken for, a traffic signal.
(Prior Code, § 156.272) (Ord. 85-O-1177, passed 6-5-1985) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.338 COMMERCIAL MESSAGES.
   (A)   After the ninetieth day after the amendment to this section takes
effect, no sign or billboard shall contain any commercial message, except one
which advertises some product, service, event, person, institution, activity or
business located on the lot where the sign or billboard is located.
   (B)   This does not apply to signs in any C or L District that are within
660 feet of an interstate expressway, nor does it pertain to “For Sale” or
“...Lease” signs in C or L Districts.
(Prior Code, § 156.273) (Ord. 85-O-1177, passed 6-5-1985; Ord. 98-O-1645,
passed 6-17-1998) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.339 ANIMATED AND AUDIBLE SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   In no case shall any sign be animated or audible.
(Prior Code, § 156.274) (Ord. 85-O-1177, passed 6-5-1985) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.340 MAINTENANCE OF STRUCTURES AFTER USE HAS CEASED.
   No structure formerly used as a sign or billboard and not in use for any
other purpose shall be maintained for more than 120 days after its use for a
sign or billboard has ceased.
(Prior Code, § 156.275) (Ord. 85-O-1177, passed 6-5-1985) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.341 SPECIFIC REGULATIONS FOR CERTAIN DISTRICTS.
   Signs, in the specified districts, shall be regulated as follows:
   (A)   In any R District:
      (1)   For a dwelling unit, no sign giving the name and/or address of the
land or building on which it is displayed, or the owner or lessee thereof,
shall exceed one square foot in area;
      (2)   For a structure other than a dwelling unit, no sign giving the name
and/or address of the land or building on which it is displayed, or the owner
or lessee thereof, shall exceed ten square feet in area;
      (3)   No church bulletin board shall exceed 18 square feet in area; and/
or
      (4)   No sign, other than a church bulletin board or house numbers, shall
project into any portion of a front yard.
   (B)   In any C District:
      (1)   No sign or billboard which pertains to the use conducted within the
main building on the lot shall exceed 60 square feet in area for each business
establishment, or shall be displayed less than ten feet or more than 24 feet
above ground level;
      (2)   However, if any one business establishment occupies more than 50
feet of frontage of any one street, then the total aggregate area of one face
of all such signs on the premises may be increased in area at the rate of one
square foot of sign area for each foot of frontage in excess of 50 feet, but
the total aggregate area of one face of all such signs on the premises shall
not exceed 200 square feet; and/or
      (3)   No sign for the purpose of selling or renting any lot or group of
lots and/or any existing or proposed building or group of buildings shall
exceed four square feet in area; provided, however, that, one sign not
exceeding 60 square feet in area with none of its dimensions exceeding ten
feet, may be displayed in connection with the marketing of any subdivision of
five lots or more, or any area in excess of five acres.
   (C)   In any L District, the following signs shall be permitted:
      (1)   One sign identifying the occupant of a building or a building
complex; and
      (2)   Signs relating to the sale or lease of land or buildings.
   (D)   In any C and L Districts: a sign for the purpose of selling or renting
any lot or group of lots and/or any existing or proposed building or group of
buildings may be erected not exceeding four square feet in aggregate area;
provided, however, that, only one sign not exceeding 60 square feet in area,
nor ten feet in its greatest dimension may be displayed in connection with the
marketing of any subdivision of five lots or more, or any area in excess of
five acres.
(Prior Code, § 156.276) (Ord. 85-O-1177, passed 6-5-1985; Ord. 99-O-1674,
passed 4-21-1999) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.342 EXCEPTIONS.
   Sections 156.335 through 156.341 do not apply to:
   (A)   Any sign or billboard not visible to motorists or pedestrians on any
public highway, street or alley;
   (B)   Any sign, traffic sign or billboard installed or maintained by the
state, the county or the city; and
   (C)   Property in the L-1 District and adjacent to an interstate expressway.
The following provisions apply to advertising signs within 660 feet of the
right-of-way of I-294 or I-57, providing the zoning lot is immediately adjacent
to the right-of-way and not separated from the right-of-way by any road or
street incorporated within the city’s street system or otherwise by property
dedicated to the city for a public purpose.
      (1)   Size; area. No individual sign shall exceed 40 feet in vertical
measurement, nor 60 feet in total length, or be more than 1,200 square feet in
area.
      (2)   Lighting. No sign may be erected which contains, includes or is
illuminated by any flashing, intermittent or moving light or lights.
      (3)   Spacing. No two sign structures on the same side of I-294 or I-57
shall be erected less than 500 feet apart.
      (4)   Height. No advertising sign shall project higher than 120 feet
above the curb level of the interstate expressway.
(Prior Code, § 156.277) (Ord. 85-O-1177, passed 6-5-1985; Ord. 98-O-1645,
passed 6-17-1998)
§ 156.343 OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS ALONG EXPRESSWAYS.
   The erection of outdoor advertising signs along property immediately
adjoining expressway or tollway right- of-way is expressly permitted as an
exception to this chapter provided the following conditions are met.
   (A)   The person or entity which proposes to erect the advertising billboard
either owns or has a valid lease of the property upon which said sign is to be
erected.
   (B)   The appropriate agency of the state has authorized the erection of the
sign in question.
   (C)   The person or entity which proposes to erect the advertising billboard
execute a continuing agreement with the city not to advertise products or
services which offend the dignity of the citizens of the city or which
constitute a violation of the health, morals or safety of the residents as
determined by the Mayor in his or her sole discretion.
   (D)   The area in which the sign is to be erected is properly zoned for such
activity.
   (E)   The plans for construction of the sign in question are submitted to
and approved by the Building Department of the city with particular attention
paid to the anticipated stresses and wind resistances required of the proposed
structure.
   (F)   The proposed sign shall be principally visible to travelers along and
upon the facing expressway and not calculated for general exposure.
(Prior Code, § 156.278) (Ord. 95-O-1538, passed 7-19-1995)
§ 156.344 “FOR SALE” SIGN PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   Pursuant to authority as a home rule unit of government, the city does
hereby enact a “for sale” sign posting permit fee in the amount of $30 for
residential property for a six-month period and $50 for commercial property for
a six-month period.
   (B)   The sign posted shall not exceed two feet by four feet in outside
dimensions.
(Prior Code, § 156.279) (Ord. 06-O-1865, passed 6-21-2006; Ord. 08-O-1913,
passed 4-2-2008) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.345 BILLBOARDS AND ADVERTISING STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BILLBOARD. Any sign with an advertising surface measuring ten feet or
more in length, width, height or along any single dimension.
      SIGN. Any structure, display or other thing utilized in whole or part to
convey or communicate a visual impression or message that advertises activities
which are not conducted on the property on which they are located. Such
definition includes, but is not limited to, billboards, placards, posters,
flags, banners, pennants, pictures, lights, projected images, balloons,
streamers and painted images.
   (B)   Permit required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter or relocate
within the city any sign, billboard or other advertising structure without
obtaining a permit from the Building Department and making payment of the
required fee. In addition, all illuminated signs shall be subject to the
provisions of the Electrical Code and the permit fees required thereof.
      (2)   An applicant for a billboard sign permit shall provide a
certificate of insurance to the Building Department. The insurance shall
provide public liability insurance in the amount of at least $100,000 for
injuries to one person and $300,000 for injuries to more than one person and
property damage insurance in the amount of at least $100,000. The billboard
sign permit shall automatically be revoked if the insurance lapses. The
insurance policy shall require written notice to the Building Department at
least 30 days before the insurance is cancelled or materially altered.
      (3)   Every applicant for a sign permit to erect or alter a sign over or
on public property, private property or in the public right-of-way shall file
with the Building Department for each such sign, or for each premises on which
signs are erected, a continuing bond in the amount of $50,000 executed by the
applicant and approved surety company, conditioned to indemnify, save and keep
harmless the city from all claims, damages, liabilities, losses, actions, suits
or judgments which may be presented, sustained, brought or secured against the
city on account of the erection or alteration of said sign, or by reason of any
accident caused by or resulting therefrom.
   (C)   License required.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain within the city any
sign, billboard or other advertising structure without obtaining an annual
license from the office of the City Clerk and making payment of the required
fee.
      (2)   (a)   Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
maintaining a sign shall provide evidence of either:
            1.   A bond in the amount of $20,000 with sureties deemed adequate
by the Building Department, conditioned to indemnify, save and keep harmless
the city from all claims, damages, liabilities, losses, actions, suits or
judgments which may be presented, sustained, brought or secured against the
city on account of the erection, alteration or maintenance of said sign, or by
reason of any accident caused by or resulting therefrom; or
            2.   Public liability insurance that protects against claims or
judgments in the amount of at least $100,000 and property damage insurance in
the amount of at least $20,000 with an insurance company qualified to write
such insurance under the laws of the state.
         (b)   Said bond or insurance shall be in force once the sign has been
erected. Said person shall present evidence at least once each year that said
bond or insurance is still in effect. The bond or evidence of insurance shall
be held by the City Clerk.
   (D)   Administration and enforcement; maintenance. All signs must be
maintained in a state of good repair. When the Building Department or
authorized city official believes that a sign is dangerous, unsafe, has become
a public nuisance, has been an abandoned or has been constructed, erected or
maintained in violation of provisions of this chapter, they shall contact the
owner of the sign in writing at the address listed on the application and
request that the problem be repaired or corrected. If the owner has not
appealed the official’s determination to the City Council or corrected the
problem(s) set forth within 14 days of the date of the written notice, the city
shall arrange for removal of any such sign and bill the license holder or owner
of the property on which it is located for all costs of such removal. If,
however, the Building Department believes the health, safety or welfare of the
citizens is immediately endangered by any violation of this chapter, then the
Building Department may immediately revoke any sign permit and summarily remove
the sign without notice.
   (E)   License fees.
 
Sign under 100 sq. ft.                  $150 (fixed)
Sign over 100 sq. ft. (illuminated)     $1.40 per sq. ft.
Sign over 100 sq. ft. (non-illuminated) $1.10 per sq. ft.
LED sign under 100 sq. ft.              $2 per sq. ft.
LED sign over 100 sq. ft.               $2.50 per sq. ft.
NOTES TO TABLE:
Structural alteration of any sign is subject to standard permit fees.
 
(Ord. 14-O-2086, passed 3-19-2014)
§ 156.346 ROADSIDE MEMORIALS.
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   Commemorated event. The accident or other event that resulted in
the death(s) of individuals as a result of reckless and/or impaired driving.
      (2)   Memorial. Any sign, object(s), other materials, or a combination
thereof that are intended to recognize and/or honor individuals who have died
during a commemorative event.
      (3)   Qualified relative. An immediate relative of the deceased, by
marriage, blood, or adoption, such as a spouse, child, parent, or sibling.
   (B)   Memorials on public rights-of-way. Memorials erected on public rights-
of-way within the City of Markham are subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   A qualified relative shall apply for installation of a memorial
with the City of Markham prior to the erection of any memorial. Said
application shall detail the proposed size, location, and duration of the
memorial. The application shall be accepted so long as all other requirements
are complied with.
      (2)   Memorials may only be erected by a qualified relative, or group
thereof, within 500 feet of the commemorative event. Memorials shall not be
placed in a manner that interferes with the line of sight required for drivers
or by pedestrians. Memorials shall not be installed in a median on any public
roadway and shall not encroach upon any roadway nor shall they be attached to
any poles. No memorial shall be located in, encroach upon, or be located in
such a manner as to constitute a hazard to health or safety of any person on
any public right-of-way.
      (3)   The memorial and all individuals visiting and/or maintaining the
memorial must comply with all applicable laws and regulations. The qualified
relative requesting placement of the memorial shall be solely responsible for
maintenance and construction of the memorial.
      (4)   Memorials shall not be permitted in any construction or maintenance
work zone. The city shall reserve the right to temporarily remove or relocate a
memorial at any time for street and/or right-of-way maintenance or construction
activities or operations. The city shall provide notification of removal or
change to any memorial only to those individuals who have properly applied and
have received approval from the city as provided herein.
      (5)   The memorial and any sign contained therein shall not be larger
than total a total of 12 square feet. The area of ground covered by the
memorial or any items associated with the memorial (e.g. flowers) shall not be
larger than 12 square feet.
      (6)   A memorial shall remain in place for no more than 90 days after the
commemorative event and shall be subject to removal by the city after said
period has expired.
      (7)   Any memorial that is determined to be unsafe, insecure, a menace to
the public, or that has been constructed and/or is being maintained in
violation of the provisions of this section or any other applicable law is
hereby declared a nuisance and shall be subject to removal by the city. The
city reserves the right to immediately remove any purported memorial that has
not first received city-approval.
(Ord. 19-O-2244, passed 12-4-2019)
NON-CONFORMING USES AND EXCEPTIONS
§ 156.360 ELIMINATION OF NON-CONFORMITIES.
   The lawful use of land for storage purposes or for advertising signs or
billboards, which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, shall be
discontinued within 12 months from 8-26-1956, and the same uses of land which
become non-conforming by reason of subsequent changes in these zoning
regulations shall also be discontinued within 12 months from the date of such
change in these regulations.
(Prior Code, § 156.290)
§ 156.361 ABANDONMENT OF USE.
   If a non-conforming use of any building or premises is discontinued or
revised, or its normal operation is stopped or revised for a period of six
months, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
(Prior Code, § 156.291)
§ 156.362 NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES.
   (A)   The lawful use of a building or premises existing on 8-26-1956, or at
the time any amendment to this chapter is adopted, may be continued, although
such use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter, or of any such
amendment, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Repairs and alterations may be made to a non-conforming building or
structure; provided that, no structural alteration shall be made, except those
required by law or this code.
   (C)   A non-conforming use shall not be extended or enlarged.
   (D)   A building or structure which does not comply with the height or area
regulations shall not be added to or enlarged in any manner unless such
modified structure conforms to all the regulations of the district in which it
is located.
   (E)   A building or structure lacking sufficient automobile parking space in
connection therewith as required in §§
156.310 through
156.316 of this chapter, shall be altered or enlarged only when additional
automobile parking space is provided to satisfy these zoning regulations.
   (F)   A non-conforming building or structure shall not be moved in whole or
in part to any other location on the lot unless every portion of such building
or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of the district in which
it is located.
   (G)   No building or structure which has been damaged by fire, explosion,
act of God or the public enemy, to the extent of more than 50% of its value,
shall be restored, except in conformity with the regulations of the district in
which it is located.
   (H)   In the event that a non-conforming use of any building or premises is
discontinued or revised, or its normal operation stopped or revised for a
period of six months, the use of the same shall thereafter conform to the
regulations of the district in which it is located.
   (I)   The use of a non-conforming building may be changed to a more
restricted classification, but not to an equal or a less restricted
classification.
(Prior Code, § 156.292)
§ 156.363 HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS.
   The building height restrictions of these zoning regulations shall not apply
to church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, chimneys,
flag poles, radio and television towers or airway beacons; nor to any water
tank or similar structure extending above the roof of a building and not
occupying an aggregate area greater than 25% of the horizontal projected roof
area.
(Prior Code, § 156.293)
§ 156.364 AREA EXCEPTIONS.
   In computing the depth of a rear yard or width of a side yard or open court
for any building where such yard or court opens onto an alley, or easement,
one-half of the alley width or easement width may be assumed to be a portion of
the yard or court.
(Prior Code, § 156.294)
UNIT DEVELOPMENT PLAN
§ 156.375 RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN; APPROVAL OF PLAN; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The owner or owners of any tract of land, comprising an area of not
less than ten acres, may submit to the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals a
plan for the use and development of the land, primarily for residential
purposes. The proposed development plans shall be submitted to the Plan
Commission for examination, study and report and for a public hearing. If the
Plan Commission approves the development plan, the plan, together with the
recommendations of the Plan Commission shall be embodied in a report to the
Board, stating the reasons for the approval of the plan and application, and
specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed residential development
plan has considered and made provision for the following essential elements:
      (1)   The appropriate use of property adjacent to the area included in
the plan will be fully safeguarded;
      (2)   The plan is consistent with the intent of these zoning regulations
to promote public health, safety and general welfare;
      (3)   The buildings shall be used for single-family dwellings and the
usual accessory uses such as garages, storage space and community activities;
and
      (4)   The area of the tract, excluding street area, but including the
area to be devoted to parks, parkways and other open spaces, will provide the
minimum lot area per family, counting all families to be housed under the unit
development plan, which is required for the most intensive use normally
permitted in the district in which such development is to be located.
   (B)   If the Board approves the proposed residential development plan,
permits shall be issued, even though the use of the land, the location of the
buildings to be erected in the area and the yards and open spaces provided in
the plan do not conform in certain respects to the regulations for the district
in which the development is to be located.
(Prior Code, § 156.305)
§ 156.376 COMMUNITY SHOPPING CENTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN; APPROVAL BY BOARD OF
APPEALS.
   (A)   The owner or owners of any tract of land, comprising an area of not
less than four acres, may submit a development plan for a community shopping
center, which shall be processed in the manner prescribed in §
156.375 of this chapter and may be approved if the report of the city’s Plan
Commission shows that:
      (1)   The commercial uses included in the plan are limited to those
permitted in the C-2 District and to the department stores;
      (2)   The entire development is designed as a single architectural unit,
with appropriate landscape architectural treatment of the entire unit area;
      (3)   At least twice the gross floor area of the stores to be included
within the development, plus one vehicle parking space for each six seats in
any theater, bowling alley or other place of congregation included within the
plan, is provided in off-street parking area, which are integral parts of the
design of the unit plan;
      (4)   The appropriate use of property adjacent to the area included in
the plan will be fully safeguarded; and
      (5)   The plan is consistent with the intent of these zoning regulations
to promote the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   If the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals approves the proposed
development for a community shopping center, permits shall be issued as
prescribed in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 156.306)
SPECIAL USES
§ 156.390 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The principal objective of this subchapter is to provide for an
orderly arrangement of compatible buildings and land uses and for the proper
location of all types of uses required for the social and economic welfare of
the city. To accomplish this objective, each type and kind of use is classified
as permitted in one or more of the various districts established by this
chapter. However, in addition to those uses specifically classified and
permitted in each district, there are certain additional uses which it may be
necessary to allow because of their unusual characteristics or the service they
provide the public.
   (B)   Such special uses fall into the following categories:
      (1)   Uses publicly operated or traditionally affected with a public
interest;
      (2)   Uses entirely private in character, but of such an unusual nature
that their operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their
impact upon neighboring property or public facilities;
      (3)   A “planned development” which is a tract of land developed as a
unit under single ownership or control, includes two or more principal uses,
and is at least four acres in area, except for planned developments operated by
a municipal corporation which shall be at least two acres in area;
      (4)   Drive-in theaters;
      (5)   Uses to which a high volume of traffic, either vehicular or
pedestrian or both, are attached;
      (6)   The sale of used autos other than as allowed under C-2 zoning;
      (7)   Privately operated utilities; and
      (8)   Cannabis businesses.
(Prior Code, § 156.315) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972; Ord. 78-O-993, passed
11-6-1978; Ord. 20-O-2258, passed 3-18-2020)
§ 156.391 AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The purpose of special uses is to provide for uses which are deemed
necessary or desirable for the public welfare or convenience within a given
district, but which are of a different character than the typical uses therein
permitted.
   (B)   Special uses shall be authorized by the City Council; provided that,
no application for a special use shall be acted upon by the City Council until
after a written report and recommendation is prepared and forwarded to the City
Council by the Plan Commission.
   (C)   In case of a special use, the City Council may authorize modification
or abrogation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of any and all
other ordinances concerning building and development of the property under a
special use classification.
(Prior Code, § 156.316) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
§ 156.392 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT FOR PLANNED
DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   An application for a special use permit verified by the owner or the
authorized agent of the owner shall be filed with the City Clerk, directed to
the attention of the Plan Commission, in such form and accompanied by such
information as required by the Plan Commission. Each application shall contain
a legal description of the property, the common address of the property, a
description of the proposed various land uses, the intended location of each
land use, the proposed average density, the proposed height of the various
types of structures, the percentage of the total area intended to be covered by
buildings, all proposed bulk variations, all proposed subdivision variations,
minimum lot sizes for each type of land use and such other matters as the Plan
Commission or the City Council may require.
   (B)   The following shall be additional requirements for planned
development.
      (1)   If the application for a special use classification is for a
planned development, in addition to the requirements of this chapter, for
procedural purposes, a planned development project shall be treated as a
subdivision and the procedure for subdivision approval as set forth in the
subdivision regulations in
Ch. 154 of this code of ordinances shall be followed in its entirety.
      (2)   It is recommended that the applicant for a planned development
project meet with the Plan Commission informally prior to submission of the
tentative plan to determine whether his or her proposal will conform with all
applicable elements of the Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   A tentative plat of the planned development project shall be
submitted as required by the subdivision regulations. Additional supporting
material beyond that required by the subdivision regulations for the tentative
plat shall include the following:
         (a)   Explanation of the character of the planned development project
and the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the
flexibility of these regulations;
         (b)   Statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within
the project;
         (c)   Development schedule indicating stages in which project will be
built with emphasis on area, density, use, and public facilities such as open
space to be developed with each stage. Overall design of each stage may be
shown on the plat and through supporting graphic material, or a statement of
the conditions and limitations which will control the detailed design of the
final plat for each stage shall be included. Approximate dates for beginning
and completion of each stage shall be included; and
         (d)   Agreements, provisions or covenants which will govern the use,
maintenance and continued protection of the planned development project,
especially its common open space.
(Prior Code, § 156.317) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
§ 156.393 HEARINGS ON APPLICATIONS; NOTICE OF HEARINGS.
   The Plan Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a
special use permit. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than 15
days before such hearing. Each notice shall contain a legal description of the
property, the common street address of the property, the proposed various land
uses and the intended location of each, the proposed average density and the
proposed height of the various types of structures.
(Prior Code, § 156.318) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
§ 156.394 FINDINGS OF FACT AND RECOMMENDATION OF PLAN COMMISSION.
   (A)   Within 60 days after the close of the hearing on a proposed special
use classification, the Plan Commission shall make written findings of fact and
shall submit same together with its recommendation to the City Council. The
Plan Commission shall make findings based upon the evidence presented to it in
each respective case with respect to the following matters:
      (1)   Existing uses of property within the general area of the property
in question;
      (2)   The zoning classification of property within the general area of
the property in question;
      (3)   The suitability of the property in question for the uses permitted
under the existing zoning classification;
      (4)   The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question, including changes, if any, which may have taken place
since the day the property in question was placed in its present zoning
classification;
      (5)   The public or community need for the special use requested (as
distinguished from private need or benefit of the property owner);
      (6)   The favorable or unfavorable impact of the project as proposed for
the special use upon the surrounding area;
      (7)   The favorable or unfavorable impact of the proposed development on
the following:
         (a)   The school system;
         (b)   The Police Department;
         (c)   The Fire Department;
         (d)   The water system as it presently exists;
         (e)   The sanitary sewer system as it presently exists;
         (f)   The storm sewer system as it presently exists; and
         (g)   Accessibility to major streets or highways without creating
traffic on presently existing residential streets.
      (8)   The balanced mix of dwelling units (single-family, multiple or
condominium);
      (9)   The percentage of land to be retained as common open space;
      (10)   The provisions that are made for community and residential
facilities in common open space;
      (11)   The consideration given to the arrangement of buildings and other
structures with regard to providing for circulation, light, air and visual
form;
      (12)   Construction standards, types and design;
      (13)   The density of the proposed development with regard to the number
of units per acre, the mix of one-bedroom, two-bedroom, three-bedroom and four-
bedroom units and the percentage of floor space in relation to the total land
area;
      (14)   What provisions are made for dedication of public land or cash
equivalent for public purposes;
      (15)   What provisions are made for the support, operation and
maintenance of common open space and all facilities installed thereon to the
end that the same shall not become a burden upon the general public; and
      (16)   What provision is made for adequate off-street parking.
   (B)   The Plan Commission shall not recommend the issuance of the requested
special use permit unless it finds that the issuance of such special use permit
is in the public interest and is not solely for the interest of the applicant.
(Prior Code, § 156.319) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
§ 156.395 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   The City Council may authorize the issuance of a special use permit and
modify or abrogate the provisions of any conflicting ordinance of the city
relating to the building or development of the special use property; provided,
the Council finds that:
   (A)   The proposed use at the particular location requested is either
necessary or desirable in order to provide a service or a facility which is in
the interest of public need and convenience and which will contribute to the
general welfare of the community;
   (B)   Such use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated that the
public health, safety and welfare will be protected;
   (C)   The proposed use will comply with all the regulations and conditions
specified in the special use permit to be issued; and
   (D)   The proposed use will not cause substantial injury to the value of
other property in the neighborhood in which it is located.
(Prior Code, § 156.320) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
§ 156.396 CONTENTS OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   Each special use permit shall contain all of the terms and conditions, as
well as all variations granted as condition to the issuance of such special use
permit.
(Prior Code, § 156.321) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
§ 156.397 CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES.
   Prior to the granting of any special use the Plan Commission may recommend,
and the City Council shall stipulate, such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special
use as deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest and to secure
compliance with the standards and requirements of the special use permit. In
all cases in which special uses are granted, the City Council shall require
such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the
conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being, and will be, complied
with.
(Prior Code, § 156.322) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
§ 156.398 FINAL PLATS.
   (A)   If the special use application is approved, final plats shall be
prepared for each stage according to the development schedule.
   (B)   The final plat and supporting material shall show in detail the
overall development plans and the use of all buildings and land, in addition to
the information required by the subdivision regulations.
   (C)   The final plats shall conform to the tentative plat and supporting
material; except that, the Plan Commission and City Council may approve minor
changes without public hearing at this time which do not change the concept or
intent of the development.
   (D)   Major changes, such as changes in density, height of buildings,
reduction of proposed open space, changes in the development schedule or final
governing agreements, provisions or covenants, may be approved only by
resubmission of an amended application.
(Prior Code, § 156.323) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
§ 156.399 TIME LIMIT FOR START OF DEVELOPMENT OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   In any case where a special use permit is issued, unless the
development of the property in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
special use permit is commenced on or before 18 months from the date of the
issuance of the special use permit, the special use permit shall be
automatically cancelled and the property shall revert to its original state of
zoning as fully as though such special use permit had never been issued.
   (B)   The City Council may, upon application, extend the time for the
commencement of the development as, in its sole discretion, it shall deem meet.
(Prior Code, § 156.324) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
§ 156.400 CONTINUING CONTROL OF SPECIAL USE PROJECT.
   The special use project shall be developed only according to the approved
and recorded final plat and all supporting material. The recorded final plat
and supporting material together with all recorded amendments shall be binding
on the applicants, their successors and assigns and shall limit and control the
uses of premises and location of structures in the special use project. Minor
changes in the final plat during or after construction shall be accomplished by
submission of a new final plat. Major changes during or after construction
shall be accomplished by submission of a new tentative plat followed by the
amendment procedure. The City Council shall consider the special use permit
subject to revocation if construction falls more than 18 months behind
schedule.
(Prior Code, § 156.325) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
§ 156.401 FEES.
   The City Council may establish a separate schedule of fees to be charged for
special use applications. The fees shall include, but not be limited to, all
expenses incurred by the municipality with reference to legal publications,
legal fees, engineering fees and the like. Building permits and certificates of
occupancy shall be required for each structure.
(Prior Code, § 156.326) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
§ 156.402 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   The Director of Building and Housing shall base issuance on conformance with
the final plat and supporting material.
(Prior Code, § 156.327) (Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972)
AMENDMENTS
§ 156.415 APPLICATION FOR AMENDMENT.
   The regulations or districts established by these zoning regulations may be
amended by ordinance. Applications for amendment shall be made in the office of
the City Clerk on a form provided therefor and shall be accompanied by a fee of
$25, no part of which shall be returnable. Before any such amendment shall be
considered by the City Council, the request for amendment shall be heard by the
Plan Commission for the purpose of making a report and recommendation to the
City Council, but such report and recommendation shall be made only after
holding a public hearing in relation thereto at which parties in interest and
citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard.
(Prior Code, § 156.340)
§ 156.416 NOTICE OF HEARING.
   Notice shall be given of the time and place of the hearing, not more than 30
days, nor less than 15 days, before the hearing, by publishing a notice thereof
at least once in one or more newspapers having general circulation in the city.
(Prior Code, § 156.341)
§ 156.417 WHEN OWNER SHALL FILE PETITION.
   (A)   (1)   The application for amendment shall be signed by a real property
owner in the area affected.
      (2)   In the event that the application includes property other than that
owned by the applicant, in addition to the applicant’s property, the applicant
shall file, on a form provided by the City Clerk, a petition in favor of the
request signed by the real property owners representing at least 75% of the
area to be included in the application.
   (B)   (1)   In the event that the application includes property owned by
more than one owner, the Plan Commission shall notify, by letter, all property
owners in the area included within the application of the contemplated change.
      (2)   The letter shall be postmarked not later than one week prior to the
Plan Commission’s hearing.
(Prior Code, § 156.342)
§ 156.418 PASSAGE OF PROTECTED AMENDMENT.
   In case of a written protest against any proposed amendment of the
regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20% of the
frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owner of 20% of the frontage
immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners of 20% of
the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, is filed
with the City Clerk, the amendment shall not be passed except by a favorable
vote of two-thirds of the members of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 156.343)
§ 156.419 SUBMITTAL OF REQUESTS FOR AMENDMENT BY PLAN COMMISSION TO CITY
COUNCIL.
   The Plan Commission may, on its own motion, after a public hearing, submit
to the City Council any requests for amendment and such action shall satisfy
the requirements of this chapter with respect to a report and recommendation by
the Plan Commission.
(Prior Code, § 156.344)
§ 156.420 VOTE OF CITY COUNCIL REQUIRED FOR PASSAGE OF AMENDMENT.
   No such proposed amendment, supplement or change shall be passed, except for
the favorable vote of two- thirds of the members of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 156.345)
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 156.435 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   A board of appeals is authorized to be established. The word BOARD, when
used in this subchapter, means the Board of Appeals. The Board shall consist of
five members, which include the Chairperson appointed by the Mayor by and with
the consent of the City Council. All members appointed to the Plan Commission
and Zoning Board of Appeals shall hold their office until their successor is
appointed. One of the members of the Board shall be designated by the Mayor,
with the consent of the City Council, as Chairperson of the Board, and shall
hold his or her office as Chairperson until his or her successor is appointed.
(Prior Code, § 156.355) (Ord. 70-O-743, passed - -1970; Ord. 22-O-2324, passed
1-19-2022)
§ 156.436 MEETINGS.
   All meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such times as the Board may determine. All hearings
conducted by the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall designate a
Secretary to keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member
upon each question or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. He
or she shall also keep records of the Board’s hearings and other official
actions. Every rule or regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof, and every
order, requirement, decision and determination of the Board shall be filed
immediately in the office of the Board and shall be a public record. The Board
shall adopt its own rules of procedure not in conflict with these zoning
regulations or with the Illinois Revised Statutes. The presence of three
members shall be necessary to constitute a quorum.
(Prior Code, § 156.356) (Ord. 22-O-2324, passed 1-19-2022)
§ 156.437 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and it shall be its
duty:
   (A)   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by the Director of Building and Housing in the
enforcement of these zoning regulations;
   (B)   To hear and decide all matters specifically referred to it in these
zoning regulations;
   (C)   On appeal or upon its own motion, to interpret any provision of these
zoning regulations where there is doubt as to the meaning or application;
   (D)   On appeal or on its own motion to determine the location of any
district boundary line shown upon the zoning map of the city adopted as a part
of these zoning regulations when such location is in doubt;
   (E)   To permit a limited increase in the number of employees permitted in
processing activities in the commercial district, but only when such increase
will not adversely affect the character of the establishment, will not be
detrimental to or affect the character of surrounding development and will not
increase traffic or parking congestion;
   (F)   To determine and vary the application in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of these zoning regulations where there are practical
difficulties or particular hardships in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of any of the regulations relating to the use, construction or
alteration of buildings or structures or the use of land;
   (G)   In its consideration of the standard of practical difficulties or
particular hardship, to require evidence that:
      (1)   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
that zone;
      (2)   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances; and
      (3)   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character
of the locality.
   (H)   To permit a variation only if the evidence, in the judgment of the
Board, sustains each of the three conditions enumerated above.
(Prior Code, § 156.357)
§ 156.438 VARIANCES; NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Appeals shall prescribe in connection with any
variation such conditions as the Board may deem necessary in order to fully
carry out the provisions and intent of these zoning regulations.
      (2)   Such variations as are granted by the Board shall be void if the
use is not commenced or if a building permit has not been obtained within 60
days of such granting or within the time stipulated by the Board.
      (3)   The concurring vote of four members of the Board is necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of such an
administrative official, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon
which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variation in
these zoning regulations, or to recommend any variation or modification in
these zoning regulations to the corporate authorities.
      (4)   Upon the report of the Board, the City Council may without further
public hearing, adopt by ordinance any proposed variation or may refer it back
to the Board for further consideration, and any proposed variation which fails
to receive the approval of the Board shall not be passed, except by the
favorable vote of two- thirds of the City Council.
      (5)   Every variation made by ordinance, after a hearing by the Board,
shall be accompanied by findings of facts specifying the reason or reasons for
making the variation.
      (6)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to give or
grant to the Board the power or authority to alter or change these zoning
regulations or the zoning map, such power and authority being reserved to the
Mayor and City Council in the manner provided by law.
      (7)   No such proposed application for variation shall be considered for
passage by the City Council unless the real estate to which said application
pertains has frontage of not less than 25 feet upon a dedicated and improved
streets.
   (B)   No variation shall be made by the Board, except in a specific case and
after a public hearing before the Board. A notice of the time and place of such
public hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the city
at least once, not more than 30, nor less than 15 days before the hearing. This
notice shall contain the particular location for which the variation is
requested as well as a brief statement of what the proposed variation consists.
(Prior Code, § 156.358) (Ord. 84-O-1136, passed 1-16-1984)
§ 156.439 EXERCISE OF POWERS.
   In exercising the powers of this chapter, the Board may reverse or affirm
wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made and, to that end, shall have all the powers
of the Director of Building and Housing from whom the appeal is taken.
(Prior Code, § 156.359)
§ 156.440 APPEALS.
   (A)   An appeal may be taken to the Board of Appeals by any person, or by an
officer, department, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by a decision of the
Director of Building and Housing. Such appeal shall be taken within such time
as shall be prescribed by the Board by general rule, by filing with the
Inspector and with the Board a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds
thereof. The Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board all of the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (B)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Inspector certifies to the Board after the notice of
appeal has been filed with him or her that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than
by a restraining order, granted by the Board or by a court of record on
application and on notice to the Inspector and on due cause shown.
   (C)   The Board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of
the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties and shall render a
decision on the appeals without unreasonable delay. Any person may appear and
testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or
attorney.
   (D)   A fee of $10 shall be paid to the clerk at the time the notice of
appeal is filed. The fee is to be transmitted to the City Treasurer to the
credit of the General Corporate Fund of the city.
(Prior Code, § 156.360)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 156.455 DIRECTOR OF BUILDING AND HOUSING TO ENFORCE PROVISIONS.
   These zoning regulations shall be enforced by the Director of Building and
Housing who is empowered and it shall be his or her duty to administer the
zoning regulations in conjunction with the administration of such portions of
this code and any applicable ordinances of the city as are commonly designated
as the Building Code in such a manner as to facilitate their joint
administration. For the purpose of enforcing these zoning regulations, the
authority vested in him or her under the Building Code is declared to be vested
in him or her under these zoning regulations.
(Prior Code, § 156.370)
§ 156.456 OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   No change in the use or occupancy of land, nor any change of use or
occupancy in an existing building shall be made, nor shall any new building be
occupied for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by
the Director of Building and Housing. Every certificate of occupancy shall
state that the new occupancy complies with all provisions of these zoning
regulations.
   (B)   A certificate of occupancy shall be required of all non-conforming
uses of land or buildings created by the passage of these zoning regulations.
Application for such certificates of occupancy for non-conforming uses shall be
filed with the Inspector by the owner or lessee of the land or building
occupied by such non-conforming use within one year from 8-26-1956, or the date
that any building or use becomes non-conforming by reason of an amendment to
this chapter. It shall be the duty of the Inspector to issue a certificate of
occupancy for non- conforming use.
   (C)   Any use which does not conform with the use regulation of the district
in which it is located and for which any occupancy permit has not been obtained
in conformity with the requirements of division (B) above shall be presumed to
be operating in violation of these zoning regulations, and such use shall
thereupon be abated.
   (D)   Certificates of occupancy shall be applied for at the same time that
the building permit is applied for and shall be issued within ten days after
the erection or alteration of the building shall have been completed.
   (E)   A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the
office of the Inspector and copies shall be furnished on request to any person
having a proprietary or tenancy interest in land or in a building affected by
such certificate of occupancy.
(Prior Code, § 156.371)
§ 156.457 PLATS TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT.
   Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a plat in
duplicate, drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the size of the building to be erected and such other information as may
be necessary to provide for the enforcement of these zoning regulations. A
record of these applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the
Director of Building and Housing.
(Prior Code, § 156.372)
§ 156.458 PROCEDURE TO PREVENT VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In case any building or structure is constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land
is used in violation of these zoning regulations, the Director of Building and
Housing (or any owner or tenant of real property in the same contiguous zoning
district as the building or structure in question), in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding:
      (1)   To prevent the unlawful construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance or use;
      (2)   To prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land;
      (3)   To prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about
the premises; and
      (4)   To restrain, correct or abate the violation.
   (B)   When any such action is instituted by an owner or tenant, a copy of
the complaint shall be served upon the Mayor at the time suit is begun. No such
action may be maintained until such notice has been given.
   (C)   In any action or proceeding for a purpose mentioned in this section,
the court with jurisdiction of such action or proceeding has the power and in
its discretion may issue a restraining order, or a preliminary injunction, as
well as a permanent injunction, upon such terms and under such conditions as
will do justice and enforce the purposes of this chapter.
   (D)   (1)   If a permanent injunction is decreed in any action or proceeding
for a purpose mentioned in this section, the court, in its decree, may, in its
discretion, allow the plaintiff a reasonable sum of money for the services of
the plaintiff’s attorney.
      (2)   This allowance shall be a part of the costs of the litigation
assessed against the defendant and may be recovered as such.
(Prior Code, § 156.373)
§ 156.459 FEES.
   Any person, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to file a petition
pursuant to which a public hearing must be held by either the Plan Commission
or the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals, and upon which City Council action
will be sought, shall pay to the City Clerk at the time of filing such petition
a filing fee in accordance with the following schedule, which filing fee shall
be non-refundable. In addition, said individual, firm, corporation or other
entity shall reimburse the city for any and all costs which the city may incur
in connection with said petition. Such costs shall include by way of example
and not limitation the costs of recording plats, attorney’s fees incurred in
the preparation of documents and publication fees.
Plan Commission
   Annexation only               $150
   Annexation with rezoning      $300
   Dedications                   $150
   PUDs                          $200, plus $10 per residential lot and $10
                                    per unit
   Rezoning                      $200
   Special Use                   $300
   Subdivisions                  $200, plus $10 per residential lot and $10
                                    per unit
   (For commercial or industrial $25 per unit and/or lot
petitions)
   Vacations                     $250
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals
   Conditional use               $250
   Variations                    $100
 
(Prior Code, § 156.374) (Ord. 67-O-667, passed - -1967; Ord. 84-O-1163, passed
12-17-1984)
§ 156.460 AVAILABILITY OF COPIES OF CHAPTER.
   The City Clerk shall keep in his or her office at least three copies of this
chapter, including such maps and standards as are incorporated in this chapter
by reference, and any amendment thereof, for inspection by interested persons.
The Clerk shall also make available copies of this chapter for purchase at $10
each, either through duplication in advance of contemplated demand or upon
order as required. The foregoing copies of this chapter shall be in addition to
the original copy which statutes required the Clerk to keep as a part of the
official record of enacted ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 156.375) (Ord. 69-O-700, passed - -1969)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to
comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any provision of this chapter,
except where a different penalty is specifically designated, shall be fined not
less than $25, nor more than $200, for each offense. Each day a violation is
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Violation of the terms and provisions of §
156.290 of this chapter shall be punishable by fine not to exceed $1,000 and by
confiscation of any and all weapons sold or offered for sale in violation of §
156.290 of this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   Any person, firm or corporation, who places a mobile sign, upon
property within the city without first having obtained and kept in full effect
a permit as required for such sign, shall pay a fee therefor equal to twice the
fee which is otherwise charged hereunder.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
156.343 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25, nor more than $500. A
separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as having been committed each
day upon which said person, firm or corporation shall continue any such
violation.
      (3)   When the person, firm or corporation responsible for violating the
provisions of §
156.343 of this chapter, cannot reasonably be determined, then the person, firm
or corporation holding the permit to place the mobile sign at such location
shall be the person, firm or corporation who is in violation of this section.
In the event that at the time of the violation, there exists no valid permit
for the particular mobile sign in violation, then the owner of the sign or the
owner of the property or business where the sign is located shall be the
person, firm or corporation in violation of §
156.343 of this chapter.
   (D)   The penalty for violation of §
156.344 of this chapter shall be a fine of not less than $50, nor more than
$300, enforceable in the local Municipal Court.
(Prior Code, § 156.279)
   (E)   Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity who violates and
provisions of §
156.345 of this chapter, in relation to the construction, maintenance or
replacement of signs or who knowingly misrepresents information in order to
procure a permit or license hereunder shall upon conviction, be subject to a
fine of not less than $200, and not more than $500. Each day that such
violation continue shall constitute a separate offense. The city may, in
addition to the penalties provided herein, initiate or pursue any action in law
or equity necessary to procure compliance with the provisions of §
156.345 of this chapter and any other ordinances of the city regulating signs
within the city limits.
   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of §§
156.390 through
156.402 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $10, nor
more than $500, for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 156.999)
(Ord. 72-O-793, passed - -1972; Ord. 82-O-1081, passed 3-15-1982; Ord. 86-O-
1257, passed 8-6-1986; Ord. 06-O-1865, passed 6-21-2006; Ord. 08-O-1913, passed
4-2-2008; Ord. 14-O-2086, passed 3-19-2014)
CHAPTER 157: FLOOD HAZARD REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
157.01   Purpose
   
157.02   Definitions
   
157.03   How to use provisions of chapter
   
157.04   Enforcement official
   
157.05   Base flood elevation
   
157.06   Variances
   
157.07   Disclaimer of liability
   
157.08   Abrogation and greater restrictions
Flood Damage Preventions
   
157.20   Flood fringe areas
   
157.21   Designated floodways
   
157.22   Special flood hazard areas where floodways are not identified
   
157.23   Permitting requirements applicable to all floodplain areas and
protection of buildings
   
157.24   Other development requirements
 
   
157.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the
city by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and 5/11-31-2. The
purpose of this chapter is: to maintain the city’s eligibility in the National
Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding
including loss of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption
of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for
flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve
and enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values
and provide for the wise utilization of water and related land resources.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific
purposes:
      (1)   To meet the requirements of 615 ILCS 5/18(g), Rivers, Lakes and
Streams Act;
      (2)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or
drainage hazards to others, or creating unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;
      (3)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
      (4)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
      (5)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities and flood rescue and
relief operations;
      (6)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property
in the city by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program;
      (7)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program, codified as 44 C.F.R. parts 59 through 79, as amended;
      (8)   To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land
and water resources; and
      (9)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of
watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water
impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and
riparian habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic
benefits and enhance community and economic development.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 157.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A non-habitable structure which is on the same parcel
of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   ACT. An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams
of the state, 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
   APPROPRIATE USE. Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible
and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed
are as specified in §
157.21(C) of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The BASE FLOOD is also known as the 100-YEAR FREQUENCY FLOOD EVENT.
Application of the base flood elevation at any location is as defined in §
157.05 of this chapter.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. The portion of the building having its floor sub-grade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, including manufactured homes,
prefabricated buildings and gas or liquid storage tanks. The term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than 180
days per year.
   CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash or natural or human-made drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form
of CHANNEL MODIFICATION involving a significant change in the channel cross-
section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.,
straightening).
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off-site flood water elevations and flows.
   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE. Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this part, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as- built plans.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter which indicates that
FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or
Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that
passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water
surface elevation.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these CRITICAL FACILITIES can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community or can put
special populations at risk. Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations); schools; hospitals; retirement homes and senior care
facilities; major roads and bridges; critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers); and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples
of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood protection is recommended include: sewage
treatment plants; water treatment plants; and pumping stations.
   DAM. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. DAMS may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
   DESIGNATED FLOODWAY.
      (1)   The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion of the
floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on the FEMA
FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency
flood discharge with no more than a 0.1-foot increase in stage due to the loss
of flood conveyance or storage and no more than a 10% increase in velocities.
      (2)   The floodways are designated for Park Creek, I-57 Drainage Ditch,
Bel Aire Creek, Dixie Creek and Calumet Union Drainage Ditch, Southern Branch
on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Cook County prepared by FEMA and
dated 8-19-2008. When two floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more
restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.
      (3)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city that may be annexed
into the city are designated for the Calumet Union Drainage Ditch on the
countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA and dated 8-19-2008.
      (4)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map
and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the DESIGNATED
FLOODWAY boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any human-made change to real estate, including:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building
or any addition to a building;
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is
on site for more than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway
use;
         (c)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges or similar projects;
         (d)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
         (e)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;
         (f)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams or
culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving
or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of
materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste;
         (g)   Any other activity of man that might change the direction,
height or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation
removal; and
         (h)   Substantial improvement of an existing building.
      (2)   DEVELOPMENT does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there
is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATES. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
   EROSION. The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or
wave action.
   EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per
Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units of
government.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before 4-1-1990.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 C.F.R.
parts 59 through 79, as amended.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. The portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway. See commentary on “designated floodway”.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM). A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
special flood hazard area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN. The land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. FLOODPLAINS may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas and the like. The FLOODPLAIN is also known as the SPECIAL FLOOD
HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
      (1)   The FLOODPLAINS are those lands within the jurisdiction of the city
that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood.
The SFHAs of the city are generally identified as such on map number 17031C and
panel number(s) 0727, 0731, 0732, 0733 and 0734 of the countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of the city prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency and dated 8-19-2008.
      (2)   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed
into the city are generally identified as such on map number 17031C and panel
numbers(s) 0731 and 0733 of the countywide for Cook County by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency and dated 8-19-2008.
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOOD-PROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry flood-
proofed to the flood protection elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood or 100-
year frequency floods, plus one foot of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
   FLOODWAY. See DESIGNATED FLOODWAY.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminary
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by
the state’s Historic Preservation Agency; and
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the state’s Historic Preservation Agency.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS. Engineering analysis which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an effective
FIRM.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided that, such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, winch
is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MITIGATION. Those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which
floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety and
welfare. Examples of MITIGATION include: excavation of compensatory storage;
soil erosion and sedimentation control; and channel restoration. MITIGATION may
also include those activities taken to reduce a structure’s susceptibility to
flooding.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by
a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after 4-1-
1990.
   NAVD 88. National American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
   NATURAL. When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by
the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by humans. A
NATURAL stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by humans through regarding and re-vegetation.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures, including a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing and
proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall preclude
the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in part, of a
flood control project by persons or parties who are not public agencies.
   PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS. All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers and streams which in their natural condition were capable
of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or discharge
their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the
state, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters and submerged lands that
are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible thereto.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE or TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGIONAL PERMITS. Offered for pre-approved projects which are considered
minor projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR part 3708 rules for
Northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the terms and
conditions for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR
website.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the state, under the
state’s Land Surveyors Act (225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.).
   REGISTERED OR LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the
state, under the state’s Professional Engineering Practice Act (225 ILCS 325/
1 et seq.).
   REPAIR, REMODELING or MAINTENANCE. Development activities which do not
result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes
to the dimensions of a structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two
separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at
the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damaged occurred.
   RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY. A retention facility stores storm water runoff
without a gravity release. A DETENTION FACILITY provides for storage of storm
water runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or
storm.
   RIVERINE SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on-stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
   RUNOFF. The water derived from melting snow or ram falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
   SEDIMENTATION. The processes that deposit soils, debris and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). See FLOODPLAIN.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued; provided, the actual START of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual START means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation.
   STATEWIDE PERMITS. Statewide permits are offered for pre-approved projects
that are considered minor projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR part
3700 rules. A complete listing of the STATEWIDE PERMITS and permit requirements
can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
   STRUCTURE. See BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes repetitive
loss buildings. (See REPETITIVE LOSS.)
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure taking place subsequent to the adoption of this chapter in which the
cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started.
      (2)   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
      (3)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a “historic structure” listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the state’s Register of Historic Places;
provided that, the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure.
   TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from
a narrow cross- section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications or
other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as
that documentation is provided.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 157.03 HOW TO USE PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The Director of Building and Housing shall be responsible for
fulfilling all of the duties listed in §
157.04 of this chapter.
   (B)   To fulfill those duties, the Director of Building and Housing should
first use the criteria listed in §
157.05 of this chapter, to determine whether the development site is located
within a floodplain.
   (C)   Once it has been determined that a site is located within a
floodplain, the must determine whether the development site is within a flood
fringe, a designated floodway or within a SFHA or floodplain for which no
floodway has been identified.
      (1)   If the site is within a flood fringe, the Director of Building and
Housing shall require that the minimum requirements of §
157.20 of this chapter be met.
      (2)   If the site is within a floodway, the Director of Building and
Housing shall require that the minimum requirements of §
157.21 of this chapter be met.
      (3)   If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for which no
detailed study has been completed and approved, the Director of Building and
Housing shall require that the minimum requirements of §
157.22 of this chapter be met.
   (D)   In addition, the general requirements of §
157.23 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of §§
157.20,
157.21 and
157.22 of this chapter.
   (E)   The Director of Building and Housing shall assure that all subdivision
proposals shall meet the requirements of §
157.24 of this chapter.
   (F)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Director of
Building and Housing shall review the requirements of §
157.06 of this chapter to make sure they are met. In addition, the Director of
Building and Housing shall complete all notification requirements.
   (G)   In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in
this chapter, the Director of Building and Housing may take any and all actions
as outlined in §
157.99 of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 157.04 ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The following are duties of the Director of Building and Housing:
   (A)   Determining the floodplain designation.
      (1)   Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a
special flood hazard area (SFHA);
      (2)   If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway,
flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been
conducted and which drains more than one square mile; and
      (3)   Check whether the development is potentially within an extended
SFHA (with a drainage area less than one square mile), indicating that the
development would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance or
inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being required to
delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the remaining sections
of this chapter.
   (B)   Professional engineer review.
      (1)   If the development site is within a floodway or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one
square mile, the permit shall be referred to a licensed professional engineer
under the employ or contract of the city for review to ensure that the
development meets §§
157.21 and
157.22 of this chapter.
      (2)   In the case of an appropriate use, the PE shall state in writing
that the development meets the requirements of §
157.21 of this chapter.
   (C)   Dam safety requirements.
      (1)   Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard/damage
potential in the event of failure.
      (2)   The construction or major modification of all Class I (high hazard)
and Class II (moderate hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit.
      (3)   Some Class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety
permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the dam and
the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off-channel detention basins that
have an embankment are non-jurisdictional Class III dam. It is not required
that BDNR/OWR “sign off’ on all non-jurisdictional Class III dams.
      (4)   A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can estimate a
hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit is
required.
      (5)   A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for the
construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.
      (6)   Regulated dams may include weirs, restrictive culverts or
impoundment structures.
   (D)   Other permit requirements. Ensure any and all required federal, state
and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit;
   (E)   Plan review and permit issuance.
      (1)   Ensure that all development activities within the SFHAs of the
jurisdiction of the city meet the requirements of this chapter; and
      (2)   Issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this community when the
development meets the conditions of this chapter.
   (F)   Inspection review.
      (1)   Inspect all development projects before, during and after
construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
      (2)   Schedule on an annual basis an inspection of the floodplain and
document the results of the inspection.
   (G)   Damage determinations. Make damage determinations of all damaged
buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged
structures which must comply with §
157.23(C) of this chapter;
   (H)   Elevation and flood-proofing certificates. Maintain permit files
including:
      (1)   An elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of a residential or non-residential building subject
to §
157.23 of this chapter; and/or
      (2)   The elevation to which a non-residential building has been flood-
proofed, using a flood-proofing certificate, for all buildings subject to §
157.23 of this chapter.
   (I)   Records for public inspection. Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies
of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, Conditional
Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Amendment and
“as-built” elevation and flood-proofing and/or elevation certificates for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter;
   (J)   State permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to §§
157.21 and
157.22 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to
the city. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the city
and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
      (1)   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes;
      (2)   IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures, as defined in §
157.02 of this chapter, and all other state, federal or local unit of
government projects, including projects of the city and county, except for
those projects meeting the requirements of §
157.21(B) of this chapter;
      (3)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per §
157.21(D)(5) of this chapter;
      (4)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to §
157.21(C)(3)(d) of this chapter;
      (5)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in §
157.21(D) of this chapter (§
157.21(D)(1), (D)(2) and (D)(8) of this chapter);
      (6)   Permit issuance of structures within, under or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams; and
      (7)   Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles.
   (K)   Cooperation with other agencies.
      (1)   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve
the administration of this chapter;
      (2)   Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a
regulatory map within six months whenever a modification of the floodplain may
change the base flood elevation or result in a change to (i.e., floodplain
map);
      (3)   Submit reports as required for the National Flood insurance
Program; and
      (4)   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
   (L)   Promulgate regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to
the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter changes.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 157.05 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is based on the Flood Insurance
Study for the city.
      (1)   If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is
not available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be
according to the best existing data available from federal, state or other
sources.
      (2)   When a party disagrees with the best available data, it shall
submit a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better
data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to
any development of the site.
      (3)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs
of Park Creek, I-57 Drainage ditch, Bel Aire Creek, Dixie Creek and Calumet
Union Drainage Ditch, South Branch, shall be as delineated on the 100-year
flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of the Cook County prepared by FEMA
dated 8-19-2008 and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared
from time to time.
   (B)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city or that may be annexed into the city shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Cook
County prepared by FEMA and dated 8-19-2008, and such amendments or revisions
to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   (C)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA
delineated as an “AH Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Cook County.
   (D)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the
remaining SFHAs delineated as an “A Zone” on the countywide Flood Insurance
Rate Map of the county shall be according to the best existing data available
from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an
engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood
elevations.
      (1)   When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists,
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall
be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, HEC-RAS or a dynamic
model such as HIP.
      (2)   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from
a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-l, TR-20 or HIP, or by techniques
presented in various publications prepared by the United States Geological
Survey for estimating peak flood discharges.
      (3)   For a non-riverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be the
historic flood of record, plus three feet, unless calculated by a detailed
engineering study.
      (4)   For an unmapped extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than one
square mile) which has been identified by the Director of Building and Housing
pursuant to §
157.04(C) of this chapter, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the
applicant utilizing a method as approved in this division (D).
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 157.06 VARIANCES.
   (A)   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
designated floodway, as defined in §
157.02 of this chapter.
      (1)   Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Planning and
Zoning Board of Appeals of the city for a variance.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals of the city shall review
the applicant’s request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to
the City Council, which may attach such conditions to granting of a variance as
it deems necessary to further the flood protection intent of this chapter.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities or other public
facilities;
      (6)   The provisions of §§
157.20(C) and
157.22 of this chapter shall still be met;
      (7)   The activity is not in a designated floodway;
      (8)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP;
      (9)   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses; and
      (10)   All other required state and federal permits or waivers have been
obtained.
   (C)   The city shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from the
requirements of §
157.23 of this chapter that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as $25 per $ 100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that the applicant will acknowledge in writing the assumption of the risk
and liability.
   (D)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site
or historic structure, as defined in §
157.02 of this chapter, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the
requirements of divisions (B) and (C) above, subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 157.07 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
   (B)   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by human-
made or natural causes.
   (C)   This chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside
of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.
   (D)   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the city or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 157.08 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions.
   (B)   Where this chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
   (C)   This chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the city passed
in order to establish initial eligibility for the program.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
§ 157.20 FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.
   (A)   General. Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be
permitted if protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood by proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other
applicable provisions of this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely
affects the capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located
within the flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this section, along with
the requirements of §
157.23 of this chapter.
   (B)   Development permit.
      (1)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by
law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the Director of Building and Housing.
      (2)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Director of Building and Housing.
         (a)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description for the
property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor;
existing grade elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings.
         (b)   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans and the development will be subject to the requirements of §
157.23 of this chapter.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the Director of
Building and Housing shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         (a)   Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher
than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map and which
has not been filled after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map
without a permit as required by this chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore,
not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development
located on land shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically
connected, but shown on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
         (b)   The Director of Building and Housing shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
      (4)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall
be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and re-vegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
      (5)   The Director of Building and Housing shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local
permits, approvals or waivers that may be required for this type of activity.
The Director of Building and Housing shall not issue a permit unless all other
federal, state and local permits have been obtained.
   (C)   Preventing increased damages. No development in the flood fringe shall
create a threat to public health and safety.
      (1)   If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or
100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data
and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of
removing the site from the floodplain.
      (2)   (a)   1.   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for
use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or
structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be
compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation
taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
            2.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and one-
half times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
            3.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall
be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
            4.   All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation.
            5.   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse.
         (b)   Compensatory storage shall be provided incrementally as follows:
            1.   All regulatory floodplain storage lost below the existing
regulatory ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed
regulatory ten-year flood elevation;
            2.   All regulatory floodplain storage lost above the existing
regulatory ten-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed
regulatory ten-year flood elevation; and
            3.   The additional compensatory storage required beyond a one to
one (1:1) ratio may be placed above or below the proposed regulatory ten-year
flood elevation.
   (D)   Construction of the lowest floor below the base flood elevation (BFE).
A person who has obtained a Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill that removes a
site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate
the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the city to construct the
lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood fringe. The
Director of Building and Housing shall not issue such a permit unless the
applicant has complied with all the criteria set forth in the following
subsection.
      (1)   Compensatory storage shall be provided per division (C)(2) above.
      (2)   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e.,
window wells, access ways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation
(FPE).
      (3)   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above
the FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet beyond the outside face of the
structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
met, the Director of Building and Housing may waive the ten-foot minimum
setback if a state licensed professional engineer certify that an alternative
method to protect the building from damage due to hydrostatic pressures has
been met, The certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and
structural design analysis, which shall be submitted to the Director of
Building and Housing for review. The Director of Building and Housing may
require such additional documentation as necessary to prove that the proposed
shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe. In no case
shall the setback distance be less than four feet.
      (4)   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of 20 feet from the structure, shall be above the BFE. However, if
site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained, the Director
of Building and Housing may waive the 20-foot minimum setback distance if a
state licensed professional engineer certifies that an alternative method to
protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures have been met. A
detailed soils analysis and structural design proving that a shorter setback
distance will keep the structure reasonably safe from flooding shall be
submitted to the city for review. In no case shall the setback distance be less
than four feet.
      (5)   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets
all requirements of this division (D) and is at least five feet thick under the
basement floor slab. Nothing in this division (D) shall be interpreted to
require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a LOMR-F,
if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification
and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according
to ASTM standard D-2487, Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes,
      (6)   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the
soil must be all of one material and the engineering priorities must be in the
same direction.
      (7)   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and
inspected by a state licensed professional engineer, as warranted by the site
conditions.
      (8)   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than
five below the BFE.
      (9)   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab,
and minimum of one-quarter horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply
shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four times
the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away from the
building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the floor
under the effect of the seepage pressure.
      (10)   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
      (11)   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic
pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
      (12)   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set
forth in the preceding paragraphs of this division (D), the Director of
Building and Housing may allow the construction of a basement below the BFE
only if the applicant demonstrates that the proposed fill and structure meet
the guidelines and requirements set forth in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 and
are reasonably safe from flooding. In order to demonstrate that the proposed
structure is reasonably safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a
detailed engineering analysis of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The
engineered basement study shall be completed in accordance with the latest
edition of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of the fill being
prepared by a state licensed professional engineer.
      (13)   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in
no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed 18 inches, as measured from the previously existing natural grade. The
rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation, if
necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly
to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to drain
the compensatory storage area will not be permitted.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008; Ord. 08-O-2206, passed 9-5-2018)
§ 157.21 DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   General. This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment,
site modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The
designated floodway for Park Creek, I-57 Drainage Ditch, Bel Aire Creek, pixie
Creek and Calumet Union Drainage Ditch, Southern Branch, shall be as delineated
on the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Cook County and referenced in §
157.02 of this chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which
meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the
minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development
shall also meet the requirements of §
157.23 of this chapter.
   (B)   Development permit. No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by state law shall commence any development in a floodway without
first obtaining a development permit from the Director of Building and Housing
and IDNR/OWR.
      (1)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Director of Building and Housing. The application shall include
the following information:
         (a)   Name and address of applicant;
         (b)   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         (c)   Name of stream or body of water affected;
         (d)   Description of proposed activity;
         (e)   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
         (f)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
         (g)   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
         (h)   Signature of the applicant or the applicant’s agent;
         (i)   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
         (j)   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form;
         (k)   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign
the name of the trustee by him or her as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit
shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust
by name and address and defining the respective interests therein;
         (l)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include
as a minimum;
            1.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale and north arrow;
            2.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance
between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated
floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed
channel modifications, location and orientation of cross- sections, north arrow
and a graphic or numerical scale;
            3.   Cross-section views of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, ten-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
            4.   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas.
This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance; and
            5.   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the designated floodway location.
         (m)   Any and all other federal, state and local permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development;
         (n)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of division (C)
below;
         (o)   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a Letter of Map Revision has been approved by FEMA;
         (p)   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings
of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing
ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed
excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a licensed
professional engineer, licensed architect or licensed land surveyor; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings
subject to the requirements of §
157.23 of this chapter; and
         (q)   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
            1.   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
            2.   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations
or methods (see division (C)(3) below) to accomplish the purpose of the
proposed work;
            3.   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in division (C)(3) below would have on the
physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and
            4.   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project,
considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the
body of water affected.
      (2)   The Director of Building and Housing shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state and local
permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity.
         (a)   The Director of Building and Housing shall not issue the;
development permit unless all required federal and state permits have been
obtained.
         (b)   A licensed professional engineer, under the employ or contract
of the city shall review and approve applications reviewed under this section.
   (C)   Preventing increased damages and a list of appropriate uses.
      (1)   The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and
which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare or
impair fee natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or
channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Ill. Adm.
Code part 3708 will be allowed. The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
         (a)   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
         (b)   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring
access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities,
and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water-dependent uses;
         (c)   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls;
         (d)   Underground and overhead utilities;
         (e)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail
systems, including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any
one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including
open air pavilions and toilet facilities (four stall maximum) that will not
block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
         (f)   Detached garages, storage sheds or other non-habitable accessory
structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
         (g)   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto;
         (h)   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
            1.   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event
will not exceed one foot; or
            2.   The applicant of a short-term recreational use facility
parking lot formally agrees to restrict access during over bank flooding events
and accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all over
bank flooding events.
         (i)   Designated floodway regarding, without fill, to create a
positive non-erosive slop toward a watercourse;
         (j)   Flood-proofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of water-tight window wells, elevating
structures or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure,
and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure;
         (k)   The replacement, reconstruction or repair of a damaged building,
provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was
damaged to 50% or more of the market value before the damage occurred, the
building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation; and
         (l)   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase
the enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows including, but not limited to,
fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios and second story additions. If the
building is improved to 50% or more of the market value before the modification
occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will be protected from
flooding to the flood protection elevation.
      (2)   Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of
any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts, excavation
or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise non-appropriate uses in
the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence) and storage of materials, except as specifically defined above as an
appropriate use.
      (3)   Within the designated floodway, the construction of an appropriate
use, will be considered permissible provided that the proposed project meets
the following engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing
with supporting plans, calculations and data by a licensed professional
engineer and provided mat any structure meets the protection requirements of §
157.23 of this chapter:
         (a)   Preservation of flood conveyance, so as not to increase flood
stages upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on-stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
            1.   Designated floodway conveyance, “K” = (1.486/n)(AR2/3), where
“n” is Manning’s roughness factor, “A” is the effective flow area of the cross-
section, and “R” is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Ven Te
Chow, Open Channel Hydraulics, (McGraw-Hill, New York 1959));
            2.   The same Manning’s V value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal,
state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-vegetative
land cover; and
            3.   Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations
of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to
IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
               a.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream’s length;
               b.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length;
               c.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of
stream length shall be used;
               d.   Transition sections shall be provided between cross-
sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated
floodway delineation on adjacent properties; and
               e.   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be
located perpendicular to flood flows.
         (b)   Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase
downstream flooding.
            1.   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
            2.   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to
at least one and one-half Awes the volume of floodplain storage lost.
            3.   Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head
loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
            4.   The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood
elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing ten-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation.
All designated floodway storage lost above the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.
            5.   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location
of the proposed construction, the applicant’s engineer shall demonstrate
through a determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that
the compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
            6.   There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a
result of a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to
reduce flooding at existing structure.
         (c)   Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to increase stream
erosion or flood heights.
            1.   For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on-
stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the
average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood events
up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
            2.   In the case of bridges or culverts or on-stream structures
built for the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood
flows, velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by me use of rip-rap or other design measures.
         (d)   Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway
approaches.
            1.   The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of
upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth foot when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event; or the upstream flood stage increases will he contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or
within recorded flood easements.
            2.   If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood
stages greater than one-tenth feet, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to
obtain a permit for a dam or waiver.
               a.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in §
157.05 of this chapter. Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any
commonly accepted FEMA approved hydraulic models.
               b.   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per division
(C)(3) above.
               c.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per division (C)(3)
above.
               d.   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is
used for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be
received.
               e.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the
bridge showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by this
division (C).
               f.   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall
be designed per division (C)(3) above.
         (e)   Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culverts and
approach roads.
            1.   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than one-tenth foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of
flood damage.
            2.   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant’s engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
            3.   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing
is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3708 (Floodway Construction in
Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued.
         (f)   On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water.
            1.   Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than zero feet
when compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and
including the 100-year frequency event shall be contained within the channel
banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as
within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within
recorded flood easements.
            2.   A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be
obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flow.
            3.   All dams and impoundment structures, as defined in §
157.02 of this chapter, shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm.
Code part 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity
involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an
impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
               a.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest
by providing flood control, public recreation or regional storm water
detention;
               b.   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of
indigenous fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of
their life cycle, such as for spawning;
               c.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded
water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual
bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a pre-sedimentation
basin;
               d.   A non-point source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants.
If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control; and
               e.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of
this section.
         (g)   Flood-proofing of existing habitable, residential and commercial
structures.
            1.   If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of
the existing building, the outside perimeter of the flood-proofing construction
shall be placed no further than ten feet from the outside of the building.
            2.   Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be
required for flood-proofing activities.
         (h)   Excavation in the floodway.
            1.   When excavation is proposed in the design of bridges and
culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement of existing
bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance or other
appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the excavation,
            2.   The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used
unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering
calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the
same efficiency:
               a.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot horizontal for every four feet of the flooded stream’s length;
               b.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot horizontal for every one foot of the flooded stream’s length;
               c.   When expanding or contacting flows in a vertical direction,
a minimum of one foot vertical transition for every ten feet of stream length
shall be used; and
               d.   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream
and downstream of the transition sections.
         (i)   Channel modification. If the proposed activity involves a
channel modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
            1.   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which
would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the
body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, flood-proofing of existing structures, removal of structures
from the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel or the
establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification
is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water
quality and fish and wildlife habitat;
            2.   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
            3.   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria.
               a.   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross-
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
               b.   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at
both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they
will prevent erosion.
               c.   One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation.
               d.   Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that
which is essential for construction of the channel.
               e.   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable.
Native vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or rip-rap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as
concrete, gabions or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
               f.   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall
be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
               g.   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom
diversity such as deep pools, riffles and other similar features, such features
shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow
characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where
appropriate.
               h.   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end
of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
               i.   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and
all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
               j.   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
               k.   Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of flood water storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification.
            4.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
         (j)   Seeding and stabilization plan. For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
         (k)   Soil erosion and sedimentation measures. For all activities in
the floodway, including grading, filling and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria.
            1.   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the
maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the
time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural
vegetation be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than 15 days prior to the
initiation of improvements.
            2.   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied
to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within 15 days after final grade is reached on any portion of the
site, and within 15 days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade, but
will remain undisturbed for longer than 60 days.
            3.   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches
and sediment traps and basins.
            4.   A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be
preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along existing channels (see
division (C)(3)(p) below). Construction vehicle use of channels shall be
minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to
minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be
restabilized immediately.
            5.   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented consistent with Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois (1988), also known as the
“Green Book”, and The Illinois Urban Manual (NRCS, J995).
         (l)   Public flood control projects. For public flood control
projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if
the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
         (m)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations.
            1.   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in §
157.05 of this chapter, must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If
the study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR
shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base
conditions data to use.
            2.   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of
the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet:
               a.   The requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency
flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and
               b.   Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water
elevations.
            3.   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
         (n)   Conditional letter of map revision.
            1.   If the appropriate use would result in a change in the
designated floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the
applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all information, calculations and
documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision
and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway
change before a permit is issued.
            2.   The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA
until as-built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging
or excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR.
            3.   In the case of non-government projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval
can be given.
            4.   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place
until a conditional approval is issued.
            5.   After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
         (o)   Professional engineer’s supervision. All engineering analyses
shall be performed by or under the supervision of a licensed professional
engineer.
         (p)   Construction. For all activities in the floodway involving
construction within 25 feet of the channel, the following criteria shall be
met.
            1.   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at
least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
            2.   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the
construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
         (q)   Conditional approval. After receipt of conditional approval of
the designated floodway change and issuance of a permit and a Conditional
Letter of Map Revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway
designation may proceed, but no buildings or structures or other construction
that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated
floodway map is changed and a final Letter of Map Revision is received. The
designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by
IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the “as-built” plans.
      (4)   Development activities in delegated communities requiring state
review. For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the
following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and
concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or
county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway:
         (a)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed
bridge pursuant to division (C)(3) above;
         (b)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, pursuant to division (C)(3)(5) below;
         (c)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
storage pursuant to divisions (C)(3)(a), (C)(3)(b) and (C)(3)(h) above;
         (d)   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in §
157.02 of this chapter) and all other federal, state or local units of
government projects, including projects of the municipality or county;
         (e)   An engineer’s determination that a proposed bridge affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening;
         (f)   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles; and
         (g)   Projects in public bodies of water.
      (5)   Other permits.
         (a)   In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, a
development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be issued unless
the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is
not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.
         (b)   No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the project
meets the requirements of Regional Permit 3.
         (c)   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has
delegated this responsibility to the city.
      (6)   Permits for dams.
         (a)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of
a dam, as defined in §
157.03 of this chapter, per 17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3702 (Rules for Construction
of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of
a dam.
         (b)   If the Director of Building and Housing finds a dam that does
not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Director of Building and Housing shall
immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
         (c)   If the Director of Building and Housing finds a dam which is
believed to be in unsafe condition, the Director of Building and Housing shall
immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office, and the
state’s Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
      (7)   Activities that do not require a licensed professional engineer’s
review. The following activities may be permitted without a licensed
professional engineer’s review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements. Regional
Permit 3 which authorizes, for example, underground and overhead utilities,
storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios, athletic fields,
playground equipment and streambank protection activities
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 157.22 SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT IDENTIFIED.
   (A)   General. In SFHA or floodplains (including AB, AH, AO and Unnumbered A
Zones) where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more
than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative
effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and
passage of the flood waters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-
year frequency flood elevation.
   (B)   Development permit.
      (1)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body, not exempted by
state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain without first
obtaining a development permit from the Director of Building and Housing.
      (2)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Director of Building and Housing:
         (a)   The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations
and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a
licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all
buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
157.23 of this chapter;
         (b)   The application for a development permit shall also include the
following information:
            1.   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose
and intended use;
            2.   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
            3.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
and
            4.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include
as a minimum:
               a.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of
the waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site,
graphic or numerical scale and north arrow;
               b.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain
limit, location and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow and a graphical
or numerical scale;
               c.   Cross-section view of the project perpendicular to the flow
of flood water and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view,
existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, ten-year frequency
flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation and graphical or numerical
scales (horizontal and vertical); and
               d.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and re-vegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
         (c)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of division below; and
         (d)   Any and all other federal, state and local permits or approvals
that may be required for this type of development.
      (3)   Based on the best available existing data according to federal,
state or other sources, the Director of Building and Housing shall compare the
elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         (a)   Should no elevation information exist for the site, the
developer’s engineer shall calculate the elevation according to §
157.05(D) of this chapter.
         (b)   Any development located on land that can be shown to have been
higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map
Identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   The Director of Building and Housing shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
         (d)   The Director of Building and Housing shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state and local
permits, approvals or waivers that may be required for this type of activity.
The Director of Building and Housing shall not issue the development permit
unless all required federal, state and local permits have been obtained.
   (C)   Preventing increased damages.
      (1)   No development in the SFHA where a floodway has not been determined
shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or
velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural
hydrologic and hydraulic Junctions of the floodway or channel, or impair
existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.
      (2)   Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been
determined, the following standards shall apply.
         (a)   The developer shall have a licensed professional engineer state
in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations and data that the
project meets the engineering requirements of §
157.21(C) of this chapter for the entire floodplain as calculated under the
provisions of §
157.05(D) of this chapter.
            1.   As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering
study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to
IDNR/OWR and FEMA for acceptance as a designated floodway.
            2.   Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the
developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of §
157.21 of this chapter for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be
defined according to the definition in §
157.02 of this chapter.
         (b)   A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant
first obtains a IDNR/OWR permit or a determination has been made that an IDNR/
OWR permit is not required.
      (3)   (a)   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal
of a dam, as defined in §
157.02 of this chapter, per 17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3702 (Rules for Construction
of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of
a dam.
         (b)   If the Director of Building and Housing finds a dam that does
not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Director of Building and Housing shall
immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office.
         (c)   If the Director of Building and Housing finds a dam which is
believed to be in unsafe condition, the Director of Building and Housing shall
immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett office and the
state’s Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
      (3)   The following activities may be permitted without a licensed
professional engineer’s review or calculation of base flood elevation and
designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of
this chapter.
         (a)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 2;
         (b)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 3;
         (c)   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 4;
         (d)   Motorboat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit
No. 5;
         (e)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change in
grade) are covered by this permit:
         (f)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions
of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7;
         (g)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8;
         (h)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 9;
         (i)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10;
         (j)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of DNR/
OWR Statewide Permit No. 11;
         (k)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12;
         (l)   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 13;
         (m)   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 14; and
         (n)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
      (4)   The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse
shall be maintained.
      (5)   (a)   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
         (b)   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and one-
half times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
         (c)   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall
be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
         (d)   All floodplain storage lost below the existing ten-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All
floodplain storage lost above the existing ten-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed ten-year flood elevation. All such excavations
shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 157.23 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS AND
PROTECTION OF BUILDINGS.
   In addition to the requirements found in §§
157.20,
157.21 and
157.22 of this chapter for development in flood fringes, designated floodways
and SFHA or floodplains where no floodways have been identified, the following
requirements shall be met.
   (A)   Public health standards.
      (1)   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a flood-proofed
and anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or flood-
proofed building constructed according to the requirements of division (C)
below.
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer
lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are water-tight.
      (5)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
   (B)   Carrying capacity and notification.
      (1)   For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream
maintenance (including levees), the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse
shall be maintained.
      (2)   In addition, the city shall notify adjacent communities in writing
30 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of
the watercourse.
   (C)   Protecting buildings.
      (1)   All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain, also known as a
SFHA, shall be protected from flood damage below the flood protection
elevation. This building protection criteria applies to the following
situations:
         (a)   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than $1,000 or 70 square feet;
         (b)   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than 20% or equal or
exceed the market value by 50%. Alteration shall be figured cumulatively
subsequent to file adoption of this chapter. If substantially improved, the
existing structure and the addition must meet the flood protection standards of
this section;
         (c)   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this chapter. If
substantially damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this section;
         (d)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do
not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage);
         (e)   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site
for more than 180 days per year; and
         (f)   Repetitive loss to an existing building, as defined in §
157.02 of this chapter. This building protection requirement may be met by one
of the following methods.
      (2)   A residential or non-residential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation; and
         (b)   Fill requirements:
            1.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
            2.   The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection
elevation. However, the ten-foot minimum may be waived if a structural engineer
certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to
hydrostatic pressures;
            3.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative coyer, riprap or other structural measure;
            4.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate
debris or refuse materials; and
            5.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties and, when necessary, storm water
management techniques such as swales or basins shall be incorporated.
      (3)   A residential or non-residential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following.
         (a)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
stilts, piles, walls or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a licensed
professional engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one on each wall,
shall be no more than one foot above existing grade, and consists of a minimum
of two openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
below the base flood elevation;
         (b)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and
aligned in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize
exposure to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating
debris; and
         (c)   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be
constructed of materials resistant to flood damage; and
            1.   The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical,
heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility
meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation; and
            2.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps and other water-proofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation; provided, they are water- proofed; and
         (d)   The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used
for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space; and
         (e)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with
these requirements may be certified by licensed professional engineer or
architect.
         (f)   Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a
site for more than 180 days, shall be elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for
the state’s Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code part
870. In addition, all manufactured homes shall meet the following elevation
requirements:
            1.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved:
               a.   Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
               b.   In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
               c.   In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
               d.   In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on
which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage from a flood, the top
of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation.
            2.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured
home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the
base flood elevation or the chassis is at least 36 inches in height above grade
and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of equivalent strength,
whichever is less.
         (g)   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to
meet the elevation and anchoring requirements of division (C)(3)(f) above
unless:
            1.   They are on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
            2.   They are fully licensed, ready for highway use and used only
for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utility and service devices and has no permanently attached additions.
      (4)   Only a non-residential building may be structurally dry flood-
proofed (in lieu of elevation) provided that:
         (a)   A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the building has been structurally dry flood-proofed below the flood protection
elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are water-tight and
capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year frequency flood;
         (b)   The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice.
         (c)   Flood-proofing measures shall be operable without human
intervention and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms,
floodwalls and similar works are not considered flood-proofing for the purpose
of this division (D)).
      (5)   A building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation; provided that, the following conditions are met.
         (a)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
         (b)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of flood waters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot above grade.
         (c)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than two feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade.
         (d)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed four feet
at any point.
         (e)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove flood
waters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of
time after a flood event.
         (f)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
         (g)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
      (6)   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
flood-proofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet above the
level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater. Flood-
proofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic substances
wilt not be displaced by or released into flood waters. Access routes elevated
to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to all
critical facilities.
      (7)   Tool sheds, detached garages and other minor accessory structures
on an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest
floor below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
         (a)   The building is not used for human habitation;
         (b)   All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in
a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as
not to block the flow of flood waters and shall also meet the appropriate use
criteria of §
157.21 of this chapter. In addition, all other requirements of §§
157.20,
157.21 and
157.22 of this chapter must be met;
         (c)   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation;
         (d)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or flood-proofed to the flood protection elevation;
         (e)   The building shall be valued at less than $10,000 and be less
than 500 square feet in floor size;
         (f)   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or
tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses
and cannot be modified later into another use;
         (g)   The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of
division (C)(3) above;
         (h)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint, insecticides,
fertilizers and the like) shall be stored above the flood protection elevation;
and
         (i)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the owner
advised of the flood insurance implications.
      (8)   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also
meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in §
157.21 of this chapter. Non-conforming structures located in a designated
floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally
altered in accordance with §
157.21(C) of this chapter. A non-conforming structure damaged by flood, fire,
wind or other natural or human-made disaster may be restored unless the damage
exceeds 50% of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall
conform to this chapter.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 157.24 OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   The City Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that
they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements and
Planned Unit Developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure
that the proposed developments are consistent with §§
157.20,
157.21,
157.22 and
157.23 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans
for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs)
shall include a signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the
plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
   (B)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel
trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured
home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing adopted study, the applicant’s
engineer shall be responsible for calculating the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation per §
157.05(D) of this chapter and the floodway delineation, per the definition in §
157.02 of this chapter.
   (C)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   (D)   The City Council shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD)
or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
§ 157.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   If such owner fails after ten days notice to correct the violation:
      (1)   The city may make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the Court;
      (2)   Any person who violates this Ordinance shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $50 or more than $1,000 for each offense;
      (3)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues; and
      (4)   The city shall record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   (B)   The Director of Building and Housing shall inform the owner that any
such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and,
therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be
suspended.
      (1)   The Director of Building and Housing is authorized to issue an
order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order
shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall
order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the
stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
      (2)   (a)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals of
the city. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and
shall state:
            1.   The grounds for compliant or reasons for suspension or
revocation; and
            2.   The time and place of the hearing.
         (b)   At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on his or her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the
Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals of the city shall determine whether the
permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from talcing such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. 08-O-1929, passed 8-6-2008)
CHAPTER 158: STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY
Section
   
158.001   Purpose and scope
   
158.002   Definitions
   
158.003   Annual registration required
   
158.004   Permit required; applications and fees
   
158.005   Action on permit applications
   
158.006   Effect of permit
   
158.007   Revised permit drawings
   
158.008   Insurance
   
158.009   Indemnification
   
158.010   Security
   
158.011   Permit suspension and revocation
   
158.012   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status
   
158.013   General construction standards
   
158.014   Traffic control
   
158.015   Location of facilities
   
158.016   Construction methods and materials
   
158.017   Vegetation control
   
158.018   Removal, relocation, or modifications of utility facilities
   
158.019   Clean-up and restoration
   
158.020   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
158.021   Variances
   
158.022   Enforcement
 
   
158.999   Penalties
§ 158.001 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the city's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city
rights-of-way and the city as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this chapter, the city intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the city and, in particular, the use of the
public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
city's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the city's residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities subject to this chapter. This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the city. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired, and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license, or
similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The city, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the city
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the city enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the city may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this
chapter.
   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the city, such franchise, license, or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the city and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The city shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the city so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the city
to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety,
and welfare.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 158.002 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI.  American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas, or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
   CITY. The City of Markham.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE. The Municipal Code of the City of Markham.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification, or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of Public Works or his or her
designee.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right- of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but
not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas,
vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits,
grates, covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across, or within rights-of-way under this chapter.
For purposes of this chapter, the term FACILITY shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the city.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee,to pose an unreasonable
and imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to
the ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures, and
appurtenances necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches, or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right- of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
158.004 and
158.005 of this chapter.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the city. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state, or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land, or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the city has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the city. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any
real or personal city property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include city buildings, fixtures and other
structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in the
right-of-way.
   ROADWAY. That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. That amount of security required pursuant to this chapter.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGEMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally
accepted engineering principles, practices, and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code, and
protocol of the information for purposes other than transmission.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by such provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or
terminates the end-to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
the provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable
Communications Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following), as now or
hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open
video system fee payable to the city through an open video system as defined in
the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. § 76.1500 and
following), as now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Means any person that installs, owns, operates,
or controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to
transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in section 21-201 (v) of the Illinois
Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 21-201(v).
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 158.003 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the city shall register on
January 1 of each year with the Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her
designee, providing the utility's name, address and regular business telephone
and telecopy numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on
behalf of the utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility's
facilities in the right-of-way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in this chapter, in the form of a
certificate of insurance.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.004 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this
chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any city right-of-way which: (i) changes the location of the facility; (ii)
adds a new facility; (iii) disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this
chapter); or (iv) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by
the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right-of-way,
without first filing an application with the Superintendent of Public Works, or
his or her designee, and obtaining a permit from the city therefor, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit shall be required for
installation and maintenance of service connections to customers' premises
where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the city and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the city may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the city:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the city and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the city finds that additional information or assurances are
needed;
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in this chapter;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in this
chapter;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter; and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
city.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control, and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District [other local or state entities with jurisdiction], have been
satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the city within 30 days after the change
necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $650 for an application to collocate a
single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or wireless support
structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed in an
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures. No application fee is required to
be paid by any electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity
infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure
Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 158.005 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   City review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Superintendent
of Public Works, or his or her designee, within a reasonable time after filing.
If the application does not conform to the requirements of applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Superintendent of Public
Works, or his or her designee, shall reject such application in writing,
stating the reasons therefor. If the Superintendent of Public Works, or his or
her designee, is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements
of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall issue a
permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty
of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of
Public Works, or his or her designee, that the construction proposed under the
application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Additional city review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4,
a telecommunications retailer shall notify the city that it intends to commence
work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the city not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work
requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of
work requiring excavation. The Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her
designee, shall specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility
may be placed, used, and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her
designee, fails to provide such specification of location to the
telecommunications retailer within either: (i) ten days after service of notice
to the city by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not
involving excavation for new construction; or (ii) 25 days after service of
notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving
excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence
work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the city, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
158.004 the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the city an application
for a permit and any and all plans, specifications, and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to
the requirements of division (A) of this section.
   (C)   Additional city review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted 45 days after
submission to the city, unless otherwise acted upon by the city, provided the
holder has complied with applicable city codes, ordinances, and regulations.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 158.006 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the city authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on city rights-of-way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the city with
such city representatives in attendance as the city deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
city does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the city and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.007 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the city within 90 days after the
completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with this chapter. If the city denies the
request for a variance, then the permittee shall either remove the facility
from the right-of-way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit
and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 158.008 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits. 
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in
the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the city, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in divisions (A) and (B) of this section:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each
person;
            2.   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
         (c)   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the city within ten days following receipt
of a written request therefor from the city.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
         "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after
receipt by the City, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice addressed to the City Mayor or Administrator of
such intent to cancel or not to renew."
      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no
event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall obtain
and furnish to the city evidence of replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A), or the requirements of divisions (B), (C), and (D)
of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required under division (A) of this
section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self insurer" under
the Workers Compensation Act.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the city and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
[All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company.]
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.009 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the city and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the city, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 158.010 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this chapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the city occasioned by
the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the city issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the city may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the city must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the city from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the city in the
form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the city, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the
city. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this division
shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
city and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the city of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the city and within the
State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the City Engineer and/or Director of Public Works, and
may also include reasonable, directly related costs that the city estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where
the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the city, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Superintendent
of Public Works, or his or her designee, may, in the exercise of sound
discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall
be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of
the Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount
that would have been required under the provisions of this division (C) for any
single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The city, upon 14 days’ advance written notice clearly
stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under
this division, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the
permittee has not reimbursed the city for such amount within the 14 day notice
period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the city for any damages, claims, costs, or
expenses which the city has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the city
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
city that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the permittee
shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division (C) of this
section.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the city,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the city, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the city for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the city to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the city as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the city with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the city may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city
shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its
rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.011 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   City right to revoke permit. The city may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      (3)   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The city shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the city, the permittee shall have the following options:
      (1)   Immediately provide the city with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
      (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the city, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the city within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
      (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way
to the satisfaction of the city providing written proof of such removal to the
city within ten days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
      (4)   The city may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this division (C).
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the city may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A) of this
section.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of division (C) of this section, the city or its
designee may, at the option of the city: (i) correct the deficiencies; (ii)
upon not less than 20 days notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or (iii) after not less than 30 days notice to the
permittee of failure to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and
property of the city. The permittee shall be liable in all events to the city
for all costs of removal.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.012 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the city no less than
30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-of-way
or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or the
facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the former
owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and facilities in
the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the city's right-of-
way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.013 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      (7)   Flagger's Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall
determine, in the exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles
apply and such decision shall be final. If requested, the Superintendent of
Public Works, or his or her designee, shall state which standard or principle
will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.014 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The city's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this code.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices, and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant this chapter, the utility
shall provide such notice as is practicable under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the city.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.015 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this section.
      (1)   No interference with city facilities. No utility facilities shall
be placed in any location if the Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her
designee, determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the City's utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the city's utility
facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of city highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage
facilities.
      (3)   Ninety degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The city may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations. (49 C.F.R. § 192.707
(1989)).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The city may
require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The city may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The city may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The city may prohibit the installation of facilities in particular
locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 158.016 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, from the edge of the
pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall be excavated no more than 48 hours
in advance of boring or jacking operations and backfilled within 48 hours after
boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the city to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOT’s “Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.”
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the City Engineer and/or Director of Public Works.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the city to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction." When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Engineer and/or Director of Public Works, the utility, at its
expense, shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the
installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as
determined by the Engineer [Director of Public Works].
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this division (4) is
permitted herein, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Engineer and/or Director of Public Works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the city.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
city.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   1.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement
shall be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or city approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the city.
            2.   Bell and spigot type pipe shall be encased regardless of
installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair; and
            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility                      Minimum Cover
Electric Lines                        30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, Cable or Video Service 18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by
Lines                                 city)
Gas or Petroleum Products             30 inches (0.8 m)
Water Line                            Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                      protection
Sanitary Sewer, Storm Sewer, or       Sufficient cover to provide freeze
Drainage Line                         protection
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within city rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction
of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities.
            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip
augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation; or
               b.   The installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the city. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights- of-way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a city
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 CFR § 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois."
      (6)   Ground mounted appurtenances. Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Engineer and/or Director of Public Works. With
the approval of the Engineer and/or Director of Public Works, shrubbery
surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation-free area. The
housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to
blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the City Engineer and/or
Director of Public Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit,
wire, poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the
right-of-way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards
to the public or an obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the
right-of-way and other property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way,
prior approval must be obtained from the city.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the city
shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the city, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Engineer and/or Director of
Public Works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the city, the hours of construction
are those set forth in
Chapter 98 of this Code.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the city shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence and
location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the rights-
of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The city will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the city or by
J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground
facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance with
the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/1 et
seq.)
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 158.017 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities; compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the city as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utilities; tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The city will require
compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed without
authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The city may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The city may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire, or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use.
      (1)   Except as provided in the following paragraph, no utility shall
spray, inject, or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs, or
vegetation in the city for any purpose, including the control of growth,
insects or disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Engineer and/or Director of Public Works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.018 REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the
rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the city, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate, or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior
to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the city, the utility shall notify the city within 90 days.
Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the utility to remove all
or any portion of the facility if the Superintendent of Public Works, or his or
her designee, determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the
public health, safety, and welfare. In the event that the city does not direct
the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of
abandonment to the city, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to
the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another
utility or person.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.019 CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged, or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the city. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the City Engineer and/or Director of Public
Works. Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling,
regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right-
of-way to a condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to
the commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may
be extended by the Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, for
good cause shown.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.020 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the city and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades, or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, or his or her duly
authorized agent of the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have
been taken for protection of the traveling public and what will be required to
make the necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to
interfere with the free movement of traffic, the city police shall be notified
immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the city a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021) Penalty, see §
158.999
§ 158.021 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Superintendent
of Public Works, or his or her designee, as a part of the permit application.
The request shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance
is requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Superintendent of Public Works, or
his or her designee, shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each
provision of this chapter identified in the variance request on an individual
basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Superintendent of Public
Works, or his or her designee, may authorize a variance only if the utility
requesting the variance has demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations, or facilities
that would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her
designee, may require the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable
standards and conditions that may or may not be expressly contained within this
chapter but which carry out the purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision, or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the
Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, under the provisions of
this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the City Council, or such other
board or commission as it may designate. The application for appeal shall be
submitted in writing to the City Clerk within 30 days after the date of such
order, requirement, decision, or determination. The City Council shall commence
its consideration of the appeal at the Council's next regularly scheduled
meeting occurring at least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The City
Council shall timely decide the appeal.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 158.022 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the city may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021)
§ 158.999 PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in
accordance with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when
the city will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because
the utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
city's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No
other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost apportionment of the city. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility
that does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(Ord. 21-O-2302, passed 6-2-2021)
CHAPTER 159: SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   
159.001   Definitions
   
159.002   Regulation of small wireless facilities
   
159.003   Collocation requirements and conditions
   
159.004   Application fees
   
159.005   Exceptions to applicability
   
159.006   Pre-existing agreements
   
159.007   Annual recurring rate
   
159.008   Abandonment
   
159.009   Dispute resolution
   
159.010   Indemnification
   
159.011   Insurance
   
159.012   Purpose
   
159.013   Conflicts
§ 159.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
following meanings:
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency (RF) radiation, to be operated or operating from a fixed
location pursuant to Federal Communications Commission (FCC) authorization, for
the provision of personal wireless service and any commingled information
services. The antenna does not include an unintentional radiator, mobile
station or device.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person or entity that submits an application and the agents,
employees and contractors of such person or entity.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the city for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities at a specified location, and a request that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well
as any applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: (i) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance
adopted by the city pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW.  A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the city in
public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the city to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include city-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and
other services.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including: (i) equipment
associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas,
coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
      (2)   Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless
facility does not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or
within which the equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities,
coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or
utility poles or coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the city.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a non-discriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.002 REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided herein
regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to zoning review or
approval if they are collocated: (i) in rights-of-way in any zoning district;
or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for commercial or
industrial use.
   (B)   Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the city to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      (1)   Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the city, together with the city's Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act
of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application
as it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the city, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
         (h)   Certification by a radio engineer that a new, replacement or
modified small wireless facility operates within all applicable FCC standards.
      (2)   Application process. The city shall process applications as
follows:
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the city fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the city in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75
days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th
day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the city. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the city's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
            4.   FCC regulation provides that an application to collocate a
small wireless facility using an exiting structure shall be granted or denied
within 60 days of submission of a completed application. Delays beyond that
time limit are available only in exceptional circumstances. The FCC time limits
may be enforced through litigation.
         (c)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the city fails to approve or
deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the city in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
105 days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th
day after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the city. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the city's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
            4.   FCC regulation provides that an application to collocate a
small wireless facility using a new structure shall be granted or denied within
90 days of submission of a completed application. Delays beyond that time limit
are available only in exceptional circumstances. These FCC time limits may be
enforced through litigation.
         (d)   The city shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
            1.   If the city determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
            2.   The city shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
city denies an application.
            3.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city
and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice of denial
is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The city
shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the
applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees, and recommencement
of the city's review period.
            4.   The applicant must notify the city in writing of its intention
to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
            5.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         (e)   Pole attachment agreement. Within 30 days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
city and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement,
provided by the city for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole by
the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the city and the applicant shall
enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
      (3)   Completeness of application. 
         (a)   Within ten days after receiving an application, the city shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an
application is incomplete, the city must specifically identify the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the city fails to
provide notification to the applicant within ten days after all documents,
information and fees specifically enumerated in the city's permit application
form are submitted by the applicant to the city.
         (b)   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the city sends the
notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
      (4)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the city;
or
         (b)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      (5)   Consolidated applications. An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the city shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the
collocations each involve substantially the same type of small wireless
facility and substantially the same type of structure.
         (a)   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities,
the city may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application
and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The city may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      (6)   Duration of permits. 
         (a)   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than
five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the
city makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified
utility pole do not comply with the applicable city codes or any provision,
condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
         (b)   If the Act is repealed, renewals of permits shall be subject to
the applicable city code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of
renewal.
      (7)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the city by personal
delivery at the city's designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked
on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.003 COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Public safety space reservation. The city may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the city's electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the city reasonably determines
that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   (B)   Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
   (C)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies.
      (1)   The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities
shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for
public safety communications.
      (2)   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the
type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public
safety agency's communications equipment.
      (3)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
      (4)   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
      (5)   The city may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based
on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the
Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous division. Failure to remedy
the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
   (D)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
city utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      (1)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the city utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      (2)   For purposes of this division, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   (E)   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes,
including acoustic regulations and local code provisions or regulations that
concern public safety.
   (F)   The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards that
are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a city ordinance,
written policy adopted by the city, a comprehensive plan or other written
design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on
a historic landmark or in a historic district.
   (G)   Alternate placements. 
      (1)   Except as provided in this collocation requirements and conditions
section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocate small wireless
facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility poles, or be
required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility pole.
However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small wireless
facility associated with a new utility pole, the city may propose that the
small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or existing
wireless support structure within 200 feet of the proposed collocation, which
the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the alternate structure
on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate location and structure
does not impose technical limits or additional material costs as determined by
the applicant.
      (2)   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the city, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this division.
   (H)   Height limitations. 
      (1)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the
small wireless facility is collocated.
      (2)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on
which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         (a)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the city, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
city, provided the city may designate which intersecting right-of-way within
300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall
control the height limitation for such facility; or
         (b)   Fifty feet above ground level.
   (I)   Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height for
a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which
the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall
apply for a special use permit, variance or administrative waiver in
conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in
Chapter 156 of this code.
   (J)   Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the city and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   (K)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall comply
with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
   (L)   Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply with
code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements that
prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles
in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a waiver,
zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new utility
poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the replacement
of utility poles.
   (M)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the city and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is
caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the city grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.004 APPLICATION FEES.
   Application fees are imposed as follows:
   (A)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application to
collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed
in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless
facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures. The fees
established by this chapter are equal to the limit imposed by the Act and
represent a reasonable approximation of the municipality's objectively
reasonable costs. The municipality shall regularly review the fees imposed and
may adjust the fees by further amendment to this chapter. The safe harbor rate
established by the FCC of $500 for up to five wireless facilities and $100 for
each additional facility in a consolidated application may be exceeded only if
justified based on the municipality's reasonable approximation of its costs.
   (B)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
   (D)   The city shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
      (1)   Routine maintenance;
      (2)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the city at least ten days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications and certifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with division (d) under the section titled Application
Requirements; or
      (3)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement
of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between
existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
   (E)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the city to work within
rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.005 EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY.
   Nothing in this section authorizes a person to collocate small wireless
facilities on:
   (A)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the city or another unit of local government that is not located within rights
-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
   (B)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
   (C)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under Section 18c-7201 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in Section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of Section 16-108.5 of the Illinois Public
Utilities Act.
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, "public utility" has the meaning
given to that term in Section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: (a)
to obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service; or (b) to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.006 PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Existing agreements between the city and wireless providers that
relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on city utility poles,
that are in effect on May 20, 2021, remain in effect for all small wireless
facilities collocated on the city's utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the city before May 20,2021, subject to applicable termination
provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after May 20, 2021, shall
comply with this chapter.
   (B)   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the city on
the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the
city makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the city that it
opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement remains in
effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small wireless
facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the city's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the city before the wireless provider
provides such notice and exercises its option under this division.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.007 ANNUAL RECURRING RATE.
   (A)   A wireless provider shall pay to the city an annual recurring rate to
collocate a small wireless facility on a city utility pole located in a right-
of-way that equals: (i) $200 per year; or (ii) the actual, direct and
reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the city
utility pole.
   (B)   If the city has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct
costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first annual
anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and
on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.008 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility shall
remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written
notice from the city notifying the wireless provider of the abandonment.
   (B)   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the city to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days
of such notice, the city may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
   (C)   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the city if it
sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
city. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.009 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
city shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to
be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.010 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the city harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the city
improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the wireless
provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the rights and
privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless provider has no
obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any liabilities and losses as
may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the city or its employees or
agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any claims that they may have
against the city with respect to consequential, incidental, or special damages,
however caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.011 INSURANCE.
   (A)   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost
and expense, the following insurance:
      (1)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
      (2)   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
      (3)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the city improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of city
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
   (B)   The wireless provider shall include the city as an additional insured
on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification and
documentation of inclusion of the city in a commercial general liability policy
prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
   (C)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limit requirement required by the city. A wireless provider that
self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply
with the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the city evidence
sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance
coverage limits required by the city.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.012 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards and
procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on
rights-of-way within the city's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way on
property zoned by the city exclusively for commercial or industrial use, in a
manner that is consistent with the Act.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
§ 159.013 CONFLICTS.
   (A)   Conflicts with other ordinances. The contents of this chapter
supersede all ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are
in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (B)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements herein to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
(Ord. 21-O-2303, passed 6-2-2021; Ord. 21-O-2318, passed 12-1-2021)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS
      
III.   DEDICATIONS AND ACCEPTANCES
      
IV.   EASEMENTS
      
V.   FRANCHISES
      
VI.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
      
VII.   VACATIONS
      
VIII.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS AND CONTRACTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
79-  5-7-
O-   1979   Adopting the Master Mutual Fire Aid Agreement.
1013
86-         Entering an agreement with the owners of the real estate described as Lots 1
O-   8-6-   and 2 and Lots 24, 25 and 26 all in Block 7, H.W. Elmore’s Kedzie Avenue
1236 1986   Ridge, that the owner of the property may post up to three handicapped
            spaces and may mark allowable parking spaces and zones in said lots.
88-  4-20-  Approving collective bargaining contract with the union representing city
O-   1988   employees.
1308
89-  2-27-
O-   1989   Approving collective bargaining contract with the city’s Police Department.
1336
92-  9-16-  Authorizing Commonwealth Edison Company to use the public ways and other
O-   1992   public property in conjunction with its construction, operation and
1452        maintenance of an electric system in and through the city.
92-  7-1-   Implementing an indemnification agreement with the county in lieu of
O-   1992   insurance and surety bond requirements.
1445
92-  11-18-
O-   1992   Approving a tax increment redevelopment agreement.
1458
93-  2-17-
O-   1993   Authorizing an agreement for installment purchase of equipment by the city.
1469
93-  12-1-  Providing for an agreement for use of public ways by the Illinois Bell
O-   1993   Telephone Company.
1485
94-  1-5-   Approving the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   1994   city and the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees
1487        (AFL- CIO) Council 31, Local 1473.
94-  3-2-   Authorizing the execution of a waste disposal agreement with Robbins
O-   1994   Resource Recovery Partners, L.P., and an agency agreement of the South
1488        Suburban Solid Waste Agency.
94-  7-3-   Authorizing the participation of the city in the South Suburban Solid Waste
O-   1994   Agency and authorizing the execution of the joint agency agreement.
1504
94-         Declaring an intent to enter into an installment purchase agreement for the
O-   10-5-  purchase of certain automotive equipment and further declaring an intent to
1512 1994   reimburse the city for those expenditures through an installment purchase
            agreement.
94-  10-19- Authorizing the execution of an installment purchase agreement to purchase
O-   1994   certain automotive equipment for the Fire Department, Department of Public
1515        Works and Police Department.
94-  11-2-  Authorizing the execution and delivery of an installment purchase agreement
O-   1994   for the purchase of certain automotive equipment by the city, an arbitrage
1517        certificate and an escrow agreement and other matters relating thereto.
94-  12-7-  Authorizing the Illinois Bell Telephone Company to use the public ways and
O-   1994   to construct and maintain fixtures, equipment and facilities for the
1520        operation of its business.
95-  2-15-  Approving a collective bargaining contract between the city and State and
O-   1995   Municipal Teamsters, Chauffeurs and Helpers Local 726 representing the
1524        police officers of the city’s Police Department.
95-  9-20-  Approving execution of redevelopment agreement with Sani- Wash, Inc., Tax
O-   1995   Increment Financing District No. 3.
1551
95-  - -    Authorizing the execution of an agreement with Friendship Hotels of Markham,
O-   1995   Inc. (TIF No. 2).
1559
96-  3-6-   Establishing relations between the city and the Markham Professional Fire
O-   1996   Fighters Association, Local No. 3209.
1566
97-  5-7-
O-   1997   Providing for the contracting of ambulance an E.M.R. Service.
1605
97-  9-3-   Authorizing entry into preliminary redevelopment agreement for Jevic
O-   1997   Transportation Business Park.
1614
97-  11-19-
O-   1997   Approving Jevic Transportation Business Park Redevelopment Plan and Project.
1621
97-  11-19- Authorizing execution of redevelopment agreement and issuance of
O-   1997   redevelopment note for Jevic Transportation Business Park.
1624
97-  1-7-   Authorizing execution of economic incentive agreement (Aetna Development
O-   1998   Corporation/Walgree ns).
1628
98-  3-18-  Approving addendum to collective bargaining agreement with Markham
O-   1998   Professional Firefighters Association.
1638
98-  3-18-  Approving addendum to collective bargaining agreement with AFSCME, AFL-CIO
O-   1998   Council 31.
1639
98-  4-1-   Approving addendum to collective bargaining agreement with State and
O-   1998   Municipal Teamsters, Chauffeurs and Helpers Local 726.
1640
98-  7-1-   Authorizing entry into preliminary redevelopment agreement for Dixie Highway
O-   1998   redevelopment project area.
1648
98-  9-16-  Authorizing execution of final redevelopment agreement (Finch & Barry
O-   1998   Properties, Inc., for Dixie Highway redevelopment project area).
1660
98-  11-18- Extending time limit for economic incentive agreement with Aetna Development
O-   1998   Corporation for the Walgreens project.
1662
98-  12-16-
O-   1998   Approving participation in mutual aid box alarm system agreement.
1664
99-  9-1-   Authorizing acceptance of revenue pursuant to Rosemont-West Central
O-   1999   Municipal Conference Agreement.
1682
99-  9-1-   Authorizing acceptance of revenue pursuant to Calumet City-South Suburban
O-   1999   Mayors and Managers Association Agreement.
1683
99-  12-1-
O-   1999   Directing purchase of E-911 plant equipment.
1687
99-  12-15-
O-   1999   Directing purchase of E-911 console communication system equipment.
1691
99-  12-15-
O-   1999   Directing purchase of E-911 plant equipment.
1692
99-  12-15-
O-   1999   Authorizing installment lease of certain telecommunications equipment.
1693
99-  12-15- Authorizing installment lease of certain automotive equipment for Department
O-   1999   of Public Works.
1694
00-  9-6-   Approving execution of collective bargaining agreement with Markham
O-   2000   Professional Firefighters Association, Local 3209, IAFF, AFL- CIO.
1701
01-  9-19-  Approving execution of collective bargaining agreement with Markham
O-   2001   Professional Firefighters Association, Local 3209, IAFF, AFL- CIO.
1722
02-  1-16-  Correcting Ord. 01- O-1722, regarding approval of collective bargaining
O-   2002   agreement with Markham Professional Firefighters Association, Local 3209,
1732        IAFF, AFL- CIO.
02-  11-6-  Approving execution of collective bargaining agreement with International
O-   2002   Association of Firefighters, Local 3209.
1741
03-  4-16-  Approving execution of collective bargaining agreement with AFSCME, AFL-CIO,
O-   2003   Council 31.
1755
03-  4-16-  Approving execution of collective bargaining agreement with State and
O-   2003   Municipal Teamsters, Chauffeurs and Helpers Union, Local 726 (Police).
1756
03-  9-3-   Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement for participation in
O-   2003   South Suburban Major Crime Task Force.
1760
03-  10-1-  Authorizing execution of intergovernmental agreement regarding South
O-   2003   Suburban Airport.
1768
06-  3-1-   Authorizing withdrawal of the city from the Abraham Lincoln National Airport
O-   2006   Commission.
1847
06-         Authorizing execution of “The 2006 Amended and Restated Intergovernmental
O-   4-5-   Agreement Providing for the Planning, Development and Operation of the
1852 2006   Abraham Lincoln National Airport and the Creation of the Abraham Lincoln
            National Airport Commission”.
07-  7-2-   Authorizing the execution of an agreement between the city and Markham
O-   2007   Meadows, LLC.
1891
11-  2-16-  Authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental agreement for the
O-   2011   establishment of the South Suburban Joint Action Water Agency.
1984
11-  8-3-   Approving the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   2011   city and the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees
2001        (AFSCME), AFL-CIO Council 31.
11-  8-3-   Approving the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   2011   city and the International Association of Firefighters, Local 3209.
2002
12-  6-20-  Participating in the local debt recovery program for the purpose of
O-   2012   collecting debts.
2022
12-  7-3-   Approving the first amendment of the intergovernmental agreement for the
O-   2012   establishment of the South Suburban Joint Action Water Agency.
2023
12-  9-20-
O-   2012   Approving the revised 8-30-2012 agreement with RedSpeed Illinois, LLC.
2029
13-  10-16- Approving the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   2013   city and the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees
2067        (AFSCME), AFL-CIO Council 31 and Local 1473.
14-  4-2-   Approving the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   2014   city and Teamsters Local Union 700 (Police Department).
2090
14-  6-18-  Authorizing the execution of an agreement to extend the term of the
O-   2014   agreement between the city and RedSpeed Illinois, LLC.
2094
14-  12-3-
O-   2014   Authorizing an addendum to the mutual aid box alarm system agreement.
2106
16-  5-5-   Approving the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   2016   city and the Teamsters Local Union 700 (Police Department.
2132
16-  5-5-   Approving the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   2016   city and the International Association of Firefighters, Local 3209.
2133
16-  11-16- Approving the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   2016   city and American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees
2154        (AFSCME), AFL-CIO Council 31 and Local 1473.
17-  10-18- Approving an intergovernmental agreement to establish a joint 9-1-
O-   2017   1 authority between the Village of Calumet Park, the Village of Sauk
2188        Village, the Village of Midlothian, the Village of Posen and the city.
18-  12-19- Approving the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   2018   city and the International Association of Firefighters, Local 3209.
2213
19-  4-3-   Authorizing the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   2019   city and Teamsters Local Union 700 (Police Department).
2225
            Approving the assignment of the property acquisition agreement from
            Interstate Crossings, LLC to Scannell Properties #425, LLC, Scannell
20-  3-4-   Properties #430, LLC, and Scannell Properties #431, LLC, as tenants-in-
O-   2020   common and to South Suburban Investments, LLC, for the property located at
2251        159th Street to the north, I-294 to the west; Dixie Highway to the east,
            162nd Street between I- 294 and Western and 161st Street between Western and
            Dixie Highway to the south.
            Approving the execution of the redevelopment agreement by and between the
20-  3-18-  city and Scannell Properties #420, LLC for the property located at 159th
O-   2020   Street to the north, I-294 to the west; Dixie Highway to the east, 162nd
2256        Street between I-294 and Western Avenue and 161st Place between Western
            Avenue and Dixie Highway to the south.
20-         Authorizing the execution of the intergovernmental agreement by and between
O-   5-9-   the City of Markham and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of
2266 2020   Greater Chicago for relocation of the East Markham Force Main and an
            easement for the relocated East Markham Forced Main.
20-  5-9-   Authorizing the execution of the Force Main relocation agreement by and
O-   2020   between the city and Scannell Properties #420, LLC.
2267
22-  4-20-  Consenting to the Cook County Class 8 real estate tax incentive for 15131 S.
O-   2022   Kedzie Avenue, being developed by Yopo Transport, Inc.
2328
22-  7-20-  Approving the city 159th Street and Spaulding Avenue tax increment financing
O-   2022   district redevelopment project area redevelopment plan and project (159th
2332        Street and Spaulding Avenue TIF District).
22-  7-20-  Adopting tax increment financing for the 159th Street and Spaulding Avenue
O-   2022   redevelopment project area.
2334
22-  9-21-  Consenting to the Cook County Class 8 real estate tax incentive for
O-   2022   properties located at 3241 - 3245 W. 159th Street and 15911 - 15935 S.
2340        Spaulding Avenue, being developed by WSSS, LLC.
22-  12-7-  Authorizing a special use permit to NMG IL 4, LLC DBA Body and Mind for a
O-   2022   cannabis dispensary at 3063 W. 159th Street.
2345
23-  3-1-   Consenting to the Cook County Class 8 real estate tax incentive for
O-   2023   properties located at 3333 W. 159th Street, being developed by 3333 159 LLC.
2351
23-  4-5-   Consenting to renewal of the Cook County Class 8 property tax incentive for
O-   2023   local business located at 2222 W. 162nd Street, owned and developed by
2354        Ameritin International Corp. / Markham Steel & Supply, LLC.
23-  4-5-   Consenting to renewal of the Cook County Class 8 property tax incentive for
O-   2023   local business located at 16600 S. Crawford Avenue, owned and developed by
2355        Alpha Pro, LLC.
23-  7-19-  Authorizing the conveyance of surplus personal property to the Village of
O-   2023   Robbins.
2367
23-  8-2-   Consenting to the Cook County Class 8 real estate tax incentive for
O-   2023   properties located at 3900 W. 167th Street, owned and being developed by
2369        Barakat Ground, Inc.
23-  10-18- Approving the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   2023   city and American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees
2376        (AFSME), AFL-CIO and Local 1473.
23-  12-6-
O-   2023   Approving paid leave benefits required for city employees.
2377
24-  2-7-   Authorizing the execution of a collective bargaining agreement between the
O-   2024   city and the Illinois Council of Police.
2383
24-  3-6-   Approving the tax increment redevelopment plan and redevelopment project for
O-   2024   the second amendment to the Interstate Crossings TIF Redevelopment project
2834        area
24-  11-20- Approving membership in the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
O-   2024   Association and authorizing the execution of an intergovernmental
2400        cooperation contract.
24-  11-20-
O-   2024   Authorizing the execution of the RMA Minimum/Maximum Contribution Agreement.
2401
25-  11-5-  Authorizing the execution of the Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
O-   2025   Association Minimum/Maximum Premium Agreement.
2421
           
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
79-  6-4-   Annexing certain territory being the 100-foot by 400-foot parcel lying west
O-   1979   of Crawford Avenue and 200 feet to 300 feet north of 165th Street known as
1015        “16430 Crawford Avenue”.
79-         Annexing certain territory being Lot 11 in Arthur R. McIntosh and Company’s
O-   10-15- Southtown Farms, Unit No. 7, being a subdivision of the north 120 rods of the
1021 1979   east 80 rods of the southeast fractional quarter, south of the Indian
            Boundary Line, of Section 22, Township 36 north, Range 13 east.
            Annexing certain territory being Lot 4 (except that part taken for Dan Ryan
84-  8-20-  Expressway - west leg - I-57) in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Southtown
O-   1984   Farms, Unit No. 4, being a subdivision of the southwest quarter, north of the
1155        Indian Boundary Line and the northeast quarter, south of the Indian Boundary
            Line, in Section 22, Township 36 north, Range 13 east.
88-  5-18-
O-   1988   Annexing land adjacent to the city on Crawford Avenue.
1315
90-  3-7-
O-   1990   Annexing vacant lots on western boundary.
1363
02-  11-6-
O-   2002   Expressing desire to annex certain unincorporated territory.
1742
03-  9-17-
O-   2003   Expressing desire to annex certain unincorporated territory.
1764
04-  4-7-   Expressing desire to annex over ten acres commonly known as “Coral Gables
O-   2004   Subdivision”.
1796
04-  7-26-  Annexing certain surrounded or nearly surrounded territories, each of which
O-   2004   is less than 60 acres in area.
1807
11-  8-3-
O-   2011   Disconnecting certain territory from the City of Harvey.
2000
12-  3-14-
O-   2012   Annexing certain property.
2013
           
 
TABLE III: DEDICATIONS AND ACCEPTANCES
 
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
                      Approving the dedication for 163rd Place lying between
81-O-1064 8-17-1981   the centerline of vacated Oakley Avenue and the west line
                      of the northeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
                      Section 19, Township 36 north, Range 14 east.
81-O-1056 10-5-1981   Accepting the dedication of certain easements for public
                      utilities in the city.
86-O-1250 10-15-1986  Dedication of the west 33 feet of Hamlin Avenue north of
                      164th Street.
04-O-1802 6-16-2004   Accepting the dedication of certain portions of 166th
                      Street east of Crawford Avenue.
                     
 
TABLE IV: EASEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
76-O-919  4-5-1976    Granting right of permanent easement to Commonwealth
                      Edison Company and Illinois Bell Telephone Company.
76-O-925  6-7-1976    Granting of an easement for sanitary sewer located at the
                      northeast corner of 167th Street and Crawford Avenue.
80-O-1033 3-17-1980   Granting of an easement for purposes of erecting a fence
                      for the protection of the Markham-Gensberg Prairie.
                      Granting certain easements and authority to the
94-O-1492 4-6-1994    Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
                      Chicago.
95-O-1523 2-1-1995    Authorizing grant of perpetual (non-exclusive) easement
                      upon municipally-owned property (3120 West 159th Street).
                      Approving the granting of an easement by the city to
                      Commonwealth Edison for the property generally located at
20-O-2253 3-4-2020    159th Street to the north, I-294 to the west, Dixie
                      Highway to the east, 162nd Street between I-294 and
                      Western and 161st Street between Western and Dixie
                      Highway to the south.
                      Approving the granting of an access easement by the city
                      to the Wasso Family LLC within the property generally
20-O-2257 3-18-2020   located at 159th Street to the north, I-294 to the west,
                      Dixie Highway to the east, 162nd Street between I-294 and
                      Western Avenue and 161st Place between Western Avenue and
                      Dixie Highway to the south.
                      Approving the granting of an easement by the city to
20-O-2268 5-9-2020    Scannell Properties #420, LLC over a portion of
                      unimproved 161st Place.
                     
 
TABLE V: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No.  Date Passed Description
                      A franchise granting the establishment, construction,
81-O-1073 10-5-1981   operation and maintenance of a cable television system in
                      the city to Multimedia Cablevision of Markham, Inc.
                      Modification to contract, Ord. 81-O-1073, to delete the
89-O-1331 2-1-1989    obligation of Multimedia Cablevision to maintain an
                      office in the city.
                      Extending the term of franchise and amending contract,
89-O-1352 9-6-1989    Ord. 81-O-1073, between the city and Multimedia
                      Cablevision.
                     
 
TABLE VI: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
78-  5-15-  Authorizing the lease of certain real estate to Foster and Kleiser Division
O-   1978   of Metromedia, Incorporated.
981
80-  9-24-
O-   1980   Authorizing the conveyance of certain real estate to the county.
1035
87-  10-7-
O-   1987   The exchange of land between Victory Temple Church and the city.
1293
93-  2-17-
O-   1993   Providing for the purchase or condemnation of certain real estate.
1470
93-  11-16-
O-   1993   Conveying certain real estate to John E. Smith, Jr., and Myrtle I. Smith.
1481
96-  1-17-  Providing for the purchase or condemnation of certain real estate (TIF No.
O-   1996   2).
1563
97-  8-20-  Authorizing transfer of title to 3204 West 159th Street to partnership of Dan
O-   1997   Kravetz and Howard Weisman.
1612
00-  7-19-  Directing sale of the south 60 feet of Lots 15 and 16 in Block 26 in National
O-   2000   Home Development Bel- Aire Park.
1699
06-  11-1-  Approving a proposed plan of development and budget for the 159th Street and
O-   2006   Crawford Avenue Business District No. 1.
1877
07-  1-17-  Authorizing the acquisition of property in connection with Business District
O-   2007   No. 1.
1882
1896 11-7-  Approving a tax increment redevelopment plan and project for the amended
     2007   Dixie Highway redevelopment project area.
1897 11-7-  Designating the amended Dixie Highway redevelopment project area.
     2007
1898 11-7-  Adopting tax increment allocation financing for the amended Dixie Highway
     2007   redevelopment project area.
08-  4-2-   Adopting and approving the second amendment to the Tax Increment
O-   2008   redevelopment area and plan and Project No. 2.
1908
08-  5-7-   Dividing one lot of Suburban Bank and Trust Company located at 3120 W. 159th
O-   2008   Street into three lots.
1922
09-  5-6-
O-   2009   Prohibiting encroachments within the state right- of-way along 159th Street.
1943
09-  10-7-  Authorizing services in connection with an extension of the Tax Increment
O-   2009   Financing District No. 3.
1960
12-  9-5-
O-   2012   Redeveloping 16250 S. Dixie Highway in the city.
2028
12-  10-17- Approving a second amendment for the redevelopment plan and project for the
O-   2012   city (Canterbury) redevelopment project area.
2031
12-  10-17-
O-   2012   Designating the amended city (Canterbury) redevelopment project area.
2032
12-  10-17- Extending and adopting tax increment allocation financing for the city
O-   2012   (Canterbury) redevelopment project area.
2033
12-  12-19- Conveying property into the state’s Toll Highway Authority for development
O-   2012   and vacating streets.
2048
14-  1-15-
O-   2014   Redeveloping the vacant lots south of 15652 S. Dixie Highway.
2081
14-  1-15-
O-   2014   Redeveloping property at the corner of 163rd Street and Crawford.
2082
14-  2-5-
O-   2014   Issuing a deed for the property located at 16250 S. Dixie Highway.
2083
14-  3-5-
O-   2014   Amendment; redeveloping property at the corner of 163rd Street and Crawford.
2084
14-  4-16-  Approving the plat to divide one lot into two for the property located at
O-   2014   4001 W. Fieldcrest Drive.
2092
14-  11-19-
O-   2014   Establishing an enterprise zone.
2104
16-  7-6-
O-   2016   Amending the current existing Cal Sag Enterprise Zone.
2139
16-  7-27-
O-   2016   Acquiring property commonly known as “Kedzie Avenue” and “Brennan Highway”.
2140
16-  2-1-   Approving the Interstate Crossings Tax Increment Financing District
O-   2017   redevelopment project area plan and project.
2165
17-  2-1-   Adopting and approving the second amendment to the Dixie Highway tax
O-   2017   increment redevelopment area, plan and project.
2164
17-  2-1-
O-   2017   Designating the Interstate Crossings redevelopment project area.
2166
17-  2-1-   Adopting tax increment financing for the Interstate Crossings redevelopment
O-   2017   project area.
2167
17-  5-4-   Ratifying and adding to the prior acquisition and transfer of title of
O-   2017   certain property; correcting Ord. 16-O-2140.
2173
17-  4-19-  Ratifying and adding to the prior acquisition and transfer of title of
O-   2017   certain property located under Res. 09-R-401 and Ord. 06-O-1844.
2176
17-  6-21-
O-   2017   Conveying three no cash bid properties.
2182
17-  8-2-
O-   2017   Conveying 15322 Cherry Lane.
2185
18-  4-4-   Correcting Scrivener’s errors in the legal description and TIF boundary map
O-   2018   for the second amendment to the Dixie Highway TIF redevelopment area.
2199
18-  8-15-  Amending Ord. 14-O-2082; redeveloping property at the corner of 163rd Street
O-   2018   and Crawford.
2205
18-  10-3-
O-   2018   Conveying 113 properties to 2400 Markham Properties, LLC, for development.
2207
18-  11-7-  Approving the conveyance of property located at 16601 Hamlin to Stat Towing,
O-   2018   Inc.
2209
19-  4-17-
O-   2019   Conveying property for development of Markham Development, LLC.
2229
20-  4-1-
O-   2020   Conveying property to Plum Creek Markham LP.
2255
21-  8-18-
O-   2021   Conveying 1449 W. 163rd Street.
2309
22-  7-20-  Designating the 159th Street and Spaulding Avenue redevelopment project area
O-   2022   pursuant to the tax increment allocation act.
2333
23-  3-15-  Authorizing the sale of surplus real estate and the publication of notices of
O-   2023   sales and requests for proposals.
2353
24-  5-1-   Authorizing the acquisition of property within the 159th Street and Spaulding
O-   2024   Avenue redevelopment project.
2385
24-  5-15-  Approving the conveyance of properties and approving assignment of
O-   2024   acquisition rights to the properties located south of 159th Street between
2389        Spaulding Street and Turner Street.
24-  6-5-   Authorizing the conveyance of surplus personal property owned by the city to
O-   2024   the Republic of Liberia, one fire engine.
2390
           
 
TABLE VII: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
            Vacating the westerly one-half of Rockwell Street as previously dedicated
76-  7-19-  commencing at a line drawn at an angle of 90 degrees to and easterly from the
O-   1976   northeasterly corner of that portion of Lot 14 in Block 1 of Canterbury Gardens
929         Unit No. 2, being a subdivision of the west half of the east half and part of
            the northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 36 north, Range 13 east.
76-  11-15-
O-   1976   Vacating the north half of 158th Street, Springfield to I-57 right-of-way.
941
77-  4-4-   Vacating portion of 160th Street, commonly known as 158th Street, being the
O-   1977   north half of 158th Street, from Springfield Avenue to I-57 right-of-way.
948
80-  3-17-  Vacating certain streets and alleys, all in Section 13, Township 36 north,
O-   1980   Range 13 east, as follows:
1032
            (1) Sacramento Avenue commencing at the line of its intersection with the
            southerly right-of- way line of 156th Street as previously dedicated and thence
          southerly to the line of its intersection with the center line of 157th Street
            as previously dedicated said portion of said street lying within Croissant Park
            Markham Eighth Addition;
            (2) The portion of 156th Street as previously dedicated commencing at the line
            of its intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of Kedzie Avenue as
          previously dedicated and thence easterly to the line of its intersection with
            the southerly prolongation of the westerly line of the previously dedicated
            public alley lying within Block 1 of Croissant Park Markham Thirteenth
            Addition;
            (3) The portion of 156th Street as previously dedicated commencing at the line
            of its intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of Troy Avenue in said
          Croissant Park Markham Thirteenth Addition, and thence easterly to the line of
            its intersection with the easterly right-of- way line of Sacramento lying
            within Croissant Park Markham Fourteenth Addition;
            (4) The portion of the south half of 156th Street as previously dedicated
          commencing at the line of its intersection previously dedicated, said
            Sacramento Avenue lying adjacent to and westerly of Block 2 in Croissant Park
            Markham Fourteenth Addition;
            (5) The portion of the public alley as previously dedicated lying between Lots
          1 through 6, inclusive, and Lots 35 through 40, inclusive, in Block 2 in
            Croissant Park Markham Fourteenth Addition;
            (6) The portion of the northerly half of 157th Street lying between the
          southerly prolongation of the easterly and westerly boundaries and lying
            adjacent to the southerly boundary in Lot 20 in Block 8 in Croissant Park
            Markham Thirteenth Addition;
            (7) The portion of the previously dedicated public alley not previously vacated
          lying south of and adjacent to Lots 1 through 5, inclusive, and a portion of
            Lot 6, in Block 3;
            (8) The portion of the previously dedicated public alley lying south of and
          adjacent to Lots 39 through 43, inclusive, in Block 1 in Croissant Park Markham
            Thirteenth Addition;
            (9) The portion of the previously dedicated public alley lying easterly of and
          adjacent to Lots 4 and 23, inclusive, in Block 1 of Croissant Park Markham
            Thirteenth Addition; and
            (10) The portion of the previously dedicated public alley lying westerly of and
          adjacent to Lots 25 through 41, inclusive, in Block 2 of Croissant Park Markham
            Thirteenth Addition.
            Vacating certain territory beginning at the intersection of the south line of
81-  4-20-  161st Street, being a line 33 feet, measured at right angles, south of parallel
O-   1981   with the north line of the fractional southwest quarter of the northwest
1055        quarter, north of the Indian Boundary Line, of Section 23, Township 36 north,
            Range 13 east.
81-  8-17-  Vacating a subdivision including lots, blocks, streets and alleys bounded on
O-   1981   the north by 163rd Street, on the south by 165th Street, on the east by Leavitt
1063        Street and on the west by Western Avenue.
            Vacating that part of dedicated 166th Street commencing at the point of its
            intersection with the easterly right-of-way line of Maplewood Avenue; thence
83-  7-5-   easterly to the point of its intersection with the southern extension of the
O-   1983   west lot line of Lot 20 in Block 3 in Croissant Park Markham Fifteenth
1119        Addition, a subdivision in the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter
            (except the south one acre thereof) of Section 24, Township 36 north, Range 13
            east.
83-  - -
O-   1983   Vacating a certain street being Leavitt between 162nd and 163rd Street.
1133
84-  6-18-  Vacating certain streets and alleys in the area designated as the site for
O-   1984   flood retention basin known as “Structure 53”.
1151
            Vacating the south half of 161st Street lying west of the centerline of
85-         Springfield Avenue as dedicated and lying east of the northerly extension of
O-   5-20-  the easterly line of Parcel SW-1336 taken for the west leg of the Dan Ryan
1173 1985   Expressway as described in Document No. 20077038, all in the northwest quarter
            of Section 23, north of the Indian Boundary Line, Township 36 north, Range 13
            east.
92-  5-6-   Vacating the public street known as Clifton Park Avenue, between 159th Street
O-   1992   and the alley to the south of 159th Street.
1436
92-  9-2-
O-   1992   Vacating a portion of Clifton Park Avenue.
1439
92-  7-15-  Vacating a portion of Springfield Avenue for approximately 640.21 feet north of
O-   1992   167th Street.
1446
96-  6-5-
O-   1996   Vacating Mozart Avenue and certain public alleys.
1578
97-  6-18-  Vacating portion of Richmond Avenue south of 166th Street and a portion of
O-   1997   166th Street.
1609
98-  10-21- Vacating portion of a 20-foot wide public alley north of Lot 31 and south of
O-   1998   Lot 13 in Croissant Park Markham 8th Addition.
1661
01-  3-21-
O-   2001   Vacating public alley from Albany to Whipple Avenues north of 159th Street.
1710
05-  4-6-
O-   2005   Vacating Hoyne Avenue between 162nd Street and 163rd Place.
1829
06-  1-1-   Vacating portions of Turner Avenue, Spaulding Avenue and the public alley
O-   2006   between those public streets, south of 159th Street.
1844
06-  9-6-   Vacating public alleys between 149th and 150th Streets and between Kedzie
O-   2006   Avenue and Sacramento Avenue.
1873
07-  3-7-   Vacating Sacramento Avenue just north of 159th Street to approximately 132 feet
O-   2007   north.
1885
07-  - -    Vacating a portion of the public streets in the National Home Developer’s Bel-
O-   2007   Aire Park and James McKeown’s Garden Home Subdivision.
1894
07-  6-6-   Vacating a dedicated, but unimproved, street (Sacramento Avenue just north of
O-   2007   159th Street).
1889
09-  1-21-  Vacating a portion of the public streets and alleys in Croissant Park Markham
O-   2009   Eighth Addition.
1938
10-  9-7-   Vacating streets and attaching to the abutting owner Prairie-Hills Elementary
O-   2010   School District No. 144.
1976
10-  12-15-
O-   2010   Vacating unimproved Hoyne Street at 166th Street to 165th Street.
1982
11-  4-20-
O-   2011   Repealing Ord. 10-O-1982.
1986
14-  5-21-
O-   2014   Vacating several streets and alleys.
2093
17-  3-15-
O-   2017   Vacating streets and alleys at 167th Street and Western Avenue.
2170
17-  4-5-
O-   2017   Vacating streets and alleys at 155th Street and Turner.
2174
17-  4-19-  Vacating streets and alleys at 159th Street, Turner Street, 160th Street and
O-   2017   Spaulding.
2175
19-         Granting Interstate Crossings, LLC’s application to vacate streets and alleys
O-   12-18- at the property within 159th Street to north, I-294 to west; Dixie Highway to
2247 2019   east, 162nd Street between I-294 and Western and 161st Street between Western
            and Dixie Highway to south.
19-  12-18- Granting Plum Creek Markham Supportive Care LLC’s application for a special use
O-   2019   permit, to vacate an area at approximately 155th Street and Turner and for a
2248        final plat approval.
20-  4-1-
O-   2020   Vacating an area at approximately 155th Street and Turner.
2255
20-  6-17-
O-   2020   Vacating Troy Street at 3148 W. 159th Street and 3140 W. 159th Street.
2273
23-  8-2-
O-   2023   Vacating a portion of 163rd Street lying west of Robey Road.
2368
23-  8-16-
O-   2023   Vacating a portion of West 158th Place and Oakley Avenue.
2371
23-  9-20-
O-   2023   Vacating certain streets and alleys at Mozart Street and California Avenue.
2372
23-  12-6-
O-   2023   Vacating Hoyne Avenue between 162nd Street and 163rd Street.
2378
24-  11-6-  Vacating certain streets and alleys at Richmond Avenue, Francisco Avenue,
O-   2024   Mozart Street and California Avenue north of 159th Street.
2399
           
 
TABLE VIII: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
76-O- 6-7-   Rezoning area bounded by 159th Street on the north, I- 57 on the east and south
924   1976   and Crawford Avenue on the west to L-2.
             Rezoning of certain property being Lots 1 through 26, both inclusive, and Lots
76-O- 6-21-  27 through 101, both inclusive, in First Addition to Berkshire Manor, being a
927   1976   subdivision of part of the east half of the southwest quarter of Section 24,
             Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-3 to Planned Unit Development.
78-O- 11-15- Amending and correcting certain portions of Ord. 76-O-924 (rezoning to L-2 area
942   1976   bounded by 159th Street on the north, I-57 on the east and south and Crawford
             Avenue on the west).
             Rezoning certain properties being Lots 14, 15 and 16 in Block 1 of Canterbury
78-O- 4-3-   Gardens Unit No. 2, being a subdivision of the west half of the east half and
975   1978   part of the northwest quarter of Section 24, Township 36 north, range 13 east,
             from Special Use to C-2.
             Rezoning certain property being the west half of Lot 43 and Lots 44 through 57,
78-O- 4-3-   inclusive, and Lots 60 through 73, inclusive, of 1st Addition to Berkshire
976   1978   Manor, a subdivision of part of the east half of the southwest quarter of
             Section 24, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-3 Single-Family Residential
             to Special Use.
78-O- 6-19-  Rezoning certain property being Lot 4 in Block 3, in Grove and Elmore and
984   1978   Company’s Hazelcrest Farms, a subdivision in the southwest quarter of Section
             23, Township 36 north, Range 13, east, from R-1 to L-2.
78-O- 8-7-   Rezoning certain property being the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter
989   1978   of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of fractional Section 14,
             Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-2 to L-2.
78-O- 10-16- Rezoning certain property being Lot 3 in Arthur T. McIntosh’s Crawford Avenue
992   1978   farms being a subdivision of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section
             23, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-1 to L-2.
             Rezoning certain property being the east 150 feet of Lots 9 and 10 in W.F.
78-O- 11-6-  Kaiser and Co.’s Midlothian Acres, being a subdivision of part of the fractional
994   1978   Section 14 and 23, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from its present zoning to
             Special Use.
             Rezoning certain property being the north half of Lot 6 (except the west 16 feet
79-O- 1-22-  thereof) in Arthur T. McIntosh’s Crawford Avenue Farms, a subdivision of the
997   1979   west half of the southwest quarter of section 23, Township 36 north, Range 13
             east, from R-1 to L-2.
             Rezoning certain property being Lots 20 through 25, inclusive, in Block 6 in
79-O- 4-16-  Croissant Park Markham Eighth Addition, a subdivision of the south half of the
1006  1979   southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from C-1 to
             C- 2.
             Rezoning certain property being Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4 in Block 57 in H.W. Elmore’s
79-O- 5-7-   Kedzie Avenue Ridge, being a subdivision of the northeast quarter and the
1012  1979   southeast quarter of Section 23, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-2 to
             C-1.
             Zoning certain property being Lot 6 (except the north half thereof) in Arthur T.
79-O- 6-4-   McIntosh and Company’s Southtown Farms, Unit No. 7, being a subdivision of the
1016  1979   north 120 rods of the east 80 rods of the southeast fractional quarter, south of
             the Indian Boundary Line, of Section 22, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, to L-
             1 Industrial.
             Rezoning certain property being Lot 1 (except the east 880.66 feet thereof as
             measured on the north line thereof and also excepting therefrom the west 12 feet
79-O- 10-15- thereof taken by the County of Cook by Document No. 23442739 recorded 4-7-1976)
1020  1979   in Arthur T. McIntosh’s Crawford Avenue Farms, being a subdivision of the west
             half of the southwest quarter of Section 23, Township 36 north, Range 13 east,
             from R-1 to L-1.
79-O- 10-15- Rezoning certain property being the south 271.44 feet of the west 275 feet of
1022  1979   Lot 5 in Arthur T. McIntosh Kedzie Avenue Farms, a subdivision of the northwest
             fractional quarter of Section 13, Township 36, Range 13 east, from R-2 to C-2.
             Rezoning certain property being the west 297 feet of Lots 1 and 2 in Block 3 of
79-O- 11-5-  Grover C. Elmore and Company’s Hazelcrest Farms, being a subdivision in the
1023  1979   southwest quarter of Section 23, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-1 to
             L-2.
79-O- 11-5-  Rezoning certain property being the west 310 feet of the east 560 feet of the
1024  1979   south 233 feet of the southeast quarter of Section 22, Township 36 north, Range
             13 east, from R-1 to L-2.
80-O- 1-21-  Rezoning certain property being Lot 123 in James McKeown’s Garden Homes
1027  1980   Subdivision in the west half of the southeast quarter of Section 13, Township 36
             north, Range 13 east, to Special Use.
80-O- 7-21-  Rezoning certain property being that part of Lot 30 in James McKeowan’s Garden
1036  1980   Homes Subdivision, being a subdivision of the west half of the southeast quarter
             of Section 13, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-2A to Special Use.
             Rezoning certain property being the east 127 feet of Lot A in Transportation
             Park, a subdivision of Lot 6 in George Weseloh’s Subdivision of those fractional
81-O- 2-17-  parts of the northeast quarter of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter
1046  1981   of the northwest quarter and also of the northwest quarter of the southwest
             quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 18, Township 36 north, Range 14
             east, from R-1 to C-2.
             Rezoning certain properties being Lots 5, 6, 7 and 8 in Block 4 of H.W. Elmore’s
81-O- 4-6-   Kedzie Avenue Ridge, being a subdivision of the northwest quarter and the
1052  1981   southeast quarter of Section 23, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-3 to
             C-1.
             Rezoning certain property being Lots 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18 and portions
81-O- - -    of Lots 19 and 20 in Arthur T. McIntosh’s Kedzie Avenue Farms, a subdivision in
1053  1981   the northwest fractional quarter of Section 13, Township 36 north, Range 13,
             from R-2 and L-1 to R-4, except for the westerly 200 feet of the aforesaid Lots
             11 and 12 which are zoned C-2.
             Rezoning certain properties being Lots 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16 and those portions
81-O- 5-4-   of Lots 17, 18, 19 and 20 not previously taken for highway purposes in Arthur T.
1058  1981   McIntosh’s Kedzie Avenue Farms, a subdivision of the northwest fractional
             quarter of Section 13, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, to Special Use.
81-O- 9-8-   Rezoning certain property being Lot 33 in W.F. Kaiser & Company’s Addition to
1067  1981   Midlothian Acres, a subdivision of part of fractional section 14 and Section 23,
             Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-3 to L-1.
             Rezoning certain property being the south half of Lot 3 in Arthur T. McIntosh
81-O- 12-21- and Company’s Southtown Farms Unit No. 7, being a subdivision of the north 120
1080  1981   rods of the east 80 rods of the southeast fractional quarter, south of the
             Indian Boundary Line, in Section 22, Township 36 north, Range 13, east, from R-
             1 to L-2.
             Rezoning of certain property being a portion of lot 3 (except the west 17 feet
             thereof), said portion lying within the area from a point beginning in the
82-O- 4-19-  northwest corner extending easterly to a point 200 feet, then northerly 200 feet
1085  1982   to the point of beginning, all in Arthur T. McIntosh’s Crawford Avenue Farms,
             being a subdivision of the west half of the southwest quarter of Section 23,
             Township 36 north, Range 13, east, from L-2 to Special Use.
             Rezoning certain property being Lot 5 (except the south 100 feet thereof) in
83-O- 1-3-   Arthur T. McIntosh & Company’s Southtown Farms Unit No. 7, being a subdivision
1101  1983   of the north 120 rods of the east 80 rods of the southeast fractional quarter,
             south of the Indian Boundary Line, of Section 22, Township 36 north, Range 13
             east, from its present zoning classification to Special Use.
83-O- 2-21-  Rezoning certain property being the west 300 feet of Lot 7 in Block 2 in Grover
1104  1983   C. Elmore & Company’s Hazelcrest Farms, being a subdivision of the southeast
             quarter of Section 23, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-1 to L-1.
             Rezoning certain property being the west half of the north half of Lot 25 in
83-O- 2-21-  Arthur T. McIntosh Company’s Southtown Farms, Unit No. 7, being a subdivision of
1106  1983   the north 120 rods of the east 80 rods of the southeast fractional quarter of
             Section 22, Township 36 north, Range 13, from R-1 to L-2.
             Rezoning certain property being the south 612.31 feet of lots 1 and 2 in W.K.
84-O- 7-16-  Gore’s Subdivision of the south half of the southwest quarter (except the east
1153  1984   half of the southeast quarter of the southwest quarter) of Section 19, Township
             36 north, Range 14 east, from its present zoning classification to Special Use.
             Zoning certain territory being Lot 4 (except that part taken for Dan Ryan
84-O- 8-20-  Expressway - west leg - I-57) in Arthur T. McIntosh and Company’s Southtown
1156  1984   Farm, Unit No. 4, being a subdivision of the southeast quarter, north of the
             Indian Boundary Line, and the northeast quarter, south of the Indian Boundary
             Line, in Section 22, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, to Special Use.
             Rezoning certain property being Lots 24 and 25 in Block 3 in Croissant Park
84-O- 8-20-  Markham Sixth Addition, being a subdivision of the southeast quarter of the
1157  1984   southeast quarter of Section 14, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-3 to
             Special Use.
85-O- 5-20-  Rezoning certain properties being Lots 6, 7 and 8 in Block 33 in H.W. Elmore’s
1175  1985   Kedzie Avenue Ridge, being a subdivision of the northwest quarter of Section 23,
             Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from C-2 to R- 3.
             Rezoning certain property being Lots 24, 25 and 26 in Block 7 in H.W. Elmore’s
85-O- 7-3-   Kedzie Avenue Ridge, being a subdivision of the northeast quarter and the
1182  1985   southeast quarter of Section 23, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-3 to
             C-1.
             Rezoning certain property being the south 212 feet of the north 250 feet of the
85-O- 10-2-  west 500 feet of the east 550 feet of the east half of the northeast quarter of
1194  1985   fractional Section 22, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, to L-1 with a variation
             permitting a manager to live on the premises.
85-O- 12-4-  Rezoning Lot 4 or northeast corner of 156th and Crawford, from Residential to L-
1199  1985   2.
85-O- 12-18- Rezoning Lots 1, 2, 5 and 6, vicinity of 156th and Crawford Avenue, from
1201  1985   Residential to L-2.
             Rezoning certain property being Lot 2, (except the west 17.0 feet thereof) in
86-O- 5-7-   Arthur T. McIntosh’s Crawford Avenue Farms, being a subdivision of the west half
1217  1986   of the southwest quarter of Section 23, Township 36 north, range 13 east, from
             R-1 to L-2 with Special Use.
             Rezoning certain properties being Lots 1 through 40, inclusive, in Block 4 in
87-O- 2-18-  Croissant Park, Markham, Eight Addition, being a subdivision of the south half
1263  1987   of the southwest quarter of Section 13, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from
             C-1 and R- 2 to C-2.
             Rezoning certain property being that part of Lots 2 and 3 in Arthur T. McIntosh
87-O- 5-6-   and Company’s Southtown Farms, Unit No. 4 being a subdivision in the southeast
1272  1987   quarter, north of the Indian Boundary Line, and the northeast quarter, south of
             the Indian Boundary Line, in Section 22, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from
             C-1 to L-2.
88-O- 1-6-   Rezoning certain property being Lots 26 and 27 in Croissant Park Markham 6th
1297  1988   Addition, a subdivision of the southeast quarter of the southeast quarter of
             Section 14, Township 36, Range 13 south, from R-3 to C-1.
88-O- 3-17-  Clarifying zoning for northwest corner of 159th and Central Park to be C-1.
1304  1988
89-O- 3-1-   Rezoning certain properties being Lots 1 and 2 in Block 2 of H.W. Elmore’s
1338  1989   Kedzie Avenue Ridge, a subdivision of the northeast quarter of the southeast
             half of Section 23, Township 36, Range 13 south, from C-1 to C-2.
89-O- 7-13-  Rezoning certain property being Lot 4 in block 51 of H.W. Elmore’s Kedzie Avenue
1345  1989   Ridge, a subdivision of the northeast quarter and the southeast quarter of
             Section 23, Township 36, Range 13 south, from R-3 to R-4.
89-O- 7-13-  Rezoning certain property being Lots 5 to 22 in block 51 of H.W. Elmore’s Kedzie
1347  1989   Avenue Ridge, a subdivision of the northeast quarter and the southeast quarter
             of Section 23, Township 36, Range 13 south, from R-3 to R-4.
89-O- 7-24-  Rezoning certain property being the west half of the northeast quarter of the
1348  1989   southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of
             fractional Section 14, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from C-1 to L-2.
             Rezoning certain property being the west 625.75 feet of Lot 5 in Arthur R.
89-O- 12-18- McIntosh’s Crawford Avenue Farms, a subdivision in the west half of the
1353  1989   southwest quarter of Section 23, Township 36 north, Range 13 east, from R-1 to
             L-1.
             Rezoning certain property being the east 200 feet and the south ten feet of the
90-O- 5-2-   northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of the northwest quarter of the
1371  1990   southwest quarter of fractional Section 14, Township 36 north, Range 13 east,
             from C-1 to L-1.
94-O- 9-7-   Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to deny a requested
1509  1994   expansion of parking space at 3525 West 159th Street.
94-O- 9-21-  Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals regarding a change of
1511  1994   zoning classification on selected lots at or near 164th and 165th Streets and
             Turner and Homan Avenues.
94-O- 10-19- Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to deny a change of zoning
1514  1994   classification at 16100 Rockwell Avenue.
95-O- 5-17-  Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to deny a rezoning of
1531B 1995   portions of Central Park Avenue, 155th to 157th Streets.
95-O- 9-6-   Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to rezone 16100 Rockwell
1552  1995   Avenue from Special Use to L-2.
95-O- - -    Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to grant conditional use
1554  1995   for the display and selling of automobiles at 16710 Richmond Avenue.
96-O- 3-6-   Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to rezone to allow limited
1569  1996   commercial use on city property at 3604 West 157th Street.
96-O- 3-6-   Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to rezone for purposes of a
1570  1996   day care center at 3512- 16 West 159th Street.
96-O- 3-6-   Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to grant a variance for
1571  1996   division of two lots at 16058 Trumbull Avenue.
97-O- 1-15-  Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to deny the rezoning at
1598  1997   15820 Albany Avenue.
97-O- 3-19-  Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to grant a re- subdivision
1599  1997   of property at 3600 Frontage Road.
97-O- 3-19-  Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to approve the petition for
1601  1997   the operation of a convenience food mart at 3553 West 159th Street.
97-O- 3-19-  Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to rezone property at 16601
1602  1997   Kedzie Avenue from Residential to Commercial.
97-O- 3-19-  Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to deny conditional use
1603  1997   zoning at 15949 South Kedzie Parkway.
97-O- 4-2-   Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to grant the requested
1604  1997   rezoning from L-2 to L-3 at 166th Street and California Avenue.
97-O- 8-6-   Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals for special use zoning at
1611  1997   15203 South Sacramento Avenue for indoor horse riding and storage of antique
             automobiles.
97-O- 10-1-  Adopting the decision of the Plan Commission approving subdivision of vacant
1617  1997   land located at 153rd Street and Kedzie Avenue.
97-O- 11-19- Adopting the decision of the Plan Commission approving erection of three-bay
1626  1997   maintenance facility and offices and four acres of truck parking at 2316 West
             167th Street.
97-O- 12-3-  Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to rezone 15739 and 15741
1627  1997   Clifton Park Avenue for construction of single-family home.
98-O- 1-21-  Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals denying special use zoning
1630  1998   at 2849 West 159th Street for construction of a Sprint Com telecommunication
             facility.
98-O- 1-21-  Adopting the decision fo the Zoning Board of Appeals denying special use zoning
1631  1998   at 16760 South Richmond Avenue for construction of a Sprint Com
             telecommunication facility.
98-O- 1-21-  Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals denying petition to rezone
1632  1998   the northeast corner of 159th Street and Turner Avenue for construction of an
             automatic car wash facility.
98-O- 5-6-   Adopting the decision of the Plan Commission to combine two lots at 3304 West
1641  1998   160th Street as one for tax purposes.
98-O- 6-17-  Changing designation of all areas previously designated M to L-1; providing for
1645  1998   retroactivity of change to 1-1-1956; and, ratifying and confirming all activity
             conducted or authorized on property previously designated “M”.
98-O- 8-5-   Adopting the decision of the Plan Commission for the resubdivision of lots 17
1656  1998   through 22 and the south 20 feet of lot 23 to make buildable lots for three
             single-family residences.
98-O- 9-2-   Adopting the decision of the Plan Commission to rezone 15450 Kedzie for single-
1657  1998   family residences.
99-O- 3-3-   Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals for rezoning and sign
1667  1999   variation for the northeast corner of 159th Street and Kedzie Avenue.
99-O- 3-3-   Adopting the decision of the Plan Commission for rezoning and vacation at the
1668  1999   northeast corner of 159th Street and Kedzie Avenue for construction of Walgreens
             with 24- hour drive-thru.
99-O- 3-3-   Adopting the decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals to rezone 2200 West 159
1671  1999   Street.
03-O- 9-1-   Adopting the decision of the Plan Commission for a special use for erection of
1765  2003   radio transmission tower at 3825 West 166th Place.
06-O- 5-3-   Adopting decision of the Zoning Board of Appeal to rezone the east side of
1858A 2006   Kedzie to Troy Avenue between 149th and 151st Streets from R- 2 to C-1.
10-O- 12-15- Rezoning 155th Street to 158th Street by Rockwell from R-2 to L-2.
1983  2010
11-O- 8-17-  Rezoning property from R-2 to R-3.
2003  2011
12-O- 2-15-  Rezoning the area inside the boundaries of 158th Street, 159th Street, Western
2011  2012   Avenue and Irving Avenue to C-2.
13-O- 11-20- Rezoning the entire area between 159th Street, Dixie Highway, 161st Street and
2070  2013   Western Avenue from R-1 to L-2.
18-O- 3-9-   Rezoning the area commonly known as the “Interstate Crossings TIF District”, and
2198  2018   some additional area northeast of it, to L-3.
22-O- 4-20-  Approving an application before the Planning and Zoning Board of Appeals for a
2327  2022   variance filed by Tyler Barnes to include a second dwelling structure on the lot
             of the property located at 3942 W. 157th Street.
23-O- 4-26-  Rezoning 21 parcels owned by the city and located between 159th Street and 160th
2358  2023   Street and Sawyer Avenue and Homan Avenue, from R-3 to C-1.
23-O- 10-18- Authorizing a special use permit to Dixie & 167th Real Estate LLC for an
2375  2023   automobile service station at 16656 Dixie Hwy.
24-O- 11-6-  Rezoning 2100 W. 163rd St. from L-1 to L-3.
2398  2024
25-O- 11-5-  Rezoning 2052 West 167th Street from R-1 to L-1.
2419  2025
25-O- 11-5-  Rezoning 3245 W. 159th Street, 3237 W. 159th Street, 15911 Spaulding Avenue,
2420  2025   15915 Spaulding Avenue, 15912 Sawyer Avenue, and 15916 Sawyer Avenue from R-3 to
             C-1.
            
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                        Code Section
5 ILCS 120                          32.186;
                                    35.097
5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.                30.10;
                                    30.11
5 ILCS 315/3                        35.090
5 ILCS 430/5-65                     35.999
5 ILCS 430/15-10                    35.133
5 ILCS 430/70-5                     39.30
10 ILCS 5/9-1.4                     35.090
10 ILCS 5/9-3                       35.090
10 ILCS 315/1-3                     35.090
20 ILCS 1605/1 et seq.              135.02
20 ILCS 2910/0.01 et seq.           137.02
35 ILCS 630                         36.270;
                                    36.273
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.                36.295;
                                    36.296
50 ILCS 340                         31.085
50 ILCS 710                         137.02
55 ILCS 5/3-9005                    137.02
65 ILCS 5                           36.270;
                                    36.273
65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.             30.10;
                                    30.11
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                     157.01
65 ILCS 5/31-35                     31.085;
                                    31.121
65 ILCS 5/8-9-2                     37.16
                                    36.157;
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2                    36.235;
                                    36.236
65 ILCS 5/8-11-22                   36.130
                                    36.325;
65 ILCS 5/8-11-24                   36.326;
                                    36.328
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.          32.105
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-6                  33.20
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-17                 33.03
65 ILCS 5/11-1-3                    36.030
65 ILCS 5/11-1-5                    132.02
65 ILCS 5/11-7-1                    36.045
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12                  157.01
65 ILCS 5/11-20-7                   151.03
65 ILCS 5/11-20-15                  151.03
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2                   157.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8                   157.01
65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.         32.233
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2                   157.01
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-1 et seq.         150.060
65 ILCS 5/11-76 et seq.             31.042
65 ILCS 5/11-135-1 et seq.          51.130
65 ILCS 5/12-11                     32.233
70 ILCS 705/6(h)                    38.63
                                    155.002;
                                    155.016;
                                    155.021;
                                    155.022;
                                    155.023;
210 ILCS 115/1 et seq.              155.040;
                                    155.041;
                                    155.052;
                                    155.070;
                                    155.072;
                                    155.999
210 ILCS 115/2.1                    155.001
210 ILCS 115/2.2                    155.001
210 ILCS 115/2.3                    155.001
210 ILCS 115/2.4                    155.001
210 ILCS 115/2.5                    155.001
210 ILCS 115/2.6                    155.001
210 ILCS 115/2.7                    155.001
210 ILCS 115/2.8                    155.001
210 ILCS 115/2.9                    155.001;
                                    155.049
210 ILCS 115/2.10                   155.001;
                                    155.050
210 ILCS 115/2.11                   155.051
210 ILCS 115/2.12                   155.052
210 ILCS 115/2.13                   155.053
210 ILCS 115/2.14                   155.054
210 ILCS 115/3                      155.015
210 ILCS 115/4                      155.017
210 ILCS 115/4.1                    155.018
210 ILCS 115/4.2                    155.019
210 ILCS 115/4.3                    155.020
210 ILCS 115/4.4                    155.021
210 ILCS 115/5                      155.022
210 ILCS 115/6                      155.023
210 ILCS 115/7                      155.024
210 ILCS 115/8                      155.016
210 ILCS 115/9                      155.040
210 ILCS 115/9.1                    155.041
210 ILCS 115/9.1 through 9.14       155.040
210 ILCS 115/9.2                    155.042
210 ILCS 115/9.3                    155.043
210 ILCS 115/9.4                    155.044
210 ILCS 115/9.5                    155.045
210 ILCS 115/9.6                    155.046
210 ILCS 115/9.7                    155.047
210 ILCS 115/9.8                    155.048
210 ILCS 115/10.1                   155.055
210 ILCS 115/10.2                   155.056
210 ILCS 115/11                     155.070
210 ILCS 115/12                     155.071
210 ILCS 115/13                     155.057
210 ILCS 115/18                     155.025
210 ILCS 115/19                     155.999
210 ILCS 115/20                     155.002
210 ILCS 115/21                     155.072
210 ILCS 115/22                     155.073
210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.              155.001
220 ILCS 5                          36.270;
                                    36.273
220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.            36.156
220 ILCS 5/7-501                    36.310
220 ILCS 5/16-104                   36.237
220 ILCS 21-201(v)                  158.002
220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)                36.291;
                                    36.292
220 ILCS 5/21-401                   36.290
220 ILCS 5/21-801                   36.290
220 ILCS 5/21-801(b)                36.290
220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi)         36.290
220 ILCS 5/21-801(d)                36.290
220 ILCS 5/70-501(r)(1)             36.312;
                                    36.999
220 ILCS 5/70-501(s)                36.312
225 ILCS 65/4                       158.005
225 ILCS 227/1 et seq.              94.32;
                                    94.33
225 ILCS 312/140                    151.03
225 ILCS 320/37                     150.088
225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.              157.02
225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.              157.02
225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq.            137.02
230 ILCS 15/1 et seq.               135.02
230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.               135.02
230 ILCS 30/1 et seq.               135.02
230 ILCS 40/1                       36.250
                                    112.018;
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.               113.30;
                                    135.01;
                                    135.02
230 ILCS 40/5                       113.10;
                                    135.01
235 ILCS 5                          112.999
                                    36.195;
235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.              36.201;
                                    112.017
235 ILCS 5/1-3.23                   112.018
235 ILCS 5/6-25                     112.018
235 ILCS 5/6-28                     112.061
355 ILCS 5                          112.017
405 ILCS 25/1 et seq.               121.07
410 ILCS 82                         95.33
410 ILCS 705 et seq.                156.003
                                    73.02;
410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.              73.04;
                                    112.01;
                                    122.20
415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.                73.06
415 ILCS 105/3                      136.01
415 ILCS 105/4                      136.02;
                                    136.99
415 ILCS 105/5                      136.03;
                                    136.99
415 ILCS 105/6                      136.04;
                                    136.99
                                    136.07;
415 ILCS 105/8                      136.04;
                                    136.99
415 ILCS 105/9                      136.05
415 ILCS 105/10                     136.06;
                                    136.99
425 ILCS 35/0.01 et seq.            94.32
430 ILCS 62/1.1                     137.40
430 ILCS 65/0.01 et seq.            73.05
505 ILCS 100/11                     151.03
510 ILCS 5/15                       92.52
525 ILCS 10                         151.03
525 ILCS 30                         131.02
605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.            158.002
615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.                157.02;
                                    157.21
615 ILCS 5/18(g)                    157.01
                                    72.01;
625 ILCS                            73.13;
                                    90.31
625 ILCS 5                          131.02
                                    50.087;
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.            72.03;
                                    73.14
625 ILCS 5/3-702                    73.13
625 ILCS 5/3-703                    73.13
625 ILCS 5/3-708                    73.13
625 ILCS 5/3-710                    73.13
625 ILCS 5/4-100                    136.01
625 ILCS 5/4-200 et seq.            73.06
625 ILCS 4-203(e)                   73.13
625 ILCS 5/5-502                    73.13
625 ILCS 5/6-101                    73.13
625 ILCS 5/6-303                    73.10
625 ILCS 5/6-303(a)(1)              73.13
625 ILCS 5/6-303(a)(2)              73.13
625 ILCS 5/6-303(c)                 73.13
625 ILCS 5/11-204.1                 73.11
625 ILCS 5/11-306                   72.15;
                                    72.16
625 ILCS 5/11-501                   73.03;
                                    73.13
625 ILCS 5/12-713                   150.091
625 ILCS 5/13B                      73.10
705 ILCS 405                        132.99
720 ILCS                            90.35
720 ILCS 5/2-2                      130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-3                      130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-4                      130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-8                      73.12
720 ILCS 5/2-12                     130.01
720 ILCS 5/4-4                      130.02
720 ILCS 5/4-5                      130.03
720 ILCS 5/4-6                      130.04
720 ILCS 5/4-7                      130.05
720 ILCS 5/8-4                      130.06
720 ILCS 5/11-9                     134.01
720 ILCS 5/11-14                    73.12
720 ILCS 5/11-18                    73.12
720 ILCS 5/11-18.1                  73.12
720 ILCS 5/11-19                    73.12
720 ILCS 5/11-19.1                  73.12
720 ILCS 5/11-19.2                  73.12
720 ILCS 5/11-20                    134.02
720 ILCS 5/11-21                    134.03
720 ILCS 5/12-12                    134.01
720 ILCS 5/20-2                     73.12
720 ILCS 5/21-3                     131.02
720 ILCS 5/21.1-1                   131.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)                  137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(7)               137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-1(e)                  137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1.9                   137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-2(a), (a-5), (a-6)    137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2(b), (d)             137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2(g), (g-6), (h), (i) 137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1                   137.03
720 ILCS 5/24-5                     137.03
720 ILCS 5/24-6                     137.05
720 ILCS 5/26-1                     132.01
720 ILCS 5/28-1                     112.017;
                                    135.02
720 ILCS 5/28-2                     135.01
720 ILCS 5/28-3                     112.017;
                                    135.02
720 ILCS 5/28-5                     135.04
720 ILCS 5/30-101 through 5/30-105  73.05
720 ILCS 5/31-1                     133.01
720 ILCS 5/31-8                     133.02
720 ILCS 5/32-9                     133.03
720 ILCS 5/34-1 et seq.             73.05
720 ILCS 535/1                      137.20
720 ILCS 535/2                      137.20
720 ILCS 535/3                      137.22
720 ILCS 535/4                      137.23;
                                    137.24
720 ILCS 535/5                      137.24
720 ILCS 535/6                      137.24
720 ILCS 535/7                      137.99
720 ILCS 550                        73.02;
                                    121.26
720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.              73.04
720 ILCS 550/4                      73.12
720 ILCS 550/5                      73.12
720 ILCS 550/5.1                    73.12
720 ILCS 550/5.2                    73.12
720 ILCS 550/8                      73.12
720 ILCS 555/1                      132.02
                                    73.02;
720 ILCS 570                        73.12;
                                    121.26;
                                    134.26
720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.            73.04
720 ILCS 600/3.5                    73.12
725 ILCS 210/7.06                   137.02
735 ILCS 5/3-14-1.5                 137.02
730 ILCS 5/3-14-1.5                 137.02
735 ILCS 5/2-203                    32.233
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.            32.233
735 ILCS 5/3-101                    72.21
735 ILCS 5/9-120                    121.26
740 ILCS 174/15(a)                  35.133
740 ILCS 174/15(b)                  35.133
750 ILCS 30                         132.02
765 ILCS 205/2                      157.24
775 ILCS 5                          35.006
775 ILCS 5/6-101                    35.133
                                    
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code 2019 Code
Prior Code      2019 Code
10.01           10.01
10.02           10.02
10.03           10.03
10.04           10.04
10.05           10.05
10.06           10.06
10.07           10.07
10.08           10.08
10.09           10.09
10.10           10.10
10.11           10.11
10.12           10.12
10.13           10.13
10.14           10.14
10.15           10.15
10.16           10.16
10.17           10.17
10.18           10.18
10.99           10.99
11.01           11.01
11.02           11.02
30.01           30.01
30.02           30.02
30.03           30.03
30.04           30.04
30.05           30.05
30.06           30.06
30.07           30.07
30.08           30.08
30.09           30.09;
                30.99
30.20           30.20
31.001          31.001
31.002          31.002
31.015          31.015
31.016          31.016
31.017          31.017
31.018          31.018
31.019          31.019
31.020          31.020
31.030          31.035
31.031          31.036
31.032          31.037
31.033          31.038
31.034          31.039
31.035          31.040
31.036          31.041
31.037          31.042
31.038          31.043
31.039          31.044
31.040          31.045
31.050          31.060
31.051          31.061
31.052          31.062
31.053          31.063 
31.065          31.075
31.066          31.076
31.067          31.077
31.068          31.078
31.069          31.079
31.070          31.080
31.071          31.081
31.072          31.082
31.073          31.083
31.074          31.084
31.075          31.085
31.076          31.086
31.077          31.087
31.078          31.088
31.080          31.100
31.081          31.101
31.082          31.102
31.083          31.103
31.084          31.104
31.095          31.120
31.096          31.121
31.097          31.122
31.140          31.155
31.141          31.156
31.142          31.157
31.143          31.157
31.155          31.170
31.156          31.171
31.157          31.172
31.158          31.173
31.159          31.174
31.160          31.175
31.170          31.190
31.171          31.191
31.172          31.192
31.173          31.193
31.174          31.194
31.195          31.205
31.196          31.206
31.197          31.207
31.198          31.208
31.199          31.209
31.200          31.210
31.211          31.226
31.212          31.227
31.213          31.228
31.214          31.229
31.215          31.230
31.216          31.231
31.217          31.232
31.218          31.233
31.230          31.245
31.231          31.246
31.232          31.247
31.233          31.248
31.234          31.249
31.235          31.250
31.236          31.251
31.245          31.265
31.246          31.266
31.247          31.267
31.248          31.268
31.249          31.269
31.250          31.270
31.251          31.271
31.260          31.285
31.261          31.286
31.262          31.287
31.263          31.288
31.264          31.289
31.265          31.290
31.266          31.291
31.275          31.305
31.276          31.306
31.277          31.307
31.278          31.308
31.279          31.309
31.280          31.310
31.290          31.325
31.291          31.326
31.292          31.327
31.295          31.340
31.296          31.341
31.297          31.342
31.298          31.343
31.299          31.344
31.305          31.355
31.306          31.356
31.307          31.357
31.999          31.999
32.001          32.001
32.002          32.002
32.003          32.003
32.015          32.015
32.016          32.016
32.017          32.017
32.060          32.055
32.061          32.056
32.062          32.057
32.063          32.058
32.064          32.059
32.075          32.070
32.076          32.071
32.077          32.072
32.090          32.085
32.091          32.086
32.092          32.087
32.093          32.088
32.094          32.089
32.095          32.090
32.105          32.105
32.115          32.120
32.116          32.121
32.117          32.122
32.118          32.123
32.119          32.124
32.120          32.125
32.150          32.155
32.160          32.170
32.161          32.171
32.162          32.172
32.163          32.173
32.175          32.185
32.176          32.186
32.177          32.187
32.190          32.200
32.191          32.201
32.192          32.202
32.193          32.203
32.200          32.215
32.201          32.216
32.202          32.217
32.203          32.218
32.204          32.219
32.999          32.999
33.01           33.01
33.02           33.02
33.04           33.03
33.05           33.03
33.06           33.05
33.07           33.06
33.08           33.07
33.09           33.08
33.10           33.09
33.11           33.10
33.12           33.11
33.13           33.12
33.14           33.13
33.15           33.14
33.16           33.15
33.17           33.16
33.18           33.17
33.19           33.18
33.20           33.19
33.30           33.30
33.31           33.31
33.40           33.45
33.41           33.46
33.42           33.47
33.43           33.48
33.44           33.49
33.55           33.60
33.56           33.61
33.57           33.62
34.01           34.01
34.02           34.02
34.03           34.03
34.04           34.04
34.05           34.05
34.06           34.06
34.07           34.07
34.08           34.08
34.09           34.09
34.10           34.10
34.45           34.25
34.55           34.40
34.56           34.41
34.57           34.42
34.65           34.55
34.66           34.56
34.67           34.57
34.68           34.58
34.69           34.59
35.01           35.001
35.02           35.002
35.03           35.003
35.04           35.004
35.05           35.005
35.15           35.020
35.16           35.021
35.17           35.022
35.18           35.023
35.19           35.024
35.20           35.025
35.21           35.026
35.30           35.040
35.31           35.041
35.32           35.042
35.33           35.043
35.34           35.044
35.35           35.045
35.36           35.046
35.37           35.047
35.45           35.060
35.46           35.061
35.47           35.062
35.48           35.063
35.49           35.064
35.55           35.075
35.70           35.090
35.71           35.091
35.72           35.092
35.73           35.093
35.74           35.094
35.75           35.095
35.76           35.096
35.77           35.097
35.78           35.999
36.001          36.001
36.003          36.002
36.015          36.015
36.017          36.016
36.030          36.030
36.031          36.031
36.040          36.045
36.050          36.060
36.060          36.075
36.061          36.076
36.062          36.077
36.063          36.078
36.064          36.079
36.065          36.080
36.066          36.081
36.080          36.095
36.081          36.096
36.082          36.097
36.083          36.098
36.084          36.099
36.085          36.100
36.086          36.101
36.087          36.102
36.088          36.103
36.120          36.140
36.121          36.141
36.122          36.142
36.999          36.999
37.01           37.01
37.02           37.02
37.03           37.03
37.15           37.15
37.16           37.16
37.17           37.17
37.25           37.30
37.26           37.31
37.27           37.32
37.28           37.33
37.29           37.34
37.30           37.35
37.31           37.36
37.32           37.37
37.33           37.38
37.34           37.39
37.35           37.40
37.36           37.41
37.37           37.42
37.38           37.43
37.39           37.44
37.40           37.45
37.41           37.46
38.01           38.01
38.02           38.02
38.03           38.03
38.04           38.04
38.05           38.05
38.06           38.06
38.07           38.07
38.08           38.08
38.09           38.09
38.10           38.10
38.11           38.11
38.12           38.12
38.25           38.25
38.26           38.26
38.27           38.27
38.40           38.40
38.41           38.41
38.42           38.42
38.43           38.43
38.44           38.44
38.45           38.45
38.46           38.46
39.01           39.01
39.02           39.02
39.10           39.15
39.11           39.16
39.12           39.17
39.13           39.18
39.14           39.19
39.15           39.20
39.16           39.21
39.17           39.22
39.18           39.23
39.25           35.110
39.26           35.111
39.27           35.112
39.28           35.113
39.29           35.114
39.30           35.115
39.31           35.116
39.32           35.117
40.01           32.245
40.02           32.246
40.03           32.247
40.04           32.248
40.05           32.249
40.06           32.250
40.07           32.251
40.08           32.252
40.09           32.253
40.10           32.254
40.11           32.255
40.99           32.999
50.01           50.001
50.02           50.002
50.10           50.015
50.11           50.016
50.12           50.017
50.13           50.018
50.14           50.019
50.15           50.020
50.16           50.021
50.17           50.022
50.18           50.023
50.19           50.024
50.20           50.025
50.30           50.040
50.31           50.041
50.32           50.042
50.45           50.055
50.46           50.056
50.47           50.057
50.48           50.058
50.60           50.070
50.61           50.071
50.62           50.072
50.63           50.073
50.70           50.085
50.71           50.086
50.72           50.087
50.73           50.088
50.99           50.999
51.001          51.001
51.002          51.002
51.015          51.015
51.016          51.016
51.017          51.017
51.018          51.018
51.019          51.019
51.020          51.020
51.021          51.021
51.022          51.022
51.023          51.023
51.024          51.024
51.025          51.025
51.050          51.060
51.051          51.061
51.052          51.062
51.053          51.063
51.054          51.064
51.055          51.065
51.065          51.080
51.080          51.095
51.081          51.096
51.082          51.097
51.095          51.130
51.096          51.131
51.097          51.132
51.098          51.133
51.099          51.134
51.100          51.135
51.101          51.136
51.999          51.999
53.01           53.01
53.02           53.02
53.03           53.03
53.15           53.15
53.16           53.16
53.17           53.17
53.18           53.18
53.19           53.19
53.30           53.30
53.31           53.31
53.32           53.32
53.33           53.33
53.34           53.34
53.99           53.99
72.01           72.01
72.02           72.01
72.03           72.03
72.99           72.99
72.03           72.99
73.01           73.01;
                73.99
73.02           73.02;
                73.99
73.03           73.03
73.04           73.04
73.05           73.05
73.06           73.06;
                73.99
73.07           73.07
73.08           73.08
73.09           73.09
73.10           73.10
73.11           73.11
73.99           73.99
Ch. 70 Schd. I  Ch. 70 Schd. I
Ch. 70 Schd. II Ch. 70 Schd. II
Ch. 71 Schd. I  Ch. 71 Schd. I
Ch. 71 Schd. II Ch. 71 Schd. II
90.01           90.01
90.10           90.15
90.11           90.16
90.12           90.17
90.25           90.30
90.26           90.31
90.27           90.32
90.28           90.33
90.29           90.34
90.30           90.35
90.31           90.36
90.32           90.37
90.99           90.99
91.01           91.01
91.02           91.02
91.03           91.03
91.04           91.04
91.05           91.05
91.06           91.06
91.07           91.07
91.99           91.99
92.01           92.01
92.02           92.02
92.03           92.03
92.04           92.04
92.05           92.05
92.15           92.20
92.16           92.21
92.17           92.22
92.18           92.23
92.19           92.24
92.20           92.25
92.21           92.26
92.22           92.27
92.23           92.28
92.24           92.29
92.25           92.30
92.26           92.31
92.27           92.32
92.28           92.33
92.29           92.34
92.30           92.35
92.40           92.50
92.41           92.51
92.42           92.52
92.43           92.53
92.55           92.65
92.56           92.66
92.57           92.67
92.58           92.68
92.99           92.99
94.01           94.01
94.02           94.02
94.03           94.03
94.10           94.15
94.11           94.16
94.12           94.17;
                94.99
94.99           94.99
95.01           95.01
95.02           95.02
95.03           95.03
95.15           95.15
95.16           95.16
95.17           95.17
95.18           95.18
95.19           95.19
95.99           95.99
96.01           96.01
96.02           96.02
96.03           96.03
96.04           96.04
96.99           96.99
97.01           97.01
97.02           97.02
97.11           97.99
97.25           97.35
97.26           97.36
97.27           97.37
97.28           97.38
98.001          98.001
98.002          98.002
98.003          98.003
98.004          98.004
98.020          98.015
98.021          98.016
98.022          98.017
98.023          98.018
98.024          98.019
98.025          98.020
98.026          98.021
98.027          98.022
98.028          98.023
98.029          98.024
98.040          98.035
98.041          98.036
98.042          98.037
98.043          98.038
98.044          98.039
98.045          98.040
98.046          98.041
98.065          98.055
98.066          98.056
98.067          98.057
98.068          98.058 
98.069          98.059
98.070          98.060
98.071          98.061
98.072          98.062
98.073          98.063
98.074          98.064
98.075          98.065
98.095          98.080
98.096          98.081
98.110          98.095
98.111          98.096
98.125          98.110
98.126          98.111
98.127          98.112
98.128          98.113
98.129          98.114
98.135          98.125
98.140          98.140
98.141          98.141
98.999          98.999
110.01          110.01
110.02          110.02
110.03          110.03
110.04          110.04
110.15          110.15
110.16          110.16
110.17          110.17
110.18          110.18
110.19          110.19
110.20          110.20
110.21          110.21
110.22          110.22
110.23          110.23
110.24          110.24
110.25          110.25
110.26          110.26
110.27          110.27
110.28          110.28
110.29          110.29
110.30          110.30
110.31          110.31
110.32          110.32
110.40          110.45
110.41          110.46
110.42          110.47
110.44          110.49
110.45          110.50
110.46          110.51
110.99          110.99
111.10          111.15
111.11          111.16
113.01          113.01
113.02          113.02
113.03          113.03
113.04          113.04
113.99          113.99
117.01          117.01
117.02          117.02
117.04          117.03
117.15          117.20
117.16          117.21
117.17          117.22
117.19          117.23
117.20          117.24
117.21          117.25
117.22          117.26
119.01          36.270
119.02          36.271
119.03          36.272
119.04          36.273
119.05          36.274
119.06          36.275
119.07          36.276
119.08          36.277
               36.999
130.01          130.01
130.02          130.02
130.03          130.03
130.04          130.04
130.05          130.05
130.06          130.06
130.99          130.99
131.01          131.01
131.02          131.02
131.03          131.03
132.01          132.01
132.02          132.02;
                132.99
132.03          132.03
133.01          133.01
133.02          133.02
133.03          133.03
133.04          133.03;
                133.99
134.01          134.01
134.02          134.02
134.03          134.03
134.04          134.04;
                134.99
135.01          135.01
135.02          135.02
135.03          135.03
135.04          135.04
136.01          136.01
136.02          136.02;
                136.99
136.03          136.03;
                136.99
136.04          136.04;
                136.99
136.05          136.05
136.06          136.06;
                136.99
136.07          136.07
137.01          137.01
137.02          137.02
137.03          137.03
137.04          137.04
137.05          137.05
137.10          137.20
137.11          137.21
137.12          137.22;
                137.99
137.13          137.23
137.14          137.24
137.15          137.25
150.01          150.001
150.02          150.002
150.03          150.003
150.40          150.020
150.41          150.021
150.42          150.022
150.55          150.035
150.56          150.036
150.57          150.037
150.58          150.038
150.59          150.039
150.60          150.040;
                150.999
150.61          150.041
150.62          150.042
150.63          150.043
150.64          150.044
150.65          150.045
150.66          150.046
150.67          150.047
150.68          150.048
150.69          150.049
151.01          151.01
151.02          151.03
151.10          151.15
151.11          151.16
151.12          151.17
151.13          151.18
151.14          151.19
151.15          151.20
151.16          151.21
151.17          151.22
151.18          151.23
151.19          151.24
151.20          151.25
151.21          151.26
151.22          151.27
151.23          151.28
151.24          151.29
151.25          151.30
151.35          151.45
151.37          151.47
151.38          151.48
151.39          151.49
151.40          151.50;
                151.99
151.41          151.51
151.42          151.52
151.43          151.53
151.44          151.54
151.45          151.99
151.99          151.99
152.01          152.01
152.02          152.02
153.01          153.01
153.02          153.02
153.10          153.15
153.11          153.16
153.12          153.17
153.13          153.18
153.20          153.30
153.21          153.31
153.22          153.32
153.23          153.33
153.24          153.34
153.25          153.35
153.26          153.36
153.30          153.36
153.31          153.51
153.32          153.52
153.33          153.53
153.34          153.54
153.35          153.54
153.99          153.99
154.01          154.01
154.02          154.02
154.03          154.03
154.15          154.15
154.16          154.16
154.17          154.17
154.18          154.18
154.19          154.19
154.20          154.20
154.30          154.35
154.31          154.36
154.32          154.37
154.45          154.50
154.46          154.51
154.47          154.52
154.48          154.53
154.49          154.54
155.01          155.001
155.02          155.002
155.15          155.015
155.16          155.016
155.17          155.017
155.18          155.018
155.19          155.019
155.20          155.020
155.21          155.021
155.22          155.022
155.23          155.023
155.24          155.024
155.25          155.025
155.35          155.040
155.36          155.041
155.37          155.042
155.38          155.043
155.39          155.044
155.40          155.045
155.41          155.046
155.42          155.047
155.43          155.048
155.44          155.049
155.45          155.050
155.46          155.051
155.47          155.052
155.48          155.053
155.49          155.054
155.50          155.055
155.51          155.056
155.52          155.057
155.65          155.070
155.66          155.071
155.67          155.072
155.68          155.073
155.99          155.999
156.001         156.001
156.002         156.001
156.003         156.003 
156.015         156.015
156.016         156.016
156.017         156.017
156.030         156.030
156.031         156.031
156.032         156.032
156.033         156.033
156.034         156.034
156.035         156.035
156.036         156.036
156.037         156.037
156.050         156.050
156.051         156.051
156.052         156.052
156.053         156.053
156.054         156.054
156.055         156.055
156.056         156.056
156.065         156.070
156.066         156.071
156.067         156.072
156.068         156.073
156.069         156.074
156.070         156.075
156.080         156.090
156.081         156.091
156.082         156.092
156.083         156.093
156.084         156.094
156.085         156.095
156.095         156.110
156.096         156.111
156.097         156.112
156.098         156.113
156.099         156.114
156.100         156.115
156.105         156.130
156.110         156.145
156.111         156.146
156.112         156.147
156.113         156.148
156.114         156.149
156.115         156.150
156.125         156.165
156.126         156.166
156.127         156.167
156.128         156.168
156.129         156.169
156.130         156.170
156.131         156.171
156.132         156.172
156.133         156.173
156.134         156.174
156.145         156.185
156.146         156.186
156.147         156.187
156.148         156.188
156.149         156.189
156.150         156.190
156.160         156.205
156.161         156.206
156.162         156.207
156.163         156.208
156.164         156.209
156.175         156.220
156.176         156.221
156.177         156.222
156.178         156.223
156.179         156.224
156.180         156.225
156.181         156.226
156.182         156.227
156.183         156.228
156.195         156.240
156.196         156.241
156.197         156.242
156.198         156.243
156.199         156.244
156.200         156.245
156.210         156.260
156.211         156.261
156.212         156.262
156.213         156.263
156.214         156.264
156.215         156.265
156.216         156.266
156.217         156.267
156.218         156.268
156.225         156.280
156.226         156.281
156.227         156.281
156.228         156.283
156.229         156.284
156.230         156.285
156.231         156.286
156.232         156.287
156.233         156.288
156.234         156.289
156.235         156.290
156.236         156.291
156.237         156.292
156.238         156.293
156.239         156.294
156.245         156.295
156.246         156.311
156.247         156.312
156.248         156.313
156.249         156.314
156.250         156.315
156.251         156.316
156.252         156.317
156.253         156.318
156.254         156.319
156.255         156.320
156.256         156.321
156.257         156.322
156.270         156.335
156.271         156.336
156.272         156.337
156.273         156.338
156.274         156.339
156.275         156.340
156.276         156.341
156.277         156.342
156.278         156.343
156.279         156.344;
                156.999
156.290         156.360
156.291         156.361
156.292         156.362
156.293         156.363
156.294         156.364
156.305         156.375
156.306         156.376
156.315         156.390
156.316         156.391
156.317         156.392
156.318         156.393
156.319         156.394
156.320         156.395
156.321         156.396
156.322         156.397
156.323         156.398
156.324         156.399
156.325         156.400
156.326         156.401
156.327         156.402
156.340         156.415
156.341         156.416
156.342         156.417
156.343         156.418
156.344         156.419
156.345         156.420
156.355         156.435
156.356         156.436
156.357         156.437
156.358         156.438
156.359         156.439
156.360         156.440
156.370         156.455
156.371         156.456
156.372         156.457
156.373         156.458
156.374         156.459
156.375         156.460
156.999         156.999
                
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.   Date Passed Code Section
470        - -1962     31.002;
                       31.999
474        - -1962     51.999
483        - -1962     51.130
492        - -1962     38.40—
                       38.46
                       151.15—
540        - -1964     151.27;
                       151.29;
                       151.99
                       31.190;
                       31.192—
541        - -1964     31.194;
                       32.055—
                       32.059
545        - -1964     156.165—
                       156.174
547        - -1964     156.110—
                       156.115
                       94.15—
565        - -1965     94.17;
                       94.99
572        - -1965     39.01
575        - -1965     51.018
580        - -         32.155
584        - -1965     32.120—
                       32.125
590        - -1965     35.026
                       92.01—
                       92.03;
                       92.05;
594        - -1965     92.50;
                       92.51;
                       92.53;
                       92.99
601        - -1965     31.155—
                       31.158
607        - -1965     36.060
610        - -1965     156.223;
                       156.224
                       50.055—
                       50.058;
613        - -1966     92.66—
                       92.68;
                       97.35—
                       97.38
622        - -1966     156.186
                       92.02;
                       92.04;
                       92.05;
647        - -1967     92.21;
                       92.22;
                       92.26;
                       92.52;
                       92.65
67-O-667   - -1967     156.459
                       32.185—
                       32.187;
                       110.01—
                       110.03;
                       110.15;
                       110.16;
                       110.18;
                       110.20—
                       110.24;
67-O-673   - -1967     110.26;
                       110.28—
                       110.31;
                       110.45—
                       110.47;
                       110.49—
                       110.51;
                       110.99;
                       113.99;
                       117.99
67-O-675   - -1967     151.27
68-O-684   - -1968     38.25—
                       38.27
68-O-687   - -1968     53.31
                       31.226—
                       31.233;
                       31.245—
                       31.251;
                       31.265—
68-O-697   - -1968     31.271;
                       31.285—
                       31.291;
                       31.999;
                       32.085—
                       32.090;
                       32.999
68-O-699   - -1968     32.015;
                       32.016
69-O-700   - -1969     156.460
                       50.058;
69-O-705   - -1969     92.68;
                       97.38
69-O-712   - -1969     31.356
69-O-719   - -1969     36.001—
                       36.002
69-O-720   - -1969     36.015—
                       36.016
69-O-722   - -1969     36.045
70-O-743   - -1970     156.435
70-O-748   - -1970     156.244;
                       156.322
70-O-757   - -1970     32.185;
                       32.186
                       117.21;
71-O-762   - -1971     117.23;
                       117.24;
                       117.26
                       33.01—
                       33.03;
                       33.05—
                       33.07;
                       33.09;
71-O-764   - -1971     33.11—
                       33.13;
                       33.18;
                       33.30;
                       33.31;
                       36.030;
                       36.031
                       35.002—
                       35.004;
                       35.020—
71-O-777   - -1971     35.025;
                       35.040—
                       35.043;
                       35.045;
                       35.060
71-O-781   - -1971     37.15—
                       37.17
71-O-783   - -1971     31.355
71-O-787   - -1971     113.01—
                       113.04
72-O-793   - -1972     156.390—
                       156.402
72-O-796   - -1972     33.01
72-O-798   - -1972     32.015
73-O-825   - -1973     33.15
73-O-829   - -1973     31.305
73-O-835   - -1973     33.03
                       50.001;
                       50.002;
                       50.015—
                       50.022;
                       50.070—
73-O-841   - -1973     50.073;
                       50.999;
                       94.01;
                       96.01;
                       96.02;
                       97.99
74-O-748   - -1974     156.227
74-O-780   - -1974     35.042
74-O-847   - -1974     31.170—
                       31.175
74-O-846   - -1974     31.190;
                       31.191
74-O-848   - -1974     32.070—
                       32.072
74-O-849   - -1974     31.325—
                       31.327
74-O-853   - -1974     33.16
74-O-860   - -1974     156.206
74-O-861   - -1974     31.357
74-O-862   - -1974     33.07;
                       33.10
74-O-867   - -1974     156.186
74-O-870   - -1974     35.040;
                       35.044
74-O-872   - -1974     30.01
74-O-874   - -1974     156.221;
                       156.225
74-O-879   - -1974     35.041;
                       156.241
75-O-894   - -1975     50.040—
                       50.042
75-O-895   - -1975     31.205—
                       31.210
                       33.45—
76-O-908   - -1976     33.49;
                       34.01
76-O-909   - -1976     35.040
76-O-910   - -1976     38.01—
                       38.12
                       53.03;
76-O-912   2-16-1976   53.15—
                       53.19;
                       53.99
                       98.080;
76-O-915   - -1976     98.095;
                       98.096
76-O-919   4-5-1976    TSO Table IV
76-O-924   6-7-1976    TSO Table VIII
76-O-925   6-7-1976    TSO Table IV
76-O-927   6-21-1976   TSO Table VIII
76-O-928   - -1976     30.05
76-O-929   7-19-1976   TSO Table VII
76-O-930   7-19-1976   154.19;
                       154.35
76-O-931   - -1976     Ch. 71, Schd. I
                       154.18—
76-O-934   - -1976     154.20;
                       154.35;
                       154.37
76-O-936   - -1976     37.03
76-O-941   11-15-1976  TSO Table VII
78-O-942   11-15-1976  TSO Table VIII
77-O-948   4-4-1977    TSO Table VII
77-O-962   11-7-1977   156.317
78-O-969   1-17-1978   51.095—
                       51.097
78-O-971   2-6-1978    150.020—
                       150.022
78-O-976   4-3-1978    TSO Table VIII
78-O-975   4-3-1978    TSO Table VIII
78-O-981   5-15-1978   TSO Table VI
78-O-984   6-19-1978   TSO Table VIII
                       50.001;
                       50.002;
                       50.015—
                       50.022;
78-O-986   6-20-1978   50.070—
                       50.073;
                       50.999;
                       96.04;
                       97.99
78-O-989   8-7-1978    TSO Table VIII
87-O-1292  9-16-1978   151.99
78-O-992   10-16-1978  TSO Table VIII
78-O-993   11-6-1978   156.390
78-O-994   11-6-1978   TSO Table VIII
79-O-997   1-22-1979   TSO Table VIII
79-O-1004  4-2-1979    152.01;
                       152.02
79-O-1006  4-16-1979   TSO Table VIII
79-O-1012  5-7-1979    TSO Table VIII
79-O-1013  5-7-1979    TSO Table I
79-O-1015  6-4-1979    TSO Table II
79-O-1016  6-4-1979    TSO Table VIII
79-O-1020  10-15-1979  TSO Table VIII
79-O-1021  10-15-1979  TSO Table II
79-O-1022  10-15-1979  TSO Table VIII
79-O-1023  11-5-1979   TSO Table VIII
79-O-1024  11-5-1979   TSO Table VIII
80-O-1027  1-21-1980   TSO Table VIII
80-O-1032  3-17-1980   TSO Table VII
80-O-1033  3-17-1980   TSO Table IV
80-O-1036  7-21-1980   TSO Table VIII
80-O-1035  9-24-1980   TSO Table VI
81-O-1045  - -1981     34.25
81-O-1046  2-17-1981   TSO Table VIII
81-O-1052  4-6-1981    TSO Table VIII
81-O-1053  - -1981     TSO Table VIII
81-O-1055  4-20-1981   TSO Table VII
81-O-1058  5-4-1981    TSO Table VIII
81-O-1059  5-18-1981   156.187
81-O-1063  8-17-1981   TSO Table VII
81-O-1064  8-17-1981   TSO Table III
81-O-1067  9-8-1981    TSO Table VIII
81-O-1070  9-21-1981   98.081;
                       98.999
81-O-1056  10-5-1981   TSO Table III
81-O-1073  10-5-1981   TSO Table V
81-O-1080  12-21-1981  TSO Table VIII
82-O-1081  3-15-1982   156.290;
                       156.999
82-O-1085  4-19-1982   TSO Table VIII
82-O-1086  5-17-1982   50.023;
                       50.999
82-O-1088  6-21-1982   50.020
82-O-1090  7-19-1982   35.042
83-O-1101  1-3-1983    TSO Table VIII
83-O-1104  2-21-1983   TSO Table VIII
83-O-1106  2-21-1983   TSO Table VIII
83-O-1119  7-5-1983    TSO Table VII
83-O-1133  - -1983     TSO Table VII
84-O-1136  1-16-1984   156.438
84-O-1138  1-16-1984   151.01
84-O-1141  2-6-1984    30.06
84-O-1145  4-2-1984    113.99
84-O-1149  5-7-1984    Ch. 70, Schd. I
84-O-1151  6-18-1984   TSO Table VII
84-O-1153  7-16-1984   TSO Table VIII
84-O-1155  8-20-1984   TSO Table II
84-O-1157  8-20-1984   TSO Table VIII
84-O-1156  8-20-1984   TSO Table VIII
84-O-1161  12-17-1984  110.99;
                       113.99;
84-O-1163  12-17-1984  156.459
85-O-1165  1-21-1985   31.001
85-O-1166  3-18-1985   156.052
85-O-1170  5-6-1985    31.120—
                       31.122
85-O-1172  5-6-1985    30.01
85-O-1173  5-20-1985   TSO Table VII
85-O-1175  5-20-1985   TSO Table VIII
85-O-1177  6-5-1985    156.335—
                       156.342
85-O-1180  6-19-1985   53.03
85-O-1181  6-22-1985   50.024
85-O-1182  7-3-1985    TSO Table VIII
85-O-1183  7-3-1985    90.30—
                       90.35
85-O-1184  7-3-1985    90.15—
                       90.17
                       91.01—
85-O-1186  7-17-1985   91.07;
                       91.99
85-O-1188  7-20-1985   31.310
85-O-1194  10-2-1985   TSO Table VIII
85-O-1198  11-20-1985  35.040
85-O-1199  12-4-1985   TSO Table VIII
85-O-1201  12-18-1985  TSO Table VIII
                       153.01;
                       153.02;
                       153.15—
86-O-1204  1-15-1986   153.18;
                       153.30—
                       153.36;
                       153.99
86-O-1205  1-15-1986   156.052
86-O-1209  2-5-1986    35.042
86-O-1218  4-16-1986   Ch. 71, Schd. I
86-O-1217  5-7-1986    TSO Table VIII
86-O-1222  - -1986     90.01
                       36.075—
86-O-1232  - -1986     36.081;
                       36.999
86-O-1236  8-6-1986    TSO Table I
86-O-1240  8-6-1986    39.15—
                       39.23
86-O-1257  8-6-1986    156.999
86-O-1245  9-17-1986   Ch. 70, Schd. II
86-O-1246  9-17-1986   32.200—
                       32.203
86-O-1250  10-15-1986  TSO Table III
87-O-1256  1-7-1987    37.02
87-O-1258  1-21-1987   35.040
                       33.45—
                       33.49;
                       34.01—
87-O-1261  2-4-1987    34.09;
                       34.40—
                       34.42;
                       34.55—
                       34.59
87-O-1263  2-18-1987   TSO Table VIII
87-O-1265  3-18-1987   150.999
87-O-1267  3-18-1987   50.024
87-O-1269  4-1-1987    39.02
87-O-1271  5-6-1987    110.21
87-O-1272  5-6-1987    TSO Table VIII
87-O-1273  5-6-1987    30.09;
                       30.99
                       96.01;
78-O-986   6-21-1987   96.02;
                       96.99
87-O-1278  7-1-1987    31.190
87-O-1280  7-1-1987    150.002;
                       150.999
87-O-1288  9-2-1987    35.005
87-O-1292  9-16-1987   151.28
87-O-1293  10-7-1987   TSO Table VI
88-O-1297  1-6-1988    TSO Table VIII
88-O-1300  2-3-1988    35.040
88-O-1304  3-17-1988   TSO Table VIII
88-O-1308  4-20-1988   TSO Table I
88-O-1310  5-18-1988   37.01
88-O-1313  5-18-1988   34.08
88-O-1315  5-18-1988   TSO Table II
89-O-1331  2-1-1989    TSO Table V
89-O-1336  2-27-1989   TSO Table I
89-O-1338  3-1-1989    TSO Table VIII
89-O-1345  7-13-1989   TSO Table VIII
89-O-1347  7-13-1989   TSO Table VIII
89-O-1348  7-24-1989   TSO Table VIII
89-O-1351  8-2-1989    Ch. 71, Schd. I
89-O-1352  9-6-1989    TSO Table V
1357       12-6-1989   51.001;
                       51.999
89-O-1353  12-18-1989  TSO Table VIII
90-O-1363  3-7-1990    TSO Table II
90-O-1368  4-18-1990   53.03
90-O-1371  5-2-1990    TSO Table VIII
90-O-1372  6-20-1990   156.186
                       92.02;
90-O-1373  8-1-1990    92.35;
                       92.52
92-O-1421  1-8-1992    34.10
92-O-1422  2-5-1992    53.03
92-O-1423  2-5-1992    34.10
                       110.04;
                       110.15—
                       110.17;
                       110.19;
92-O-1432  3-18-1992   110.24;
                       110.25;
                       110.27;
                       110.28;
                       110.32;
                       110.46
92-O-1436  5-6-1992    TSO Table VII
92-O-1437  5-6-1992    110.25
92-O-1443  6-3-1992    Ch. 71, Schd. I
92-O-1445  7-1-1992    TSO Table I
92-O-1446  7-15-1992   TSO Table VII
92-O-1439  9-2-1992    TSO Table VII
92-O-1452  9-16-1992   TSO Table I
92-O-1455  10-21-1992  Ch. 70, Schd. I
92-O-1456  10-21-1992  Ch. 70, Schd. I
92-O-1458  11-18-1992  TSO Table I
92-O-1460  12-2-1992   Ch. 70, Schd. I
92-O-1461  12-16-1992  72.01
93-O-1469  2-17-1993   TSO Table I
93-O-1470  2-17-1993   TSO Table VI
93-O-1474  6-16-1993   30.07
                       36.075—
93-O-1475  6-16-1993   36.081;
                       36.999
93-O-1478  9-15-1993   110.31
93-O-1481  11-16-1993  TSO Table VI
93-O-1485  12-1-1993   TSO Table I
94-O-1487  1-5-1994    TSO Table I
94-O-1488  3-2-1994    TSO Table I
94-O-1492  4-6-1994    TSO Table IV
94-O-1504  7-3-1994    TSO Table I
94-O-1503  7-20-1994   50.024
94-O-1506  9-7-1994    Ch. 71, Schd. I
94-O-1509  9-7-1994    TSO Table VIII
94-O-1511  9-21-1994   TSO Table VIII
94-O-1512  10-5-1994   TSO Table I
94-O-1514  10-19-1994  TSO Table VIII
94-O-1515  10-19-1994  TSO Table I
94-O-1517  11-2-1994   TSO Table I
94-O-1520  12-7-1994   TSO Table I
94-O-1521  12-7-1994   51.001
                       153.36;
95-O-1522  1-4-1995    153.51—
                       153.54
95-O-1523  2-1-1995    TSO Table IV
95-O-1524  2-15-1995   TSO Table I
95-O-1525  2-15-1995   94.03
95-O-1526  - -1995     156.287
95-O-1528  4-19-1995   Ch. 70, Schd. I
95-O-1529  4-19-1995   Ch. 70, Schd. I
95-O-1547  9-6-1995    Ch. 71, Schd. I
95-O-1554  - -1995     TSO Table VIII
95-O-1559  - -1995     TSO Table I
                       34.02;
96-O-1573  3- -1995    34.04;
                       34.06
95-O-1527  4-19-1995   73.99
95-O-1531B 5-17-1995   TSO Table VIII
95-O-1538  7-19-1995   156.343
95-O-1552  9-6-1995    TSO Table VIII
95-O-1548  9-6-1995    97.02
95-O-1543  9-6-1995    156.291
95-O-1551  9-20-1995   TSO Table I
96-O-1563  1-17-1996   TSO Table VI
                       156.261;
                       156.262;
96-O-1564  2-7-1996    156.264;
                       156.267;
                       156.268
96-O-1566  3-6-1996    TSO Table I
96-O-1569  3-6-1996    TSO Table VIII
96-O-1570  3-6-1996    TSO Table VIII
96-O-1571  3-6-1996    TSO Table VIII
96-O-1574  3-20-1996   156.291
96-O-1578  6-5-1996    TSO Table VII
                       31.340—
96-O-1583  7-23-1996   31.344;
                       35.075
96-O-1586  8-7-1996    98.125
96-O-1588  9-4-1996    110.24
                       36.095—
97-O-1597  1-2-1997    36.103;
                       36.999
97-O-1598  1-15-1997   TSO Table VIII
97-O-1599  3-19-1997   TSO Table VIII
97-O-1601  3-19-1997   TSO Table VIII
97-O-1602  3-19-1997   TSO Table VIII
97-O-1603  3-19-1997   TSO Table VIII
97-O-1604  4-2-1997    TSO Table VIII
97-O-1605  5-7-1997    TSO Table I
97-O-1606  5-7-1997    50.024
97-O-1608  6-4-1997    31.100—
                       31.104
97-O-1609  6-18-1997   TSO Table VII
97-O-1611  8-6-1997    TSO Table VIII
97-O-1612  8-20-1997   TSO Table VI
97-O-1614  9-3-1997    TSO Table I
                       110.15;
                       110.17—
97-O-1615  9-3-1997    110.19;
                       110.22;
                       110.24;
                       110.31
97-O-1617  10-1-1997   TSO Table VIII
97-O-1621  11-19-1997  TSO Table I
97-O-1624  11-19-1997  TSO Table I
97-O-1626  11-19-1997  TSO Table VIII
97-O-1627  12-3-1997   TSO Table VIII
97-O-1628  1-7-1998    TSO Table I
98-O-1630  1-21-1998   TSO Table VIII
98-O-1631  1-21-1998   TSO Table VIII
98-O-1632  1-21-1998   TSO Table VIII
98-O-1638  3-18-1998   TSO Table I
98-O-1639  3-18-1998   TSO Table I
98-O-1640  4-1-1998    TSO Table I
98-O-1641  5-6-1998    TSO Table VIII
98-O-1644  6-17-1998   51.003;
                       51.999
                       156.221;
98-O-1645  6-17-1998   156.338;
                       156.342;
                       TSO Table VIII
98-O-1647  6-17-1998   50.024
98-O-1648  7-1-1998    TSO Table I
98-O-1650  7-1-1998    50.024
98-O-1652  7-1-1998    36.270—
                       36.277
98-O-1655  7-15-1998   50.024
98-O-1656  8-5-1998    TSO Table VIII
98-O-1657  9-2-1998    TSO Table VIII
98-O-1658  9-2-1998    10.99
98-O-1659  9-3-1998    52.01
98-O-1660  9-16-1998   TSO Table I
98-O-1661  10-21-1998  TSO Table VII
98-O-1662  11-18-1998  TSO Table I
98-O-1664  12-16-1998  TSO Table I
99-O-1667  3-3-1999    TSO Table VIII
99-O-1668  3-3-1999    TSO Table VIII
99-O-1671  3-3-1999    TSO Table VIII
99-O-1673  4-7-1999    110.25
99-O-1674  4-21-1999   156.341
99-O-1676  6-2-1999    36.235—
                       36.241
99-O-1677  6-2-1999    53.16
99-O-1682  9-1-1999    TSO Table I
99-O-1683  9-1-1999    TSO Table I
99-O-1685  10-6-1999   90.35
99-O-1687  12-1-1999   TSO Table I
99-O-1688  12-15-1999  37.30—
                       37.46
99-O-1691  12-15-1999  TSO Table I
99-O-1692  12-15-1999  TSO Table I
99-O-1693  12-15-1999  TSO Table I
99-O-1694  12-15-1999  TSO Table I
00-O-1695  3-15-2000   110.25
00-O-1696  6-7-2000    110.24
00-O-1699  7-19-2000   TSO Table VI
00-O-1701  9-6-2000    TSO Table I
00-O-1703  10-18-2000  52.01
01-O-1710  3-21-2001   TSO Table VII
01-O-1713  5-16-2001   92.22;
                       92.52
01-O-1717  7-5-2001    151.28
01-O-1716  7-18-2001   132.02
01-O-1720  9-5-2001    133.03;
                       133.99
01-O-1722  9-19-2001   TSO Table I
01-O-1723  10-17-2001  50.019
01-O-1724  10-17-2001  37.04
02-O-1732  1-16-2002   TSO Table I
                       50.073—
02-O-1733  4-17-2002   50.076;
                       50.999
02-O-1735  6-5-2002    156.317
                       32.245—
02-O-1737  9-4-2002    32.255;
                       32.999
02-O-1740  9-18-2002   53.17
02-O-1741  11-6-2002   TSO Table I
02-O-1742  11-6-2002   TSO Table II
03-O-1747  1-2-2003    Ch. 71, Schd. I
03-O-1748  1-2-2003    33.08
03-O-1749  1-2-2003    33.01
03-O-1750  1-2-2003    33.02
03-O-1752  4-2-2003    32.002
03-O-1755  4-16-2003   TSO Table I
03-O-1756  4-16-2003   TSO Table I
03-O-1758  7-16-2003   Ch. 71, Schd. I
03-O-1765  9-1-2003    TSO Table VIII
03-O-1760  9-3-2003    TSO Table I
03-O-1764  9-17-2003   TSO Table II
03-O-1768  10-1-2003   TSO Table I
03-O-1771  11-5-2003   35.045
03-O-1773  11-19-2003  35.045
03-O-1779  12-3-2003   90.35
04-O-1785  1-17-2004   94.03
04-O-1780  1-21-2004   151.26
04-O-1781  2-4-2004    151.27
04-O-1786  3-17-2004   50.020
04-O-1790  3-17-2004   151.01
04-O-1791  3-17-2004   72.01;
                       72.26
04-O-1792  3-17-2004   34.10
04-O-1789  3-17-2004   151.26
04-O-1799  3-21-2004   151.53
04-O-1796  4-7-2004    TSO Table II
04-O-1797  4-21-2004   110.25
04-O-1798  4-21-2004   35.110—
                       35.117
04-O-1802  6-16-2004   TSO Table III
                       35.090—
04-O-1804  7-7-2004    35.097;
                       35.999
04-O-1805  7-7-2004    134.04;
                       134.99
04-O-1806  7-7-2004    72.03;
                       72.26
04-O-1807  7-26-2004   TSO Table II
04-O-1808  8-4-2004    156.130
04-O-1810  8-18-2004   36.272
04-O-1816  11-17-2004  Ch. 71, Schd. I
04-O-1815  10-6-2004   72.03;
                       72.26
05-O-1824  2-2-2005    133.03;
                       133.99
-          2-16-2005   94.03
05-O-1825  2-16-2005   151.27
05-O-1829  4-6-2005    TSO Table VII
05-O-1830  4-6-2005    151.27
05-O-1830B 4-20-2005   156.292
05-O-1831  4-20-2005   156.293
05-O-1833  5-18-2005   97.99
05-O-1834  6-1-2005    156.294
                       73.01—
05-O-1837  7-3-2005    73.09;
                       73.99
05-O-1838  8-17-2005   30.01
05-O-1839  10-5-2005   151.27
05-O-1840  10-19-2005  151.27
05-O-1841  11-16-2005  32.215—
                       32.219
05-O-1842  11-16-2005  134.04;
                       134.99
06-O-1844  1-1-2006    TSO Table VII
06-O-1845  2-1-2006    53.03
06-O-1847  3-1-2006    TSO Table I
06-O-1849  3-29-2006   36.001
06-O-1850  3-29-2006   36.015
06-O-1851  4-5-2006    33.19
06-O-1852  4-5-2006    TSO Table I
06-O-1853  4-5-2006    150.003
06-O-1854  4-19-2006   97.02
06-O-1855  5-3-2006    36.140—
                       36.142
06-O-1857  5-3-2006    151.30;
                       151.99
06-O-1858A 5-3-2006    TSO Table VIII
06-O-1862  5-7-2006    36.140—
                       36.142
                       151.45;
06-O-1863  5-7-2006    154.47—
                       151.54;
                       151.99
06-O-1859  6-7-2006    73.10—
                       73.13
06-O-1861  6-7-2006    51.001
06-O-1865  6-21-2006   156.344;
                       156.999
06-O-1868  7-5-2006    151.30;
                       151.99
06-O-1869  7-5-2006    31.060—
                       31.063 
06-O-1870  8-2-2006    150.035—
                       150.049
06-O-1873  9-6-2006    TSO Table VII
06-O-1874  9-20-2006   51.001
06-O-1877  11-1-2006   TSO Table VI
07-O-1880  1-17-2007   51.001
07-O-1881  1-17-2007   150.041
07-O-1882  1-17-2007   TSO Table VI
07-O-1884  3-7-2007    31.364
07-O-1885  3-7-2007    TSO Table VII
                       95.30—
07-O-1886  3-21-2007   95.39;
                       95.99
07-O-1887  4-18-2007   150.060—
                       150.070
07-O-1888  4-18-2007   36.155—
                       36.159
07-O-1889  6-6-2007    TSO Table VII
07-O-1891  7-2-2007    TSO Table I
07-O-1892  7-18-2007   36.157;
                       36.158
07-O-1893  8-15-2007   72.15—
                       72.26
07-O-1894  - -2007     TSO Table VII
1896       11-7-2007   TSO Table VI
1897       11-7-2007   TSO Table VI
1898       11-7-2007   TSO Table VI
08-O-1906  2-6-2008    53.03
08-O-1908  4-2-2008    TSO Table VI
08-O-1911  4-2-2008    110.25
08-O-1912  4-2-2008    110.25
08-O-1913  4-2-2008    156.344;
                       156.999
08-O-1914  4-2-2008    151.30;
                       151.99
08-O-1916  4-2-2008    156.291
08-O-1918  4-2-2008    31.311
                       31.225;
08-O-1921  4-16-2008   32.030—
                       32.039;
                       32.999
08-O-1922  5-7-2008    TSO Table VI
08-O-1923  5-21-2008   34.03
08-O-1925  6-4-2008    51.110—
                       51.115
08-O-1926  7-2-2008    36.195—
                       36.203
                       157.01—
                       157.08;
08-O-1929  8-6-2008    157.20—
                       157.24;
                       157.99
08-O-1937  12-17-2008  156.206
09-O-1938  1-21-2009   TSO Table VII
09-O-1942  5-6-2009    Ch. 71, Schd. I
09-O-1943  5-6-2009    TSO Table VI
09-O-1945  5-6-2009    33.12
09-O-1946  5-6-2009    33.12
                       32.140—
09-O-1950  6-3-2009    32.142;
                       32.999
09-O-1952  7-1-2009    150.005
09-O-1953  7-15-2009   36.115—
                       36.125
09-O-1954  7-15-2009   36.215—
                       36.225
09-O-1957  8-5-2009    93.01
09-O-1958  8-5-2009    73.12;
                       73.13
09-O-1959  8-5-2009    51.081;
                       51.999
09-O-1960  10-7-2009   TSO Table VI
10-O-1965  1-6-2010    36.078
10-O-1966  2-17-2010   36.310—
                       36.312
10-O-1966B 4-7-2010    31.363
10-O-1968  4-21-2010   38.01—
                       38.12
10-O-1969  6-16-2010   72.26
10-O-1976  9-7-2010    TSO Table VII
19-O-1980  12-1-2010   31.035
10-O-1982  12-15-2010  TSO Table VII
10-O-1983  12-15-2010  TSO Table VIII
11-O-1984  2-16-2011   TSO Table I
11-O-1985  3-16-2011   37.99
11-O-1986  4-20-2011   TSO Table VII
11-O-1987  5-18-2011   156.295
11-O-1989  5-18-2011   31.358
                       72.16;
                       72.18;
11-O-1994  6-15-2011   72.19;
                       72.22;
                       72.23
11-O-1999  7-20-2011   150.005;
                       150.999
11-O-2000  8-3-2011    TSO Table II
11-O-2001  8-3-2011    TSO Table I
11-O-2002  8-3-2011    TSO Table I
11-O-2003  8-17-2011   TSO Table VIII
0-7-12     1-9-2012    38.60
12-O-2011  2-15-2012   TSO Table VIII
12-O-2013  3-14-2012   TSO Table II
12-O-2019  5-2-2012    53.03
12-O-2022  6-20-2012   TSO Table I
12-O-2023  7-3-2012    TSO Table I
                       94.30—
12-O-2025  7-18-2012   94.34;
                       94.99
12-O-2028  9-5-2012    TSO Table VI
12-O-2029  9-20-2012   TSO Table I
12-O-2030  10-3-2012   97.99
12-O-2031  10-17-2012  TSO Table VI
12-O-2032  10-17-2012  TSO Table VI
12-O-2033  10-17-2012  TSO Table VI
12-O-2047  12-19-2012  73.12;
                       73.13
12-O-2048  12-19-2012  TSO Table VI
13-O-2049  1-16-2013   135.02
13-O-2050  2-6-2013    132.02
13-O-2051  2-6-2013    130.99
13-O-2052  2-6-2013    135.99
13-O-2053  2-20-2013   35.006
13-O-2054  4-24-2013   50.024
                       51.040—
13-O-2056  6-5-2013    51.048;
                       51.999
13-O-2058  6-19-2013   36.170—
                       36.180
13-O-2059  7-17-2013   132.01;
                       132.99
                       137.40—
13-O-2060  7-19-2013   137.42;
                       137.99
13-O-2062  8-7-2013    Ch. 71, Schd. I
13-O-2063  8-21-2013   Ch. 71, Schd. I
13-O-2064  8-21-2013   38.60—
                       38.64
13-O-2065  8-21-2013   36.290—
                       36.296
13-O-2067  10-16-2013  TSO Table I
13-O-2070  11-20-2013  TSO Table VIII
13-O-2071  11-20-2013  31.362
13-O-2072  12-18-2013  53.03
14-O-2079  1-2-2014    32.230—
                       32.233
14-O-2081  1-15-2014   TSO Table VI
14-O-2082  1-15-2014   TSO Table VI
14-O-2083  2-5-2014    TSO Table VI
14-O-2084  3-5-2014    TSO Table VI
14-O-2088  3-5-2014    34.27
14-O-2086  3-19-2014   156.345;
                       156.999
14-O-2090  4-2-2014    TSO Table I
                       35.041—
14-O-2091  4-16-2014   35.043;
                       35.048
14-O-2092  4-16-2014   TSO Table VI
14-O-2093  5-21-2014   TSO Table VII
14-O-2094  6-18-2014   TSO Table I
                       120.01—
14-O-2099  8-20-2014   120.08;
                       120.99
14-O-2104  11-19-2014  TSO Table VI
14-O-2106  12-3-2014   TSO Table I
15-O-2119A 7-1-2015    31.361
16-O-2132  5-5-2016    TSO Table I
16-O-2133  5-5-2016    TSO Table I
16-O-2139  7-6-2016    TSO Table VI
16-O-2140  7-27-2016   TSO Table VI
16-O-2142  8-17-2016   37.17
16-O-2144  9-7-2016    Ch. 71, Schd. I
16-O-2154  11-16-2016  TSO Table I
                       150.085—
16-O-2155  12-7-2016   150.093;
                       150.999
17-O-2161  1-18-2017   51.043
                       121.01;
                       121.04—
                       121.07;
17-O-2162  1-18-2017   121.25—
                       121.27;
                       121.40—
                       121.43;
                       121.99
17-O-2164  2-1-2017    TSO Table VI
16-O-2165  2-1-2017    TSO Table VI
17-O-2166  2-1-2017    TSO Table VI
17-O-2167  2-1-2017    TSO Table VI
17-O-2170  3-15-2017   TSO Table VII
17-O-2173  4-5-2017    TSO Table VI
17-O-2174  4-5-2017    TSO Table VII
17-O-2175  4-19-2017   TSO Table VII
17-O-2176  4-19-2017   TSO Table VI
17-O-2178  4-19-2017   31.360
17-O-2179  4-19-2017   31.359
                       156.185;
17-O-2180  5-17-2017   156.186;
                       156.205;
                       156.206
17-O-2181  6-21-2017   35.027
17-O-2182  6-21-2017   TSO Table VI
17-O-2185  8-2-2017    TSO Table VI
17-O-2188  10-18-2017  TSO Table I
17-O-2189  12-6-2017   51.044
                       35.130—
18-O-2191  1-12-2018   35.133;
                       35.999
18-O-2198  3-9-2018    TSO Table VIII
18-O-2199  4-4-2018    TSO Table VI
                       112.001—
                       112.004;
                       112.015—
                       112.025;
18-O-2200  5-2-2018    112.040—
                       112.060;
                       112.075—
                       112.080;
                       112.999
18-O-2204  8-1-2018    156.313
18-O-2205  8-15-2018   TSO Table VI
08-O-2206  9-5-2018    157.20
18-O-2207  10-3-2018   TSO Table VI
18-O-2209  11-7-2018   TSO Table VI
18-O-2213  12-19-2018  TSO Table I
19-O-2214  1-2-2019    32.105
19-O-2217  2-6-2019    35.007
19-O-2220  3-20-2019   132.04;
                       132.99
19-O-2225  4-3-2019    TSO Table I
19-O-2226  4-3-2019    112.005
19-O-2229  4-17-2019   TSO Table VI
19-O-2230  5-15-2019   98.065
19-O-2232  5-15-2019   150.004
19-O-2233  6-19-2019   53.03
19-O-2234  6-19-2019   50.024
19-O-2237  9-4-2019    94.18
19-O-2239  9-4-2019    36.130—
                       36.133
                       31.135—
                       31.137;
19-O-2240  10-2-2019   32.121;
                       35.002;
                       38.42
19-O-2242  12-4-2019   151.30
19-O-2244  12-4-2019   156.346
                       112.005;
                       112.018;
                       112.023;
19-O-2245  12-18-2019  112.025;
                       112.045;
                       112.061;
                       112.062;
                       112.999
19-O-2247  12-18-2019  TSO Table VII
19-O-2248  12-18-2019  TSO Table VII
                       150.086;
20-O-2250  3-4-2020    150.089;
                       150.094
20-O-2251  3-4-2020    TSO Table I
20-O-2253  3-4-2020    TSO Table IV
20-O-2254  3-18-2020   38.25
                       TSO Tables
20-O-2255  4-1-2020    VI,
                       VII
20-O-2256  3-18-2020   TSO Table I
20-O-2257  3-18-2020   TSO Table IV
                       156.003;
                       156.186;
                       156.206;
20-O-2258  3-18-2020   156.229;
                       156.246;
                       156.263;
                       156.296;
                       156.390
20-O-2259  4-15-2020   39.30
                       122.01;
                       122.02;
20-O-2261  4-15-2020   122.10—
                       122.15;
                       122.20—
                       122.24
                       73.02;
                       73.04;
20-O-2262  4-15-2020   134.10—
                       134.16;
                       134.99
20-O-2265  5-6-2020    94.15;
                       150.094
20-O-2266  5-9-2020    TSO Table I
20-O-2267  5-9-2020    TSO Table I
20-O-2268  5-9-2020    TSO Table IV
20-O-2269  5-20-2020   94.15
20-O-2272  6-17-2020   30.10;
                       30.11
20-O-2273  6-17-2020   TSO Table VII
20-O-2276  7-15-2020   91.05
20-O-2277  8-5-2020    31.365
20-O-2278  8-5-2020    31.366
                       73.02;
                       73.04;
20-O-2279  8-19-2020   134.10—
                       134.16;
                       134.99
20-O-2280  8-19-2020   121.41
20-O-2281  9-16-2020   121.27
20-O-2287  10-21-2020  112.023
20-O-2288  10-21-2020  51.043
20-O-2289  10-21-2020  73.14
21-O-2294  3-17-2021   110.17
21-O-2295  3-17-2021   33.20
                       151.01—
21-O-2299  4-21-2021   151.05;
                       151.99
21-O-2301  5-19-2021   110.23
                       158.001—
21-O-2302  6-2-2021    158.022;
                       158.999
21-O-2303  6-2-2021    159.001—
                       159.013
21-O-2304  7-21-2021   50.024
21-O-2305  7-21-2021   33.20
21-O-2306  8-18-2021   151.03;
                       151.99
21-O-2307  8-18-2021   151.30
21-O-2309  8-18-2021   TSO Table VI
21-O-2311  9-15-2021   112.023
                       36.250—
21-O-2314  10-31-2021  36.255;
                       36.999
                       156.003;
21-O-2316  11-17-2021  156.051;
                       156.314
21-O-2317  11-17-2021  124.01—
                       124.04
21-O-2318  12-1-2021   159.001—
                       159.013
21-O-2319  12-1-2021   151.03
21-O-2320  12-1-2021   110.25
                       32.141;
22-O-2324  1-19-2022   156.435;
                       156.436
22-O-2325  2-16-2022   33.20
22-O-2326  3-2-2022    112.023
22-O-2327  4-20-2022   TSO Table VIII
22-O-2328  4-20-2022   TSO Table I
                       33.01;
22-O-2329  5-4-2022    33.02;
                       33.08.01
22-O-2331  5-18-2022   125.01—
                       125.03
22-O-2332  7-20-2022   TSO Table I
22-O-2333  7-20-2022   TSO Table VI
22-O-2334  7-20-2022   TSO Table I
22-O-2335  8-17-2022   112.023
22-O-2336  8-17-2022   11.02
                       97.01;
22-O-2337  9-7-2022    97.99;
                       151.03
22-O-2338  9-7-2022    94.01
22-O-2339  9-7-2022    90.05—
                       90.08
22-O-2340  9-21-2022   TSO Table I
22-O-2341  10-19-2022  34.27
22-O-2345  12-7-2022   TSO Table I
                       52.02—
23-O-2349  2-1-2023    52.05;
                       52.99
23-O-2350  2-15-2023   150.005
23-O-2351  3-1-2023    TSO Table I
23-O-2352  3-15-2023   151.06
23-O-2353  3-15-2023   TSO Table VI
23-O-2354  4-5-2023    TSO Table I
23-O-2355  4-5-2023    TSO Table I
23-O-2357  4-26-2023   37.05
23-O-2358  4-26-2023   TSO Table VIII
23-O-2360  5-17-2023   53.03
23-O-2364  6-21-2023   33.03
23-O-2365  6-21-2023   125.04
23-O-2366  6-21-2023   53.03
23-O-2367  7-19-2023   TSO Table I
23-O-2368  8-2-2023    TSO Table VII
23-O-2369  8-2-2023    TSO Table I
23-O-2370  8-16-2023   34.25
23-O-2371  8-16-2023   TSO Table VII
23-O-2372  9-20-2023   TSO Table VII
                       120.01—
23-O-2373  10-4-2023   120.08;
                       120.99
23-O-2374  10-4-2023   151.30;
                       151.99
23-O-2375  10-18-2023  TSO Table VIII
23-O-2376  10-18-2023  TSO Table I
23-O-2377  12-6-2023   TSO Table I
23-O-2378  12-6-2023   TSO Table VII
                       §
24-O-2382  1-3-2024    72.30—
                       72.37;
                       72.99
24-O-2383  2-7-2024    TSO I
24-O-2834  3-6-2024    TSO I
24-O-2835  5-1-2024    TSO VI
                       110.01—
                       110.04;
                       110.15—
                       110.32;
                       110.45—
                       110.51;
                       110.99;
                       111.15—
                       111.18;
                       112.001—
                       112.005;
                       112.015—
                       112.025;
                       112.040—
                       112.057;
                       112.059—
                       112.062;
                       112.075—
                       112.080;
                       112.999;
                       113.01—
                       113.04;
                       113.10—
                       113.13;
                       113.20—
                       113.23;
                       113.30—
                       113.35;
                       113.99;
                       114.001—
                       114.008;
                       114.020—
                       114.023;
                       114.030—
                       114.043;
                       114.055—
                       114.057;
                       115.01;
                       115.02;
                       115.10—
                       115.12;
                       115.20—
                       115.23;
                       115.30—
                       115.33;
                       116.001;
24-O-2388  5-15-2024   116.002;
                       116.010—
                       116.013;
                       116.025—
                       116.030;
                       116.040—
                       116.044;
                       116.060—
                       116.066;
                       117.01—
                       117.03;
                       117.20—
                       117.27;
                       118.01—
                       118.03;
                       118.10—
                       118.12;
                       118.20—
                       118.22;
                       118.30—
                       118.32;
                       119.01—
                       119.03;
                       120.01—
                       120.08;
                       120.99;
                       121.01—
                       121.08;
                       121.25—
                       121.27;
                       121.40—
                       121.44;
                       121.99;
                       122.01;
                       122.02;
                       122.10—
                       122.15;
                       122.20—
                       122.24;
                       123.01—
                       123.04;
                       123.10—
                       123.14;
                       124.01—
                       124.04;
                       125.01—
                       125.04
24-O-2389  5-15-2024   TSO VI
24-O-2390  6-5-2024    TSO VI
24-O-2391  6-19-2024   156.036
24-O-2393  7-17-2024   151.01;
                       151.03
                       34.70—
                       34.72;
                       36.270—
                       36.277;
                       36.290—
24-O-2394  9-4-2024    36.296;
                       36.310—
                       36.312;
                       36.999;
                       134.25—
                       134.31
                       112.016,
24-O-2395  9-18-2024   12.018,
                       112.021,
                       112.023
24-O-2398  11-6-2024   TSO Table VIII
24-O-2399  11-6-2024   TSO Table VII
24-O-2400  11-20-2024  TSO Table I
24-O-2401  11-20-2024  TSO Table I
24-O-2402  12-4-2024   36.325—
                       36.328
24-O-2405  12-11-2024  37.04
                       110.16;
                       110.17;
                       110.20;
                       110.22;
25-O-2406  1-15-2025   110.48;
                       110.50;
                       121.07;
                       121.08;
                       121.25; 123.05—123.09
25-O-2408  3-5-2025    TSO VI
                       114.001,
                       115.01,
25-O-2412  7-16-2025   116.001,
                       118.21,
                       118.22,
                       119.03
25-O-2414  9-3-2025    53.03
25-O-2415  9-3-2025    50.024
25-O-2416  9-17-2025   121.28
25-O-2419  11-5-2025   TSO Table VIII
25-O-2420  11-5-2025   TSO Table VIII
25-O-2421  11-5-2025   TSO Table I
25-O-2422  11-5-2025   151.03
                      
 
