MATTESON, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-4 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 4589, passed 12-18-2023; and
State legislation current through 2024 Illinois Legislative Service, Pamphlet
No. 6
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
   
10.18   Record of ordinances
 
   
10.98   Debts due and owing the village
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the Village of Matteson, Illinois shall be
designated as the code of Matteson, Illinois and may be so cited.
(2000 Code, § 10.01)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the village.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITY. The President and Board of Trustees of the village.
   COUNTY. Cook County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Cook County, Illinois.
(5 ILCS 70/1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT.
(5 ILCS 70/1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections.
(65 ILCS 5/1-1-2)
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of such officer,
either generally or in special cases.
(5 ILCS 70/1.08)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER. HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at any
time after that date.
(5 ILCS 70/1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and
all bridges thereupon.
(5 ILCS 70/1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 1992, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   IN THE VILLAGE. All territory over which the village now has or shall
hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police or other
regulatory powers.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5.
   MUNICIPALITY or VILLAGE. The Village of Matteson, Illinois.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm.
(5 ILCS 70/1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals.
(5 ILCS 70/1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed and in the service of the Village
of Matteson. POLICE FORCE shall be construed to include such persons in the
employ of a village as members of the Department of Police, who are or shall
hereafter be appointed and sworn as POLICE OFFICERS.
(5 ILCS 70/1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
village, county, state or federal governments, officers and agencies thereof,
or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized public
official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance or any other place for the sale
of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SEWERAGE SYSTEM. Includes any or all of the following: a sewage treatment
plant or plants; collecting, intercepting and outlet sewers; force mains,
conduits, lateral sewers and extensions; pumping stations, ejector stations and
all other appurtenances, extensions or improvements necessary or useful and
convenient for the collection, treatment and disposal, in a sanitary manner, of
sewage and industrial wastes. Also includes the disconnection of stormwater
drains and constructing outlets therefor, where, in any case, such work is
necessary to relieve existing sanitary sewers of stormwater loads, in order to
permit the efficient operation of such sanitary sewers for collection,
treatment and disposal of sewage and industrial wastes.
(65 ILCS 5/11-141-1)
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. The village code hereby adopted, and
as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision and by the adoption of new
titles, chapters or sections.
   UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in Section 1 of Article
VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970.
(5 ILCS 70/1.28)
   VILLAGE, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Matteson,
Illinois.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WHOLESALER or WHOLESALE DEALER. Unless otherwise specifically defined, they
shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or
things in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale, as
distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in smaller quantities direct to
the consumer.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law,
except as otherwise provided by law it shall be:
      (1)   In the proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, except as otherwise provided by law.
(5 ILCS 70/1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.”
(5 ILCS 70/1.10)
(2000 Code, § 10.02)
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this code are employed for reference purposes
only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
(2000 Code, § 10.03)
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular.
(5 ILCS 70/1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders.
(5 ILCS 70/1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future.
(5 ILCS 70/1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday or
Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded.
(5 ILCS 70/1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to three or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(5 ILCS 70/1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the President
and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
(5 ILCS 70/1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, insofar as they are the same as those
of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment.
(5 ILCS 70/2)
(2000 Code, § 10.04)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the village shall be as set by federal law.
(2000 Code, § 10.05)
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) below:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
(2000 Code, § 10.06)
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context clearly
indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was not
intended.
(2000 Code, § 10.07)
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters or sections of these codified
ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions bearing the
latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions bear the same
passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be consistent with the
meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject matter taken as a
whole.
(2000 Code, § 10.08)
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in any
way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections and divisions, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this code of ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are re-adopted as a new code of ordinances by
the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 10.09)
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
(2000 Code, § 10.10)
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. Such references
shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer or office, unless
the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
(2000 Code, § 10.11)
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
(2000 Code, § 10.12)
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
(2000 Code, § 10.13)
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not limited
to: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the village; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
code of ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
(2000 Code, § 10.14)
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Board
of Trustees or a certain village officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.
(2000 Code, § 10.15)
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the village. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
(2000 Code, § 10.16)
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text of the
section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example:
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-2-1)
   (C)   An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text
of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
      § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         The village shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information
Act.
      Statutory reference:
         Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
(2000 Code, § 10.17)
§ 10.18 RECORD OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Record of ordinances and proof of publication. All ordinances passed
by the municipality shall be recorded by the Village Clerk in a proper book or
books kept for that purpose, which book or books shall have complete indexes.
The originals of all ordinances shall be kept on file in the Clerk’s office. In
the case of ordinances requiring publication, proof of publication shall be
procured by the Clerk in the form of a certificate of the printer or publisher.
The certificate shall be attached to the ordinance or written and attested on
the face of the original of the ordinance.
   (B)   Offense punishable by different sections; recovery. In all cases where
the same offense may be made punishable or shall be created by different
clauses or sections of ordinances of the municipality, the prosecuting officer
may elect under which to proceed; but no more than one recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense.
   (C)   Ordinance expressing only minimum fine. Whenever in this code, or any
ordinance hereafter passed, a minimum but no maximum fine or penalty is
imposed, the court may, in its discretion, adjudge the offender or offenders to
pay a sum of money exceeding the minimum fine or penalty so fixed, but not
exceeding the sum of $750.
   (D)   Revised ordinances; custody and distribution. All the printed books
containing the revised ordinances shall be in the custody and keeping of the
Clerk, who shall deliver one copy thereof to each officer of the municipality
and to such other persons as the Board may direct. The President shall have
authority to extend to or reciprocate courtesies of other cities by presenting
to them a copy of the revised ordinances bound at the expense of the
municipality in such manner as to him or her may seem advisable.
(2000 Code, § 10.18)
§ 10.98 DEBTS DUE AND OWING THE VILLAGE.
   (A)   Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity (“debtor”) owing
any fine, penalty, cost, tax, user charge, fee, judgment, financial contractual
obligation or any other debt to the village or any person, partnership,
corporation or entity under the control of such debtor, shall not be entitled
to any village service, permit, license or other village action or approval
unless that debt is paid in full.
   (B)   This shall not limit any emergency village service such as police or
fire service to a debtor of the village.
(Ord. 4070, passed 10-4-2010)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this code or other ordinance of this
village for which another penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined
not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day the
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   There is hereby imposed a fee of $20 for bail processing against any
person arrested for violating a bailable village ordinance or a state or
federal law. For purposes of this section, a BAILABLE OFFENSE shall include any
offense for which a custodial arrest is made and the arrestee is brought to the
Village Police Department and is subsequently released on bond at the
Department station. This fee, however, shall not be charged to persons who are
transported to the county jail due to their inability to post bond.
(2000 Code, § 10.99) (Ord. 4167, passed 10-15-2012)
Cross-reference:
   Municipal Code Enforcement, see
Ch. 38
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance violations, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-
1.1
   Limitations on penalties, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
      
31.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS
      
32.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
33.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
34.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
35.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
      
36.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
37.   TAXATION
      
38.   MUNICIPAL CODE ENFORCEMENT
      
39.   VILLAGE POLICIES
      
40.   ETHICS
      
41.   FINES
CHAPTER 30: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Composition
   
30.02   Trustees; election, term and vacancies
   
30.03   Powers and duties
   
30.04   Compensation
Rules of Order and Procedure
   
30.15   Meetings
   
30.16   Presiding officer
   
30.17   Duties of members of the Council
   
30.18   Standing committees
   
30.19   Visitors
   
30.20   Conduct of meetings
   
30.21   Motions
   
30.22   Ordinances and resolutions
   
30.23   Privileges of the floor
   
30.24   Suspension of rules
   
30.25   Appeal from decisions of the presiding officer
   
30.26   Amendment of rules
Ordinances
   
30.40   Ordinances and rules to execute powers
   
30.41   Ordaining clause
   
30.42   Vote required; method of voting
   
30.43   Approval and disapproval by President
   
30.44   Publication requirements; effective date
   
30.45   Recordation
   
30.46   Revision
   
30.47   Adoption of codes and public records by reference
Standing Committees
   
30.60   Authority to establish
   
30.61   Members
   
30.62   Standing committees
   
30.63   Special committees
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 COMPOSITION.
   The Board of Trustees shall consist of the President and Trustees.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-5) (2000 Code, § 30.01)
§ 30.02 TRUSTEES; ELECTION, TERM AND VACANCIES.
   (A)   Except as provided in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-10, the electors of the village
shall elect six Trustees. The term of office of the Trustees shall be four
years and until their successors are elected and have qualified. Three Trustees
shall be elected at the village election in each odd-numbered year for a term
of four years.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-5)
   (B)   Whenever a vacancy in the office of a Trustee occurs during his or her
term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term at the next
general village election as provided in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50.
   (C)   The terms of elected municipal officers shall commence and the newly
elected officers shall be inaugurated at the first regular or special meetings
of the corporate authorities in the month of May, following the proclamation of
the results of the regular municipal election at which the officers were
elected.
(2000 Code, § 30.02)
Cross-reference:
   Oath requirement, see §
31.002(A) and (B)
   Qualifications for officers, see §
31.001
Statutory reference:
   Elections and primary elections to be conducted pursuant to state law, see
Illinois Election Code, 10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.
§ 30.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Trustees shall have the powers and shall perform
the same duties as the city council in cities. It shall pass ordinances,
resolutions and motions in the same manner as a city council. The President of
the Board of Trustees may exercise the same veto power and powers in 65 ILCS 5/
3.1-40-30, and with like effect, as the Mayor of a city.
      (2)   The Trustees may pass motions, resolutions and ordinances over the
President’s veto in like manner as the alderpersons of a city council.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-5)
   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall consist of the President and six Trustees.
It shall meet in accordance with the State Open Meetings Act, 5 ILCS 120/1 et
seq. It shall keep a journal of its own proceedings.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-5)
   (C)   The Board shall be the sole judge of the election to office of the
Trustees. It shall also be the sole judge of whether, under 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5,
Trustees are eligible to their offices. A court, however, shall not be
prohibited from hearing and determining a proceeding in quo warranto.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-10)
   (D)   The Board shall determine its own rules of proceeding and punish its
members for disorderly conduct. With the concurrence of two-thirds of the
Trustees then holding office, it may expel a Trustee from a meeting, but not a
second time for the same incident.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-15)
   (E)   (1)   (a)   The Board may prescribe, by ordinance, the times and
places of the Board meetings, and the manner in which special Board meetings
may be called.
         (b)   The President or any three Trustees may call special meetings of
the Board.
      (2)   In addition to any notice requirement prescribed by the Board,
public notice of meetings must be given as prescribed in 5 ILCS 120/2.02 and 5
ILCS 120/2.03 of the Open Meeting Act.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25)
(2000 Code, § 30.03) (Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 30.04 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   The compensation received by each member of the Village Board of
Trustees is hereby fixed at the sum of $15,000 per fiscal year or such sum as
is appropriate for any partial year served, paid on a bi-weekly basis.
   (B)   Each Trustee may receive reimbursement from the village for expenses
incurred by the member in attending committee meetings of the Board of Trustees
or for other expenses incurred by the Trustee in the course of performing
official duties, as approved by the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 30.04) (Ord. 1837, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 2004, passed 10-4-2004;
Ord. 4062, passed 8-2-2010)
RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE
§ 30.15 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held at Village
Hall, unless otherwise specified, on the third Monday of each month. The
meetings shall begin at 7:30 p.m. unless otherwise ordered at a regular
meeting.
   (B)   In every case where the regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, the
regular meeting may be held on the day following such holiday.
   (C)   Special meetings may be held at any time on call of the President or
of any three Trustees. Such call shall be made in writing, duly signed and
shall be presented to the Village Clerk at least 50 hours prior to the time
specified for such meeting. The Clerk shall immediately serve, or cause to be
served, written notice of such special meeting on all members of the Board of
Trustees. The written notice shall describe briefly the object of the special
meeting and shall be served, except in case of emergency, at least 48 hours
before the meeting. At a special meeting, no business other than that proposed
by the call shall be in order.
   (D)   In addition to any notice requirement prescribed by the Board of
Trustees, public notice of meetings must be given as prescribed in §§ 2.02 and
2.03 of the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.).
   (E)   All regular and special meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be
open to the public, except that a closed executive session can be declared for
purposes permitted by statute by a majority vote of the members of the Board
present. The presiding officer may invite such persons as may be required for
advice and information. During any executive session, a formal vote may not
take on any matter under discussion, except as to adjournment of the executive
session.
   (F)   News media so requesting shall be provided with the agenda for all
meetings of the Board of Trustees and its representatives shall be entitled to
attend all open meetings.
(2000 Code, § 30.20) (Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010; Ord. 4396, passed 8-19-2019)
§ 30.16 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The President shall be the presiding officer at all meetings of the
Board of Trustees. Except as provided in the Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et
seq.), he or she shall not vote on any ordinance, resolution or motion except
where the vote of the Board of Trustees has resulted in a tie; or where one-
half of the Board of Trustees elected have voted in favor of an ordinance,
resolution or motion even though there is no tie vote; or where a vote greater
than a majority of the Board of Trustees is required to adopt an ordinance,
resolution or motion. In each instance specified, the President shall vote.
Nothing in this section shall deprive an Acting President or President Pro Tem
from voting in his or her capacity as Trustee, but he or she shall not be
entitled to another vote in his or her capacity as Acting President or
President Pro Tem.
   (B)   The President shall nominate one Trustee at the commencement of each
fiscal year to act as the presiding officer of the meeting in the absence of
the President, and one alternate in the event of the unavailability of the
appointed Trustee, which Trustee shall perform the duties of the President as
presiding officer.
   (C)   The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum. The presiding
officer may speak to a subject before the Board of Trustees without
relinquishing the chair. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of
order, subject to appeal to the Board of Trustees. When two or more Trustees
request the floor, the presiding officer shall name the order in which they are
to be heard. In case of any disturbance or disorderly conduct, the presiding
officer shall have the power to have the chamber cleared of any or all
visitors.
(2000 Code, § 30.21) (Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 30.17 DUTIES OF MEMBERS OF THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   While the presiding officer is putting the question or while business
is being transacted, no Trustee shall leave the Board of Trustees’ chamber
except by consent of the presiding officer. No Trustee shall speak or offer a
motion without first addressing the chair and being recognized.
   (B)   In speaking during the discussion of any question, members of the
Board of Trustees shall confine their remarks to the question under debate,
avoiding personalities and refraining from impugning the motives of any other
member of the Board or the staff. Members of the Board of Trustees shall not
speak more than once upon any subject until other members of the Board who wish
to speak shall have relinquished the floor.
   (C)   A Trustee, when called to order by the presiding officer, shall
thereupon discontinue speaking on the order of the presiding officer, which
order shall be binding and conclusive, subject only to right of appeal as
provided in §
30.25.
   (D)   Every Trustee present when a question is stated shall vote thereon,
unless excused by the Board, or unless he or she has a personal interest in the
question.
(2000 Code, § 30.22) (Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 30.18 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Standing committees; listed. Standing committees of the Board of
Trustees shall be as follows:
      (1)   Administration and Finance Committee;
      (2)   Community Affairs/Customer Service (Housing and Human Relations);
      (3)   Education Commission;
      (4)   Community and Economic Development;
      (5)   Parks and Recreation Commission;
      (6)   Public Safety; and
      (7)   Public Works.
   (B)   Composition. Except for the Committee of the Whole, each standing
Committee shall consist of three Trustees with the President as an ex officio
member. The President shall assign Trustees to each Committee annually.
Standing Committee assignment shall be made following each election, but no
later than at the first regular meeting in June each year. Each Committee shall
enlist such assistance from other Trustees as the Committee may find desirable.
No Committee shall obligate the village for the expenditure of any money in
connection with its operation except with prior and proper authorization of the
Board of Trustees. The Committee shall keep the President aware of the
Committee activities and will report any policy matters to the President before
any action, publicity or opinions are presented to the public.
   (C)   Assignments. Assignments to the standing committees shall be made by
the Village President.
   (D)   Committee procedures.
      (1)   All committees shall hold meetings in accordance with the Open
Meetings Act.
      (2)   A copy of the agenda of each committee meeting shall be delivered
to the President along with a copy of the minutes of the meeting.
      (3)   The committee shall report on all matters under discussion upon
request of the President at any regular Board of Trustees meeting. Upon the
request of any two Trustees present, any report of a committee shall be
deferred, for final action thereon, to the next regular meeting of the Board
after the report is made.
      (4)   Any person who requests to address the committee shall be limited
to two minutes, unless otherwise directed by the committee Chairperson.
(2000 Code, § 30.23) (Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 30.19 VISITORS.
   Except during the time allotted for audience and visitors comments as
provided in §
30.23, no person other than a member of the Board of Trustees shall address
that body, except with the consent of the presiding officer.
(2000 Code, § 30.24) (Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 30.20 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS.
   (A)   Quorum. Four members of the Board of Trustees shall constitute a
quorum and the affirmative vote of a majority of Trustees present shall be
necessary to adopt any motion, resolution or ordinance, unless a greater number
is required by law. If a quorum is not present, the meeting shall thereby stand
adjourned and there may be no further discussion by the Trustees present. A
smaller number, however, may adjourn from time to time and may compel the
attendance of absentees, under penalties (including a fine for failure to
attend) as set forth by ordinance as may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Agendas. The Village President shall have the final authority
concerning the preparation, placement or removal of all items for the agenda
for all meetings of the Board of Trustees. The Village Clerk shall distribute
the printed agenda with all supporting documents not later than 48 hours before
the meeting. Priority of business shall follow the printed agenda unless
changed by the presiding officer, subject to appeal of the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Robert’s Rules of Order. The current edition of Robert’s Rules of
Order shall govern the proceedings of the Board of Trustees where these rules
of order and procedure are silent, and when not in conflict with statutes or
ordinances.
(Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 30.21 MOTIONS.
   (A)   No motion shall be debated unless it has been seconded. If any motion
or question contains two or more distinct propositions, the presiding officer
may have the same divided with the consent of the Board.
   (B)   After a motion or resolution is stated by the presiding officer, it
may be withdrawn from consideration by the maker and the seconder with the
consent of majority of the Board.
   (C)   When a blank is to be filled and different sum or times proposed, the
question shall be taken first on the least sum or the longest time.
   (D)   A motion to reconsider may be introduced by any member of the Board on
the prevailing side of the question at the same meeting at which the question
was voted upon or at the next regular meeting of the Board. A motion to
reconsider may only be presented at a special meeting at which there are
present at least as many members of the Board as were present when the original
vote was taken. A motion for reconsideration once having been made and decided
in the negative, shall not be renewed nor shall a motion to reconsider be
reconsidered. A motion to reconsider need not be seconded.
(Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 30.22 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   (A)   All ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced to the Board in
printed or written form.
   (B)   Any proposed ordinances may be prepared or reviewed by the Village
Attorney as directed by the Village President, Village Board or Village
Administrator.
   (C)   The Village Clerk or Assistant Village Clerk shall prepare copies of
all proposed ordinances and resolutions, together with copies of the
attachments and shall distribute these to the Board.
(Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 30.23 PRIVILEGES OF THE FLOOR.
   (A)   No persons, other than the presiding officer, the Trustees, village
officials or persons invited by the presiding officer, shall have the privilege
of the floor.
   (B)   Persons other than the presiding officer, Trustees and village
officials shall not be permitted to address the Board except upon introduction
by the presiding officer or during the audience portion of the meeting.
   (C)   The presiding officer may determine the length in time of the audience
portion of the meeting in his or her discretion depending upon the other
business to come before the Board as listed on the agenda; providing, however,
in no event shall such audience portion exceed 30 minutes. No person recognized
by the presiding officer during the audience portion may address the Board more
than once or speak for longer than two minutes, except with the unanimous
consent of all Board members present, including the Village President.
   (D)   The presiding officer may have any person disrupting the meeting or
speaking when not recognized removed from the meeting. Disrupted behavior shall
include, but not be limited to, use of profane language or slanderous language.
(Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 30.24 SUSPENSION OF RULES.
   Any provision of these rules not governed by state statutes or village
ordinances may be temporarily suspended at any meeting of the Board, by
affirmative vote of four of the members of the Board present.
(Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 30.25 APPEAL FROM DECISIONS OF THE PRESIDING OFFICER.
   Any Trustee may appeal to the Board from a ruling of the presiding officer.
If the appeal is seconded, the Trustee making the appeal may make a brief
statement of the reasons for the appeal, and the presiding officer may explain
the ruling briefly, but there shall be no debate on appeal and no other Trustee
shall participate in the discussion. The presiding officer shall then put the
question, “Shall the decision of the presiding officer be sustained?” If the
majority of the Trustees present vote “Aye”, the ruling of the presiding
officer is sustained, otherwise it is overruled.
(Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
§ 30.26 AMENDMENT OF RULES.
   These rules may be amended or new rules adopted by an affirmative vote of
five members of the Village Board.
(Ord. 4047, passed 6-21-2010)
ORDINANCES
§ 30.40 ORDINANCES AND RULES TO EXECUTE POWERS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees may pass all ordinances and make all rules and
regulations proper or necessary, to carry into effect the powers granted to
municipalities, with such fines or penalties as may be deemed proper. No fine
or penalty, however, except civil penalties provided for failure to make
returns or to pay any taxes levied by the village shall exceed $750 and no
imprisonment authorized in 65 ILCS 5/1-2-9 for failure to pay any fine, penalty
or cost shall exceed six months for one offense.
   (B)   A penalty imposed for violation of an ordinance may include, or
consist of, a requirement that the defendant do one or both of the following:
      (1)   Complete an education program, except that a holder of a valid
commercial driver’s license who commits a vehicle weight or size restriction
violation shall not be required to complete an education program under this
section; and
      (2)   Perform some reasonable public service work such as, but not
limited to, the picking up of litter in public parks or along public highways
or the maintenance of public facilities.
   (C)   A default in the payment of a fine or penalty or any installment of a
fine or penalty may be collected by any means authorized for the collection of
monetary judgments. The Municipal Attorney of the municipality in which the
fine or penalty was imposed may retain attorneys and private collection agents
for the purpose of collecting any default in payment of any fine or penalty or
installment of that fine or penalty. Any fees or costs incurred by the
municipality with respect to attorneys or private collection agents retained by
the Village Attorney under this section shall be charged to the offender.
   (D)   A low-income individual required to complete an education program
under this section who provides proof of eligibility for the federal earned
income tax credit under § 32 of the Internal Revenue Code or the state earned
income tax credit under § 212 of the Illinois Income Tax Act shall not be
required to pay any fee for participating in a required education program.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-1) (2000 Code, § 30.40)
§ 30.41 ORDAINING CLAUSE.
   The ordaining clause of ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
____________________________.”
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-2) (2000 Code, § 30.41)
§ 30.42 VOTE REQUIRED; METHOD OF VOTING.
   (A)   The passage of all ordinances for whatever purpose, and of any
resolution or motion to create any liability against the village or for the
expenditure or appropriation of its money, shall require the concurrence of a
majority of all members then holding office on the Board of Trustees, including
the President, unless otherwise expressly provided by this code or any other
act governing the passage of any ordinance, resolution or motion; provided
that, where the Board consists of an odd number of Trustees, the vote of the
majority of the Trustees shall be sufficient to pass an ordinance. The passage
of an ordinance, resolution or motion to sell any school property shall require
the concurrence of three-fourths of all Trustees then holding office.
   (B)   The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of
the designated ordinances, resolutions or motions and recorded in the journal
of the Board. In addition, the Board of Trustees at any meeting may by
unanimous consent take a single vote by yeas and nays on the several questions
of the passage of any two or more of the designated ordinances, orders,
resolutions or motions placed together for voting purposes in a single group,
which single vote shall be entered separately in the journal under the
designation “omnibus vote”, and in such event the Clerk may enter the words
“omnibus vote” or “consent agenda” in the journal in each case in lieu of
entering the names of the members of the Board voting “yea” and of those voting
“nay” on the passage of each of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions
and motions included in such omnibus group or consent agenda. The taking of
such single or omnibus vote and such entries of the words “omnibus vote” or
“consent agenda” in the journal shall be a sufficient compliance with the
requirements of this section to all intents and purposes and with like effect
as if the vote in each case had been taken separately by yeas and nays on the
question of the passage of each ordinance, order, resolution and motion
included in such omnibus group, and separately recorded in the journal.
   (C)   Likewise, the yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the
passage of any other resolution or motion at the request of any Trustee and
shall be recorded in the journal.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40) (2000 Code, § 30.42)
§ 30.43 APPROVAL AND DISAPPROVAL BY PRESIDENT.
   All resolutions and motions which create any liability against the village
or which provide for the expenditure or appropriation of its money, or to sell
any village or school property, and all ordinances passed by the Board of
Trustees, shall be deposited with the Clerk. Except as provided in 65 ILCS 5/4-
1-1 et seq. and 5-1-1 et seq., if the President approves of an ordinance or
resolution, the President shall sign it. Those ordinances, resolutions and
motions which he or she disapproves shall be returned to the Board of Trustees,
with his or her written objections, at the next regular meeting of the Board
occurring not less than five days after their passage. The President may
disapprove of any one or more sums appropriated in any ordinance, resolution or
motion making an appropriation, and, if so, the remainder shall be effective.
However, the President may disapprove entirely of an ordinance, resolution or
motion making an appropriation. If the President fails to return any ordinance
or any specified resolution or motion with his or her written objections within
the designated time, it shall become effective despite the absence of his or
her signature.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-45) (2000 Code, § 30.43)
§ 30.44 PUBLICATION REQUIREMENTS; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   All ordinances imposing any fine, penalty, imprisonment or forfeiture,
or making any appropriation, shall be printed or published in book or pamphlet
form, published by authority of the Board of Trustees, or be published at least
once, within 30 days after passage, in one or more newspapers published in the
village, or if no newspaper is published therein, then in one or more
newspapers with a general circulation within the village. If there is an error
in printing, the publishing requirement of this section shall be satisfied if
those portions of the ordinance that were erroneously printed are republished,
correctly, within 30 days after the original publication that contained the
error. The fact that an error occurred in publication shall not affect the
effective date of the ordinance so published. If the error in printing is not
corrected within 30 days after the date of the original publication that
contained the error, as provided in the preceding sentence, the corporate
authorities may by ordinance declare the ordinance that was erroneously
published to be nevertheless valid and in effect no sooner than the tenth day
after the date of the original publication, notwithstanding the error in
publication, and shall order the original ordinance to be published once more
within 30 days after the passage of the validating ordinance.
   (B)   Except as provided in 65 ILCS 5/1-2-4, no such ordinance shall take
effect until ten days after it is so published. However, ordinances
establishing rules and regulations for the construction of buildings or any
part thereof, or for the development or operation of camps accommodating
persons in house trailers, house cars, cabins or tents, where such rules and
regulations have been previously printed in book or pamphlet form, may by their
terms provide for the adoption of such rules and regulations or portions
thereof by reference thereto without further printing, or publication, if not
less than one copy of such rules and regulations in book or pamphlet form has
been filed in the office of the Clerk for use and examination by the public at
least 30 days prior to the adoption thereof.
   (C)   All other ordinances, resolutions and motions shall take effect upon
their passage unless they otherwise provide.
   (D)   Anything in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, any
ordinance which contains a statement of its urgency in the preamble or body
thereof, other than an ordinance relating to finance, appropriations or taxes,
adopted under 65 ILCS 5/8-1-1 et seq. may take effect immediately upon its
passage provided that the Board of Trustees, by a vote of two-thirds of all the
members then holding office, so direct. The decision of the Board of Trustees
as to the urgency of any ordinance shall not be subject to judicial review
except for an abuse of discretion.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-4) (2000 Code, § 30.45)
§ 30.45 RECORDATION.
   The Clerk shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose, all
ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees. Immediately following each
ordinance, the Clerk shall make a memorandum of the date of the passage and of
the publication or posting, where required, of the ordinance. This record and
memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage and of the publication or posting of ordinances.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-5) (2000 Code, § 30.46)
§ 30.46 REVISION.
   The President may appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Board
of Trustees, one or more competent persons to prepare and submit to the Board
of Trustees for adoption or rejection, an ordinance to revise the village
ordinances. The compensation for this revision shall be fixed by the Board of
Trustees and paid out of the village treasury.
(65 ILCS 5/1-2-3) (2000 Code, § 30.47)
§ 30.47 ADOPTION OF CODES AND PUBLIC RECORDS BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PUBLIC RECORD. Any village, state or federal statute, rule or regulation
and any ordinance or resolution of the county in which the village is located,
adopted prior to the exercise by any village of the authority to incorporate by
reference herein granted; however, this definition shall not include the
village ordinances, rules or regulations of any village except those of the
village which is exercising the right to incorporate by reference, nor shall
this definition include the state laws, rules or regulations of any state other
than the State of Illinois.
      PUBLISHED. Printed, lithographed, multigraphed, mimeographed or otherwise
reproduced.
      REGULATIONS. Any published compilation of rules and regulations which
have been prepared by nationally recognized technical trade or service
associations and shall include specifically building codes; plumbing codes;
electrical wiring codes; fire prevention codes; codes for the slaughtering,
processing and selling of meats and meat products for human consumption; and
codes for the production, pasteurizing and sale of milk and milk products.
(65 ILCS 5/1-3-1)
   (B)   The village may adopt by reference, as criteria for the issuance of
construction, reconstruction, alteration or installation permits, all or part
of the provisions of regulations, without setting forth those provisions in
full, if at least one copy of those regulations is filed in the office of the
Clerk and is kept available for public use, inspection and examination. The
village may likewise adopt by reference the provisions of public records, if at
least three copies of the public record are filed with and kept on file in the
office of the Clerk as provided for regulations. The filing requirement is not
deemed to be complied with unless the required copy of regulations or copies of
the public record are filed with the Clerk for a period of 30 days before the
adoption of the ordinance that incorporates the regulations or public record by
reference. Regulations or a public record of a jurisdiction other than the
state may not be adopted by reference covering any subject matter for which
standards are available in any public record of the state.
(65 ILCS 5/1-3-2)
   (C)   The codes which have been adopted by the village pursuant to division
(B) above are set forth by ordinance as may be amended from time to time.
(2000 Code, § 30.48)
Statutory reference:
   Incorporation by reference of technical codes and public records, see 50
ILCS 220/1 through 7
STANDING COMMITTEES
§ 30.60 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees may have one or more standing committees with
the powers, functions and duties established by ordinance.
   (B)   The standing committees which have been established and their duties
are set forth in §
30.62 of this code.
(2000 Code, § 30.60)
§ 30.61 MEMBERS.
   The members of each standing committee shall be appointed from time to time
by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 30.61)
§ 30.62 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Standing committees shall be appointed by the President from the
members of the Board of Trustees, by and with the advice and consent of the
Board, at or before the second regular meeting in each fiscal year, or as soon
thereafter as may be practicable. Should the Board of Trustees reject
appointments for the standing committees as presented by the President, he or
she shall resubmit a second recommendation at the next regular meeting of the
Board of Trustees. Should the Board of Trustees reject the second
recommendation of the President, the Board of Trustees may at that time propose
from its own members names of those who will serve on the committees by a
majority vote of the membership of the Board. In the event of a tie, the
Village President shall vote to break the tie. The Board of Trustees may add a
third member from its membership to any committee as it deems necessary.
Vacancies, if any occur, shall be filled in the same way.
   (B)   Standing committees shall investigate, study, report and recommend to
the full Board of Trustees on matters pertaining to legislative action and
executive policy at the request of the President or Village Administrator and
shall have no executive or administrative authority. All actions of the
standing committees shall be limited to the matters or activities with which
the particular committee may be concerned, as established herein under division
(C) below.
   (C)   There shall be six standing committees having responsibilities as
follows.
      (1)   The Community Affairs and Economic Development Committee shall be
responsible for matters pertaining to public relations, information, community
relations, intercommunity relations and other public and service agencies. It
shall be the liaison with the Library Board, Historical Society, school
districts and civic organizations.
      (2)   The Finance and Administration Committee shall be responsible for
matters pertaining to village financial policy, accounting practices,
investments, auditing, insurance, personnel administration, budget preparation
and business licenses.
      (3)   The Public Services - Public Works and Parks and Recreation
Committee shall be responsible for matters pertaining to streets, sewers,
street lights, sidewalks, water system, storm drainage, public buildings, cable
television system, municipal waste management and miscellaneous village
property, as well as matters pertaining to park site development, recreation
programming and community beautification concerns. It shall be the liaison with
the Citizens’ Advisory Board.
      (4)   The Regulatory Services - Building, Planning and Engineering
Committee shall be responsible for matters pertaining to community development,
land use, comprehensive planning, development regulations and building. It
shall be the liaison with the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board and regional
agencies.
      (5)   The Public Safety - Police, Fire Committee shall be responsible for
matters pertaining to the police and fire protection, paramedic service,
traffic control, construction codes and emergency preparedness. It shall be the
liaison with the Fire and Police Commission.
      (6)   The Health, Environmental and Capital Planning Committee shall be
responsible for matters of general health concerns and environmental issues to
provide, maintain and ensure a healthful living environment in the village, and
also for the consideration, preparation and implementation of long range
capital planning.
   (D)   Each committee shall consist of two Trustees, unless otherwise deemed
necessary, one of whom shall be designated by the President as Chairperson,
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, and the President who
shall, ex officio, be a member of each committee. Should the Board of Trustees
reject the designated Chairperson for each standing committee as presented by
the President, he or she shall resubmit a second recommendation at the next
regular meeting of the Board of Trustees. Should the Board of Trustees reject
the second recommendation of the President, the Board of Trustees may at that
time propose from its own membership a Chairperson by a majority vote of the
Board. In the event of a tie vote, the Village President shall vote to break
the tie.
(2000 Code, § 30.62) (Ord. 1102, passed 5-18-1981; Ord. 1167, passed 1-17-1983;
Ord. 1452, passed 10-1-1990; Ord. 2033, passed 5-16-2005)
§ 30.63 SPECIAL COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Special committees shall be created by the Board of Trustees for such
purposes as it may deem necessary.
   (B)   Members of any special committee shall be appointed by the President
from the membership of the Board of Trustees, with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees. Should the Board of Trustees reject recommendations for
special committees as presented by the President, he or she shall resubmit a
second recommendation at the next regular meeting of the Board of Trustees.
Should the Board of Trustees reject the second recommendation of the President,
the Board of Trustees may at that time propose from its own membership names of
those who will serve on the special committees by a majority vote of the Board.
In the event of a tie vote, the Village President will vote to break the tie.
The Board of Trustees may add a third member from its membership to any special
committee as it deems necessary.
   (C)   Special committees, on the acceptance of their final reports, shall,
unless otherwise ordered by the Board of Trustees, be discharged without formal
vote of the Board.
(2000 Code, § 30.63) (Ord. 967, passed 5-15-1978)
CHAPTER 31: VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Qualifications
   
31.002   Oath; bond
   
31.003   Further duties
   
31.004   Compensation
   
31.005   Removal from office
   
31.006   Resignation
   
31.007   Date of inauguration of newly elected officials
   
31.008   Indemnification of village officials
President
   
31.020   Election; term; vacancy
   
31.021   Powers and duties
   
31.022   Compensation
Clerk
   
31.035   Election; term; vacancy
   
31.036   Duties
   
31.037   Compensation
Treasurer
   
31.050   Appointment and term
   
31.051   Duties
Village Administrator
   
31.065   Creation of office; tenure
   
31.066   Appointment; absence or disability
   
31.067   Bond and oath
   
31.068   Powers and duties of the Village Administrator
   
31.069   Powers and duties as to village administration
Deputy Village Administrator
   
31.080   Creation of office; tenure
   
31.081   Powers and duties
Director of Community Development
   
31.095   Office created; appointment
   
31.096   Duties
   
31.097   Compensation
   
31.098   Village Engineer
Economic Development Director
   
31.110   Office created
   
31.111   Duties
Other Officials
   
31.125   Appointment of other village officials
   
31.126   Duties and fees; bond
   
31.127   Certificate of appointment
   
31.128   Duty to successor
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   A person is not eligible for an elective village office unless that
person is a qualified elector of the village and has resided in the village at
least one year next preceding the election or appointment, except as provided
in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-20-25, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-75(b), 65 ILCS 5/5-2-2 or 65 ILCS 5/5-
2-11. A person is not eligible for an elective village office if that person is
in arrears in the payment of a tax or other indebtedness due to the village or
has been convicted in any court located in the United States of any infamous
crime, bribery, perjury or other felony.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5(a),(b))
   (B)   No person shall be eligible for any appointive village office unless
that person is a qualified elector of the village or otherwise provided by law.
The residency requirements do not apply, however, to village engineers, health
officers, attorneys or other officers who require technical training or
knowledge, to an appointed Village Treasurer, or to an appointed Village
Collector (unless the village has designated by ordinance that the Village
Clerk shall hold the office of Collector). The village may adopt ordinances
that allow its firefighters and police officers to reside outside the corporate
limits of the village both at the time of employment and while serving as a
firefighter or police officer.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-6)
(2000 Code, § 31.01)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of President or Trustees to other offices prohibited, see 50
ILCS 105/2
§ 31.002 OATH; BOND.
   (A)   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all
village officers, whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe the
following oath:
      “I do solemnly swear that I will support the Constitution of the United
States, and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and that I will
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of                according to
the best of my ability.”
   (B)   This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the Clerk.
   (C)   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all
village officers, except Trustees, shall execute a bond with security, to be
approved by the Board of Trustees. The bond shall be payable to the village in
the penal sums set forth by ordinance as may be amended from time to time,
conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office and the
payment of all money received by such officer, according to law and also the
ordinances of the village. Such bond may provide that the obligation of the
sureties shall not extend to any loss sustained by the insolvency, failure or
closing of any bank or savings and loan association organized and operating
either under the laws of the state or the United States wherein such officer
has placed funds in his or her custody, if the bank or savings and loan
association has been approved by the Board of Trustees as a depository for
these funds. The Treasurer’s bond shall be an amount of money that is not less
than three times the latest federal census population or any subsequent census
figure used for motor fuel tax purposes. These bonds shall be filed with the
Clerk, except the bond of the Clerk, which shall be filed with the Treasurer.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25, 3.1-10-30) (2000 Code, § 31.02)
§ 31.003 FURTHER DUTIES.
   Every officer shall perform such duties, in addition to those which may be
prescribed by law, and be subject to such other rules and regulations, as the
Board of Trustees may provide by ordinance.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40) (2000 Code, § 31.03)
§ 31.004 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   All village officers, except as otherwise provided, shall receive the
salary or other compensation that is fixed by ordinance. Salaries or other
compensation shall not be increased or diminished, so as to take effect during
the term of any elected village officer. The salaries, fees or other
compensation of any appointed village officer, not including those appointed to
fill vacancies in elective offices, may be increased but not diminished so as
to take effect during the term for which the officer was appointed. (65 ILCS 5/
3.1-50-5)
   (B)   The Board of Trustees may fix the salary of all village officers and
employees, in the annual appropriation ordinance or budget ordinance. They may
fix the salary of all officers who are elected for a definite term in an
ordinance other than the appropriation or budget ordinance. Salaries which are
fixed in the annual appropriation ordinance shall neither be increased nor
diminished during the fiscal year for which the appropriation is made. Salaries
which are fixed by ordinance for those officers who are elected for a definite
term shall neither be increased nor diminished during that term, and shall be
fixed 180 days before the beginning of the terms of the officers whose
compensation is to be fixed.
   (C)   In addition, effective May 1, 2023, every elected officer shall be
able to receive the same health and life insurance benefits received by
regular, full-time management and unrepresented village employees, as that may
be changed from time to time. Elected officials opting to receive this benefit
must contribute toward the payment of insurance premiums at the same rate as
regular, full-time management and unrepresented village employees covered by
the village health and life insurance plan(s).
(2000 Code, § 31.04) (Ord. 2005, passed 10-4-2004; Ord. 2021, passed 3-21-2005;
Ord. 4367, passed 6-18-2018; Ord. 4459, passed 6-21-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Compensation of President, see §
31.022
   Compensation of Trustees, see §
30.04
§ 31.005 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   Except where otherwise provided by statute, the President may remove any
officer appointed by him or her under 65 ILCS 5 and this chapter, on any
written charge, whenever he or she is of the opinion that the interests of the
village demand removal, but he or she shall report the reasons for the removal
to the Board of Trustees at a meeting to be held not less than five nor more
than ten days after the removal. If the President fails or refuses to report to
the Board of Trustees the reasons for the removal, or if the Board of Trustees
by a two-thirds vote of all its members authorized by law to be elected,
disapproves of the removal, the officer thereupon shall be restored to the
office from which he or she was removed. The vote shall be by yeas and nays,
which shall be entered upon the Board’s journal. Upon restoration, the officer
shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be
removed a second time for the same offense.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-10) (2000 Code, § 31.05)
§ 31.006 RESIGNATION.
   Any appointed officer of the village may resign from his or her office. If
an appointed officer resigns, he or she shall continue in office until a
successor has been chosen and has qualified.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5(d)) (2000 Code, § 31.06)
§ 31.007 DATE OF INAUGURATION OF NEWLY ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   The term of all elected municipal officers shall commence, and the newly
elected officers shall be inaugurated, at the first regular or special meeting
of May following the proclamation of the results of the regular municipal
election at which the officers were elected.
(2000 Code, § 31.07) (Ord. 1813, passed 6-4-2001)
§ 31.008 INDEMNIFICATION OF VILLAGE OFFICIALS.
   (A)   To the fullest extent permitted by the Constitution of the State of
Illinois of 1970 and all other applicable laws, the President and members of
the Village Board shall be indemnified, defended and held harmless by the
village from and against all liabilities, expenses of defense and
investigation, judgments and amounts paid in settlement which may be imposed
upon or reasonably incurred or paid by such official in connection with or
resulting from any claim made against him or her, or any action, suit,
proceeding or investigation in which he or she may be involved, by reason of
being or having been elected or appointed to the Village Board as such official
of the village and as a result of conduct, within the scope of the duties of
office, whether or not he or she continues to be such official at the time of
such claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation.
   (B)   The indemnity provided for in division (A) above shall not extend to
any of the following:
      (1)   Any liability or cost with respect to any matter as to which such
official is finally adjudged to be guilty of bad faith or actual malice or
willful and wanton misconduct in the performance of the duties of such
official;
      (2)   Any payment, expense or cost arising out of a settlement of any
claim, action, suit or proceeding, unless:
         (a)   Such settlement shall be approved by the court having
jurisdiction over such claim, action, suit or proceeding, with express
knowledge of the existence of the indemnification provided hereby; or
         (b)   Such settlement shall have been made upon the written opinion of
the village’s Attorney or independent legal counsel to the effect that there is
no reasonable ground for any finding of bad faith or of actual malice or
willful and wanton misconduct on the part of such official and that the
anticipated cost of such settlement will not substantially exceed the estimated
cost and expense of defending such claim, action, suit or proceeding to a final
conclusion.
      (3)   (a)   Any claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation in
respect of which such official has failed to deliver notice to the village as
provided in this division (B)(3). NOTICE, for the purposes of this division (B)
(3), means a written notice signed by such official and identifying, in
reasonable detail, the particular claim, action, suit, proceeding or
investigation and the date upon and manner in which such official first learned
of the pendency of such claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation.
         (b)   It shall be sufficient delivery of the notice if the notice
shall be mailed by registered mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the village,
Village Hall, attention: President; provided such mailing takes place no later
than the first of the following to occur:
            1.   Twenty days after the date upon which such official first
learned of the pendency of such claim, action, suit, proceeding or
investigation; or
            2.   Twenty days prior to the date upon which any response to the
claim, action, suit, proceeding or investigation is required by law.
      (4)   Any proceeding brought by the village or any liability or judgment
payable to the village itself; and
      (5)   The cost of independent legal representation in any such action,
suit or proceeding if the village offers or otherwise indicates its willingness
to provide a legal defense with respect to such claim, action, suit, proceeding
or investigation.
   (C)   In the event the village shall not have employed independent legal
counsel to have charge of the defense of any such claim, action, suit,
proceeding or investigation or such claim, action, suit, proceeding or
investigation is asserted against both the village and such official, and such
official shall have reasonably concluded that there may be defenses available
to him or her which are different from or additional to those available to the
village (in which case the village shall not have the right to direct the
defense of such action on behalf of such official), legal and other expenses
incurred by such official shall be borne by the village.
   (D)   The foregoing rights of indemnification shall apply to any criminal
action or proceeding, if the indemnified person had no reasonable cause to
believe the conduct (which must be within the scope of the duties of office)
was unlawful. The termination of any action or proceeding by judgment or
settlement, conviction or upon a plea of nolo contendere or its equivalent
shall not of itself create a presumption that the person did not act in good
faith and in a manner reasonably believed to be in or not opposed to best
interests of the village, and with respect to any criminal action or
proceeding, had reasonable cause to believe that the conduct was unlawful.
   (E)   The foregoing rights of indemnification shall be in addition to any
other rights to which such official may otherwise be entitled as a matter of
law.
(Ord. 4048, passed 6-21-2010)
PRESIDENT
§ 31.020 ELECTION; TERM; VACANCY.
   (A)   As set forth in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5, the President shall be elected by
the electors of the village at a general village election held therein.
   (B)   As set forth in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-10, the President shall hold his or
her office for a term of four years and until his or her successor is elected
and has qualified. The four-year term for President may be changed to two years
pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-65.
   (C)   Whenever a vacancy in the office of President occurs during his or her
term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term in the manner
provided in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-55. During the period from
the time that the vacancy occurs until a President is elected, and has
qualified, the vacancy may be filled by the appointment of an Acting President
by the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 31.20)
Cross-reference:
   Commencement of term, see §
30.02(C)
§ 31.021 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   As set forth in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-5, the President of the village shall
be President of the Board of Trustees thereof and shall preside at all meetings
of the Board. He or she shall devote to the duties of his or her office
whatever time the faithful discharge thereof may require.
   (B)   The President shall perform all the duties which are prescribed by
law, including the municipal code and village ordinances, and shall take care
that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed. The President from time
to time may, and annually shall, give the Board of Trustees information
relative to the affairs of the village, and may recommend for its consideration
measures as he or she believes expedient.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5)
   (C)   The President shall have the power to administer oaths and
affirmations upon all lawful occasions.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-20)
   (D)   The President at all times may examine and inspect the books, records
and papers of any agent, employee or officer of the village.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-20)
   (E)   The President may designate in writing another person to affix the
signature of the President to any written instrument or instruments required to
be signed by the President. The President shall send written notice of this
designation to the Board of Trustees, stating the name of the person whom he or
she has selected and what instrument or instruments the person will have
authority to sign. A written signature of the President executed by the person
so designated, with the signature of the person so designated underneath, shall
be attached to the notice. The notice, with the signatures attached, shall be
recorded in the journal of the Board and then filed with the Village Clerk.
When the signature of the President is placed on a written instrument at the
direction of the President in the specified manner, the instrument or
instruments, in all respects, shall be as binding on the village as if signed
by the President in person.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-30)
   (F)   If the President is temporarily absent because of an incapacity to
perform official duties, but the incapacity does not create a vacancy in the
office, the Board of Trustees shall elect one of their members to act as
President Pro Tem. The President Pro Tem, during this absence or disability,
shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the President
but shall not be entitled to vote both as President Pro Tem and as Trustee. In
the absence of the President, Acting President and President Pro Tem, the Board
of Trustees may elect one of their members to act as temporary Chairperson. The
temporary Chairperson shall have only the powers of a presiding officer and a
right to vote only in the capacity as Trustee on any ordinance, resolution or
motion.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35)
(2000 Code, § 31.21)
Statutory reference:
   Duties as conservator of the peace, see 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25
§ 31.022 COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the Village President is hereby fixed at the sum of $15,000
per fiscal year or such sum as is appropriate for any partial year served, paid
on a bi-weekly basis.
(2000 Code, § 31.22) (Ord. 1837, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 2004, passed 10-4-2004;
Ord. 4062, passed 8-2-2010)
CLERK
§ 31.035 ELECTION; TERM; VACANCY.
   At every other election for Trustees, a Clerk shall also be elected who
shall hold office for a four-year term. Whenever a vacancy in the office of a
Clerk elected under this section occurs during the term, the vacancy shall be
filled for the remainder of the term at the next general village election as
provided by 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50. During the period from the time that the
vacancy occurs until a Clerk is elected, as provided in this section, and has
qualified, the vacancy may be filled by the appointment of an Acting Clerk by
the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-90)
(2000 Code, § 31.35)
Cross-reference:
   Commencement of term, see §
30.02(C)
§ 31.036 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Clerk shall keep the corporate seal, to be provided by the Board
of Trustees, and all papers belonging to the village the custody and control of
which are not given to other officers. The Clerk shall attend all meetings of
the Board of Trustees, and keep a full record of its proceedings in the
journal. The record of those proceedings shall be made available for public
inspection within ten days after being approved or accepted by the Board of
Trustees as the official minutes of their proceedings. Copies of all papers
duly filed in the Clerk’s office, and transcripts from the journals and other
records and files of the Clerk’s office, certified by the Clerk under the
corporate seal, shall be evidence in all courts in the same manner as if the
originals were produced.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90)
   (B)   The Clerk shall perform such duties, in addition to those which may be
prescribed by law, and be subject to such other rules and regulations, as the
Board of Trustees may provide by ordinance.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40)
   (C)   The Clerk shall appoint the various clerks and subordinates in his or
her office which the Board of Trustees may authorize, and shall be held
responsible, severally, for the fidelity of all persons so appointed by him or
her. This power, however, is subject to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/10-1-1 et
seq. The power of the Clerk is also subject to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/3.1-
30-10.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-45)
   (D)   The Clerk shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations upon
all lawful occasions.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-20)
(2000 Code, § 31.36)
Statutory reference:
   Clerk authorized to hold office of Comptroller or of Collector, see 65 ILCS
5/3.1-35-115, 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-130 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-135
§ 31.037 COMPENSATION.
   The salary of the Municipal Clerk is hereby fixed at the sum of $20,000 per
fiscal year or such sum as is appropriate for any partial year served, paid on
a bi-weekly basis.
(2000 Code, § 31.37) (Ord. 1837, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 2004, passed 10-4-2004;
Ord. 4062, passed 8-2-2010)
TREASURER
§ 31.050 APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
   There is hereby created the office of Village Treasurer, who shall be
appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, as provided by statute. The term of office of the Village Treasurer
shall not exceed that of the Village President.
(2000 Code, § 31.40) (Ord. 4148, passed 3-12-2012)
§ 31.051 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall perform such lawful duties as may be
prescribed by ordinance or otherwise by the Board of Trustees or Village
Administrator. He or she shall pay out money only on vouchers, bills or orders
properly approved by the Village Board. All warrants must be signed by the
President and countersigned by the Clerk stating the particular find or
appropriation to which the same is chargeable and the person to whom payable.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall deposit the village funds in such
depositories as may be selected from time to time as provided by law.
   (C)   The Village Treasurer shall keep records showing all money received
and paid by him or her showing the source from which it is received and the
purpose for which it is paid, and showing the financial status of the village.
(2000 Code, § 31.41) (Ord. 4148, passed 3-12-2012)
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
§ 31.065 CREATION OF OFFICE; TENURE.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Village Administrator, an
administrative office of the village.
   (B)   The Village Administrator shall be appointed by the President with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 31.50) (Ord. 1132, passed 3-15-1982; Ord. 4000, passed 5-11-2009;
Ord. 4001, passed 5-11-2009)
§ 31.066 APPOINTMENT; ABSENCE OR DISABILITY.
   (A)   The Village President shall appoint the Village Administrator with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. In making the appointment, the
President shall consider the executive and administrative qualifications and
experience of each applicant. At the time of appointment, the person so
appointed shall not be required to be a resident of the village.
   (B)   During the absence or disability of the Village Administrator, the
President may appoint a qualified person to act as Village Administrator Pro
Tempore to perform the duties of this office or may direct the Deputy Village
Administrator to act as Village Administrator Pro Tempore to perform the duties
of this office.
(2000 Code, § 31.51) (Ord. 1132, passed 3-15-1982; Ord. 4000, passed 5-11-2009;
Ord. 4001, passed 5-11-2009)
§ 31.067 BOND AND OATH.
   (A)   Before entering on the duties of his or her office, the Village
Administrator shall furnish a surety bond in the amount of $75,000 approved by
the Board of Trustees, this bond to be conditioned on the faithful performance
of his or her duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the village.
   (B)   Before entering on the duties of his or her office, the Village
Administrator shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-
25.
(2000 Code, § 31.52) (Ord. 1132, passed 3-15-1982)
§ 31.068 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Village Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of
the village and shall be responsible to the President and Board of Trustees for
the administration and operation of the affairs and all of the departments of
the village.
   (B)   He or she shall attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees unless
excused therefrom by the Board of Trustees. He or she shall have the privilege
of taking part in the discussion of all matters coming before the Board of
Trustees and shall be entitled to notice of all meetings, regular and special,
of the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   He or she shall make investigations into the affairs of the village or
any department or division thereof and shall investigate all complaints in
relation to matters concerning village services and village administration.
   (D)   He or she shall devote his or her entire time to the discharge of
official duties.
   (E)   He or she shall be responsible to respond to and advise the Village
President and Board of Trustees on issues affecting any and all aspects of the
village to the best of his or her ability and competence.
   (F)   To the extent required by ordinance, he or she shall advise and
consult with the Village President regarding hiring, assignment, promotion and
firing of employees in all departments except police and fire.
   (G)   He or she shall perform all other duties required of him or her by the
Board of Trustees, consistent with the village ordinances or state law.
   (H)   The Village Administrator and/or his designee shall have the authority
to administer policies and procedures for purposes of determining and
administering benefits issued by the village pursuant to the Public Safety
Employee Benefits Act (820 ILCS 320/1 et. seq.) ("PSEBA"). He or she will have
the authority to create the necessary application and other documentation
necessary to administer the PSEBA policies and procedures.
(2000 Code, § 31.53) (Ord. 1132, passed 3-15-1982; Ord. 4001, passed 5-11-2009;
Ord. 4149, passed 3-12-2012; Ord. 4209, passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 4397, passed 8-
19-2019)
§ 31.069 POWERS AND DUTIES AS TO VILLAGE ADMINISTRATION.
   In addition to the duties outlined in §
31.068, the Village Administrator shall perform the duties herein provided.
   (A)   The Village Administrator shall be the chief administrative officer of
the village and shall be responsible to the President and to the Board of
Trustees for the administration and operation of all the affairs and the
departments of the village. As the administrative officer, he or she shall have
the administration and control of all matters and things pertaining to the
operation and maintenance of the properties of the village and all of the
departments of the village, including, but not limited to the Department of
Public Works, the Fire Department, the Police Department, the Water Department,
the Health Department, the Community Development Department and the general
offices of the village. He or she shall also have supervision of those
administrative agencies, departments and officers as may be hereafter created
by the Board of Trustees, unless the administration and control of these
departments and officers is expressly delegated elsewhere. He or she shall
perform his or her duties in conformity with the rules of the Police and Fire
Commission.
   (B)   Specifically, but not in limitation of the above, he or she shall have
the following additional powers and duties.
      (1)   The Village Administrator shall make all necessary purchases of
supplies and equipment for all departments of the village. For that purpose, he
or she is authorized to make expenditures not to exceed $20,000 without
preliminary authorization by the Board of Trustees; however, all expenditures
and payments, regardless of amount, shall be subject to the confirmation or
approval of the Board of Trustees and to the limitations imposed by the
adoption of a budget or special appropriation.
      (2)   He or she shall attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees unless
excused therefrom by the Board of Trustees, except when his or her removal is
under consideration by the Board of Trustees. He or she shall have the
privilege of taking part in the discussion of all matters coming before the
Board of Trustees and shall be entitled to notice of all meetings, regular and
special, of the Board of Trustees.
      (3)   He or she shall make investigations into the affairs of the village
or any department or division thereof and shall investigate all complaints in
relation to matters concerning village services and village administration.
      (4)   He or she shall have the power to appoint and to discharge any
employee of the village exclusive of employees and officers of the Police
Department and exclusive of regular firefighters employed on a full-time basis,
and as to said excluded employees he or she shall make his or her
recommendations to the Police and Fire Commission. Upon discharging any
employee he or she shall submit to the Board of Trustees at the next meeting
following such removal a statement concerning said removal and the reasons
therefor.
      (5)   He or she shall devote his or her entire time to the discharge of
official duties.
      (6)   He or she shall perform all other duties required of him or her by
the Board of Trustees, consistent with the village ordinances or state law.
(2000 Code, § 31.54) (Ord. 1132, passed 3-15-1982; Ord. 4000, passed 5-11-2009;
Ord. 4149, passed 3-12-2012)
DEPUTY VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
§ 31.080 CREATION OF OFFICE; TENURE.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Deputy Village Administrator, an
administrative office of the village.
   (B)   The Deputy Village Administrator shall be appointed by the President
with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 31.65) (Ord. 1476, passed 8-19-1991; Ord. 4000, passed 5-11-2009;
Ord. 4001, passed 5-11-2009)
§ 31.081 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   In the absence of the Village Administrator, the Deputy Village
Administrator shall be the Village Administrator Pro Tempore and shall assume
all of the powers and duties of the Village Administrator, as and when directed
by the Village President.
   (B)   He or she shall report to the Village Administrator and perform all
other duties and management assignments required of him or her by the Village
President and the Board of Trustees consistent with village ordinances or state
law.
   (C)   The Village Administrator and Deputy Village Administrator shall
communicate on an on-going basis regarding the status of projects, operational
matters, budgetary, personnel and other major management issues or ordination-
wide concern in order to ensure effective overall continuity and management
control.
   (D)   (1)   He or she shall attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees,
unless excused therefrom by the Village Administrator or the Board of Trustees.
      (2)   He or she shall have the privilege of taking part of the discussion
of all matters coming before the Board of Trustees, and shall be entitled to
notice of all meetings, regular and special, of the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 31.66) (Ord. 1476, passed 8-19-1991; Ord. 4001, passed 5-11-2009)
DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
§ 31.095 OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT.
   The office of Director of Community Development is established in the
municipality. This office shall be filled by appointment by the President with
the approval of the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 31.75) (Ord. 1147, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 31.096 DUTIES.
   The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for
administrative and professional work in directing the operation of the village
community development program, which responsibilities shall include, but not be
limited to, the Departments of Planning, Zoning and Building.
(2000 Code, § 31.76) (Ord. 4289, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 31.097 COMPENSATION.
   The Director of Community Development shall receive from the municipality,
for his or her services, a salary as may be established by the President and
Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 31.77) (Ord. 1147, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 31.098 VILLAGE ENGINEER.
   (A)   Office created; appointment; qualification.
      (1)   There is hereby created the office of Village Engineer.
      (2)   The Village Engineer shall be a person or firm appointed by the
Village President with the advice and consent of the Village Board.
      (3)   The Village Engineer shall be a registered professional engineer in
the state.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Village Engineer shall:
      (1)   Be responsible for the design and inspection of construction of all
public improvements and facilities in the municipality;
      (2)   Perform the duties as are prescribed by ordinance, this code, by
other statute or law, or as directed by the Village Administrator and Director
of Community Development;
      (3)   Review and approve all plans, specifications and any other
documents for public or private improvements within the village, as prepared by
other engineers; and
      (4)   Have the power to order all work stopped on the construction,
alteration or repair of any municipal improvement when the work is being done
in violation of any provision of this code or any law relating thereto.
         (a)   Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such an order,
except on the written permission of the Village Engineer. If a stop work order
was given verbally, it shall be followed by a written stop work order within
two hours.
         (b)   Not less than two full working days’ notice shall be given to
the Village Engineer prior to the commencement of any construction of public
improvements.
(Ord. 4085, passed 12-13-2010; Ord. 4086, passed 1-3-2011)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR
§ 31.110 OFFICE CREATED.
   There shall be established with the municipality the office of Economic
Development Director, which position shall be filled by an appointee of the
President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 31.80) (Ord. 4289, passed 10-5-2015)
§ 31.111 DUTIES.
   The Economic Development Director shall be responsible for administrative
and professional work in directing village economic development programs, which
responsibility shall include but not be limited to development and
implementation of economic development projects and programs, private sector
investments, public sector inducements and grants, serves as a liaison between
the village and business community.
(2000 Code, § 31.81) (Ord. 4289, passed 10-5-2015)
OTHER OFFICIALS
§ 31.125 APPOINTMENT OF OTHER VILLAGE OFFICIALS.
   The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall
appoint such other officers and commissioners as are set forth by ordinance, as
may be amended from time to time.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5) (2000 Code, § 31.85)
§ 31.126 DUTIES AND FEES; BOND.
   The President and Board of Trustees may prescribe the duties of the officers
appointed pursuant to §
31.125 and the amount to be charged for services rendered by those officers,
and may require them to execute whatever bonds are prescribed by statute or
ordinance.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-10) (2000 Code, § 31.86)
§ 31.127 CERTIFICATE OF APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a person has been appointed or elected to office, the
President shall issue a certificate of appointment or election, under the
corporate seal, to the Clerk.
   (B)   All officers elected or appointed under 65 ILCS 5 and this chapter,
except the Clerk, Trustees and President, shall be commissioned by warrant,
under the corporate seal, signed by the Clerk and the presiding officer of the
Board of Trustees.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-55-5) (2000 Code, § 31.87)
§ 31.128 DUTY TO SUCCESSOR.
   Within five days after written notification and request, a person who has
been an officer of the village shall deliver to the successor in office all
property, books and effects in the former officer’s possession, belonging to
the village. A former officer who violates this section is liable for all the
damages caused by the violation and is subject to the penalty prescribed by
ordinance.
(65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-35) (2000 Code, § 31.88) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Replacement of commission members
   
32.002   Compensation of Liquor Control Commissioners
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
   
32.030   Created; composition
   
32.031   Appointment; terms
   
32.032   Qualifications; oath; bond; removal
   
32.033   Powers and duties
   
32.034   Compensation of Secretary and members
Zoning Board of Appeals
   
32.045   Created; members
   
32.046   Term of office
Parks and Recreation Commission
   
32.060   Purpose
   
32.061   Membership
   
32.062   Guidelines for operation
   
32.063   Duties
Economic Development Commission
   
32.075   Establishment
   
32.076   Membership; term of office
Plan Commission
   
32.090   Purpose
   
32.091   Membership
   
32.092   Term of office
   
32.093   Procedure
   
32.094   Powers and duties
   
32.095   Land division and resubdivision
   
32.096   Improvements
   
32.097   Expenditures
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
   
32.110   Establishment
   
32.111   Coordinator
   
32.112   Functions
   
32.113   Service as mobile support team
   
32.114   Agreements with other political subdivisions
   
32.115   Emergency action
   
32.116   Emergency powers and duties
   
32.117   Civil defense and disaster basic plan
   
32.118   Compensation
   
32.119   Reimbursement by state
   
32.120   Purchases and expenditures
   
32.121   Oath
   
32.122   Office
   
32.123   Appropriation; levy of taxes
Education Commission
   
32.135   Establishment; appointment and term
   
32.136   Chairperson pro tem and Secretary of the Commission
   
32.137   Goals and objectives
   
32.138   Periodic reports
Veterans Commission
   
32.150   Establishment, appointment and term
   
32.151   Chairperson Pro-Tem and Secretary of the Commission
   
32.152   Goals and objectives
   
32.153   Periodic reports
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 REPLACEMENT OF COMMISSION MEMBERS.
   Whenever a member of any commission designated in this chapter shall either
resign, cease to be a legal voter in the village, neglect to perform required
duties, be absent without just cause from three consecutive regular meetings in
any quarter, or be absent without just cause from 50% of regularly scheduled
meetings in any quarter, the Chairperson of the said commission shall so advise
the President and Board of Trustees and may recommend that the person be
removed from the commission. The replacement shall be made in the same manner
as the original appointment to fill the unexpired term as provided herein.
(2000 Code, § 32.001) (Ord. 1327, passed 7-20-1987)
§ 32.002 COMPENSATION OF LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONERS.
   The compensation of the Village Liquor Control Commissioner is hereby fixed
at the sum of $10,000 per fiscal year or such sum as is appropriate for any
partial year serve, paid on a bi-weekly basis.
(2000 Code, § 32.002) (Ord. 820, passed 4-16-1973; Ord. 1089, passed 2-17-1981;
Ord. 1458, passed 1-28-1991; Ord. 1837, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 2004, passed 10-
4-2004; Ord. 4062, passed 8-2-2010)
BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS
§ 32.030 CREATED; COMPOSITION.
   There is created a Board of Fire and Police Commissioners consisting of
three members, as provided by statute.
(65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.) (2000 Code, § 32.040) (Ord. 533, passed 5-1-1961)
§ 32.031 APPOINTMENT; TERMS.
   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be appointed by the
President of the municipality by and with the consent of the Board of Trustees.
The terms of office of the members of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners shall be three years and until their respective successors shall
be appointed and qualified; provided that no such appointments shall be made by
any President within 30 days before the expiration of his or her term of
office; and provided further that the President shall appoint the first members
of such Board, one of whom is appointed to serve until the end of the current
municipal year in which such appointment is made, another shall serve until the
end of the municipal year next ensuing, and the third shall serve until the end
of the municipal year second next ensuing. Each of the first members of the
Board shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
(2000 Code, § 32.041) (Ord. 533, passed 5-1-1961)
§ 32.032 QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; BOND; REMOVAL.
   The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such
qualifications as are now, or may hereafter be, required of them by law. Each
member of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall take oath or
affirmation of office and shall execute and deliver to the Village Clerk a bond
in the sum of such sureties as the President and Board of Trustees shall
require, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of his or her
office. The members of the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall be
subject to removal from office in the same manner as other officers of the
municipality.
(2000 Code, § 32.042) (Ord. 533, passed 5-6-1961)
§ 32.033 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall have such powers and duties
as are now, or as may hereafter be, given to it by law.
(2000 Code, § 32.043) (Ord. 533, passed 5-1-1961)
§ 32.034 COMPENSATION OF SECRETARY AND MEMBERS.
   The compensation of the Secretary of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners and the members of such Board shall be as established by the
President and Board of Trustees in the annual budget ordinance, or such sum as
is appropriate for any partial year served, paid on a semi-annual basis at the
end of the months of April and October.
(2000 Code, § 32.044) (Ord. 533, passed 5-1-1961; Ord. 1710, passed 10-19-1998)
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
§ 32.045 CREATED; MEMBERS.
   There is hereby created a Zoning Board of Appeals for the village that shall
consist of seven appointed citizen members appointed by the President and Board
of Trustees on the basis of their particular fitness for duty on the Zoning
Board of Appeals. The appointed citizen members shall not concurrently serve on
the Plan Commission.
(2000 Code, § 32.080) (Ord. 422, passed 4-5-1954; Ord. 4099, passed 5-2-2011)
Statutory reference:
   Zoning Board of Appeals, see 65 ILCS 5/11-13-3
§ 32.046 TERM OF OFFICE.
   Effective May 1, 2011, of the seven appointed citizen members, one shall
serve for a period of one year, one for a period of two years, one for a period
of three years, one for a period of four years, one for a period of five years,
one for a period of six years and one for a period of seven years or until a
successor has been appointed and has qualified. Vacancies shall be filled by
appointments for unexpired terms only. The successor to each member so
appointed shall serve for a term of five years. All appointed citizen members
and the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Appeals may receive such compensation
as may be fixed from time to time by the Board of Trustees and provided for in
the annual budget ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 32.081) (Ord. 422, passed 4-5-1954; Ord. 4099, passed 5-2-2011)
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 32.060 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Commission shall be to act as a liaison between the
citizens of the village and the Parks and Recreation Department, in order to
communicate citizen opinions, needs, desires and interests, thereby making the
actions and decisions of the Parks and Recreation Commission and the Village
Board of Trustees responsive to the citizenry. The Parks and Recreation
Advisory Commission created herein shall be known as the “Parks and Recreation
Commission”. Any and all references in this code of ordinances to the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Commission, shall be and the same is hereby amended to read
“the Parks and Recreation Commission”.
(2000 Code, § 32.120) (Ord. 1287, passed 3-17-1986; Ord. 1440, passed 8-6-1990)
§ 32.061 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   All appointments to the Parks and Recreation Commission shall be made
by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Village Trustees.
   (B)   The membership of the Commission shall consist of nine members as
follows:
      (1)   Seven members, preferably and to the extent practical one member
from each of the following geographic areas:
         (a)   Original Matteson (Memorial Park);
         (b)   Lincoln Terrace/Matteson Farms (New Park site);
         (c)   Oakwood/Applewood (Oakwood Park);
         (d)   Glenridge/Cricket Hills (Notre Dame Park);
         (e)   Woodgate (Woodgate Park);
         (f)   Allemong (Creekside Park); and
         (g)   One member serving at large for special projects.
      (2)   Also two members who shall be between the ages of 16 and 21 years,
who shall be residents of the village.
   (C)   All members shall serve for a period of two years, or until a
successor has been approved and has qualified.
   (D)   Whenever a Commission member shall either resign, cease to be a legal
voter in the village, neglect to perform required duties, be absent without
just cause from three consecutive regular meetings in any quarter, or be absent
without just cause from 50% of regularly scheduled meeting in any quarter, the
Chairperson of the Commission shall so advise the President and Board of
Trustees and may recommend that the person be removed from the Commission. The
replacement shall be made in the same manner as original appointments to fill
the unexpired term as provided herein.
   (E)   The Chairperson of the Commission shall be named by a majority vote of
its members each year before June 1.
   (F)   The members of the Commission shall also elect the Vice-Chairperson at
the same time as the Chairperson.
   (G)   The Commission shall have the authority to establish its own rules of
procedure as long as they are not inconsistent with this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 32.121) (Ord. 1287, passed 3-17-1986; Ord. 1322, passed 7-6-1987;
Ord. 1894, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 32.062 GUIDELINES FOR OPERATION.
   (A)   All Commission meetings shall be open to the public.
   (B)   Regular meetings shall be monthly on a day determined by the majority
vote of the members of the Commission.
   (C)   The Commission shall have the authority to appoint ad hoc committees
consisting of non-Commission members, to study and recommend solutions where
specialized areas of interest can best be served.
   (D)   No member of any ad hoc committee will have a vote in the Commission.
   (E)   Neither the Commission, nor any member thereof, nor any ad hoc
committee, shall incur any expense without prior written approval of the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
   (F)   Each member of the Commission shall receive such compensation as may
be stipulated in the village budget and adopted in the village appropriation
ordinance, for each fiscal year.
(2000 Code, § 32.122) (Ord. 1287, passed 3-17-1986)
§ 32.063 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Commission’s duties shall include studying assignments given to it
by the Village Board of Trustees or the Director of Parks and Recreation. It
shall then recommend action which reflects the best interests of the citizens
of the village. It shall attempt to determine citizen interests, opinions,
needs and desires as they concern parks and recreation, and shall communicate
the same to the Director of Parks and Recreation.
   (B)   In order to properly represent their geographic areas, each Commission
member is encouraged to attend meetings and communicate with their area
residents regarding parks and recreation. This information should be brought
back and presented to the Commission.
   (C)   The Commission shall have the duty to:
      (1)   Review, discuss and recommend appropriate action on:
         (a)   Programs;
         (b)   Facilities;
         (c)   Parks and landscaping;
         (d)   Participant discipline;
         (e)   Park and facility rules;
         (f)   Citizen communication;
         (g)   Parks and Recreation Commission budget;
         (h)   Parks and Recreation Department budget (excluding salaries and
personnel);
         (i)   Updates for capital improvements;
         (j)   Program structure changes;
         (k)   Vandalism or damage; and
         (l)   Upgrading or changes in facilities or structures.
      (2)   Call for special meetings as determined by the Chairperson or Vice-
Chairperson.
(2000 Code, § 32.123) (Ord. 1287, passed 3-17-1986)
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 32.075 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a citizens’ commission that shall be known as the
village’s Economic Development Commission for the purpose of structuring sound
economic development programs, and of conducting the research and inventory of
resources necessary to the preparation of industrial fact profiles for
distribution to prospective employers considering expansion or location in the
village area. Said Commission will make its findings and recommendations, as
appropriate to the President and Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 4281, passed 9-8-2015)
§ 32.076 MEMBERSHIP; TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   The membership of the Economic Development Commission shall be
composed of five Commissioners and two ex officio members. The Chairperson will
be appointed by the President of the village. The two ex officio members will
be the President of the village, or his or her representative, and a member of
the Board of Trustees to be appointed by the Village President.
   (B)   (1)   The members of the Commission shall serve for a two-year period,
or until a successor has been duly appointed and qualified, as follows.
      (2)   The terms of office for said Commissioners will be on a rotating
basis; however, the first members appointed shall have the following terms of
office:
         (a)   Three Commissioners shall serve for a two-year term; and
         (b)   Two Commissioners shall serve for a one-year term.
(Ord. 4281, passed 9-8-2015; Ord. 4312, passed 4-28-2016)
PLAN COMMISSION
§ 32.090 PURPOSE.
   In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation of a
comprehensive municipal plan for the guidance, direction and control of the
growth and development of the municipality, a Plan Commission, which shall be a
department of the municipal government, is created under authority of 65 ILCS
5/11-12-4.
(2000 Code, § 32.135) (Ord. 484, passed 12-17-1958; Ord. 502, passed 3-7-1960)
§ 32.091 MEMBERSHIP.
   The Plan Commission shall consist of nine members to include the following:
the President of the Board of Trustees shall be an ex officio member of the
Plan Commission and one member of the Board of Trustees appointed by the
President of the Board of Trustees shall also be an ex officio member of the
Plan Commission without the power to vote; and seven other members, citizens of
the municipality, appointed by the President of the Board of Trustees on the
basis of their particular fitness for their duty on the Plan Commission, and
subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees. The appointed citizen members
shall not concurrently serve on the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(2000 Code, § 32.136) (Ord. 484, passed 12-17-1958; Ord. 502, passed 3-7-1960;
Ord. 4094, passed 2-7-2011; Ord. 4099, passed 5-2-2011)
§ 32.092 TERM OF OFFICE.
   Ex officio members shall serve for the term of their elected office.
Effective May 1, 2011, of the seven appointed citizen members, two shall serve
for a period of one year, two for a period of two years and three for a period
of three years, or until a successor has been appointed and has qualified.
Vacancies shall be filled by appointments for unexpired terms only. The
successor to each member so appointed shall serve for a term of five years. All
appointed citizen members and the Secretary of the Plan Commission may receive
such compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the Board of Trustees
and provided for in the annual budget ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 32.137) (Ord. 1685, passed 9-15-1997; Ord. 4099, passed 5-2-2011)
§ 32.093 PROCEDURE.
   Immediately following their appointment, the members of the Plan Commission
shall meet, organize, elect such officers as it may deem necessary, and adopt
and later change or alter rules and regulations of organization and procedure
consistent with municipal ordinances and state laws. The Commission shall keep
written records of its proceedings, which shall be open at all times to public
inspection. The Plan Commission shall also file with the President of the Board
of Trustees and with the Board an annual report setting forth its transactions
and recommendations.
(2000 Code, § 32.138) (Ord. 484, passed 12-17-1958; Ord. 502, passed 3-7-1960)
Statutory reference:
   General power of the Plan Commission, 65 ILCS 5/11-12-5
§ 32.094 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Plan Commission shall have all the general powers as prescribed by the
municipal ordinances and the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(2000 Code, § 32.139) (Ord. 484, passed 12-17-1958; Ord. 502, passed 3-7-1960)
Statutory reference:
   Plan Commission, see 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq.
§ 32.095 LAND DIVISION AND RESUBDIVISION.
   Following the adoption of an official plan or part thereof in the manner
prescribed by law, no map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented
for record, affecting land within the corporate limits of the municipality or
in contiguous territory outside of and distant for not more than one and one-
half miles from such limits shall be entitled to record, or shall be valid
unless the subdivision thereon shall provide for streets, alleys, public ways,
ways for public service facilities, storm and flood water run-off channels and
basins, and public grounds, in conformity with any requirements applicable
thereto of such official plan or map or part thereof, provided that a
certificate of approval by the Board of Trustees, certified by the Village
Clerk or a certified copy of an order of the Circuit Court directing the
recording as provided in 65 ILCS 5/11-12-8 shall be sufficient evidence of
compliance with this section upon which the recorder may accept the plat for
recording.
(65 ILCS 5/11-12-12) (2000 Code, § 32.140) (Ord. 484, passed 12-17-1958; Ord.
502, passed 3-7-1960)
§ 32.096 IMPROVEMENTS.
   The Village Clerk shall furnish the Plan Commission for its consideration a
copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to public improvements of any
nature. The Plan Commission may report in relation thereto, if it deems a
report necessary or advisable, for the consideration of the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 32.141) (Ord. 484, passed 12-17-1958; Ord. 502, passed 3-7-1960)
§ 32.097 EXPENDITURES.
   The Commission may, at the discretion of the Board of Trustees, employ
necessary help whose salaries, wages and other necessary expenses shall be
provided for by adequate appropriations made by the Board of Trustees from the
public funds. If the Plan Commission shall deem it advisable to secure
technical advice or services, it may be done on authority from the Board of
Trustees and appropriations by the Board of Trustees therefor.
(2000 Code, § 32.142) (Ord. 484, passed 12-17-1958; Ord. 502, passed 3-7-1960)
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
§ 32.110 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is created the village ESDA to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate
injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or
other hostile action, or from natural or human-made disaster, in accordance
with the Illinois Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975, being 20 ILCS
3305. This ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and such additional members as
may be selected by the coordinator.
(2000 Code, § 32.155)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency Telephone System Act, see 50 ILCS 750/0.01 et seq.
   Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act of 1988, see 20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.
§ 32.111 COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The Coordinator of the village ESDA shall be appointed by the
President and shall serve until removed by same.
   (B)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction
and control of the President as provided by statute.
   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve
as the Coordinator, the President or any person designated by him or her shall
be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this
subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 32.156)
§ 32.112 FUNCTIONS.
   The village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the municipality
as shall be prescribed in and by the state ESDA plan and program prepared by
the Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by
the Governor. In addition, he or she shall perform such duties outside the
corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with
any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered
into as provided by the State ESDA Act.
(2000 Code, § 32.157)
§ 32.113 SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   (A)   All or any of the village ESDA organization may be designated as
members of a mobile support team created by the Director of the state ESDA as
provided by law. The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by
the Coordinator of the village ESDA organization.
   (B)   Any member of a mobile support team who is a municipal employee or
officer, while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director,
shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and
immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a
paid officer or employee of the municipality, while so serving, shall receive
from the state reasonable compensation as provided by law.
(2000 Code, § 32.158)
§ 32.114 AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS.
   The Coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the President and by the State Director
of ESDA.
(2000 Code, § 32.159)
§ 32.115 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack on the United States or the occurrence within the state of
a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or from
human-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the village ESDA to
cooperate fully with the state ESDA and with the Governor in the exercise of
emergency powers as provided by law.
(2000 Code, § 32.160)
§ 32.116 EMERGENCY POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Village President may exercise the emergency power and authority
necessary to fulfill his or her general powers and duties. The judgment of the
Village President shall be the sole criteria necessary to invoke emergency
powers provided by ordinance and other appropriate authorities. The Board of
Trustees may convene to perform its legislative and administrative powers as
the situation demands, and shall receive reports relative to civil defense
activities. Nothing in this section shall be construed as abridging or
curtailing the powers or restrictions of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   (1)   During any period when disaster threatens or when the village
has been struck by disaster, within the definition of this section, the Village
President may promulgate such regulations as he or she deems necessary to
protect life and property and preserve critical resources.
      (2)   The regulations may include, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
         (a)   Regulations prohibiting or restricting the movement of vehicles
in order to facilitate the work of civil defense forces, or to facilitate the
mass movement of persons from critical areas within or without the village;
         (b)   Regulations pertaining to the movement of persons from areas
deemed to be hazardous or vulnerable to disaster;
         (c)   Other regulations necessary to preserve public peace, health and
safety; and
         (d)   Regulations promulgated in accordance with the authority above
will be given widespread circulation by proclamations published and uttered by
newspaper and radio.
(2000 Code, § 32.161) (Ord. 1385, passed 3-20-1989)
§ 32.117 CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER BASIC PLAN.
   (A)   A comprehensive civil defense and disaster basic plan shall be adopted
and maintained by resolution of the Board of Trustees upon the recommendations
of the Village President. In the preparation of this plan as it pertains to
village organization, it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities
and personnel of all existing departments and agencies shall be utilized to the
fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of all municipal
departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to
maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all
times. The basic plan shall be considered supplementary to this section and
have the effect of law whenever a disaster has been proclaimed.
   (B)   The Village President shall prescribe in the basic plan those
positions within the disaster organization, in addition to his or her own, for
which lines of succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible
person will designate and keep on file with the village a current list of three
persons as successors to his or her position. The list will be in order of
succession and will as near as possible designate persons best capable of
carrying out all assigned duties and functions.
   (C)   Each department head assigned responsibility in the basic plan shall
be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned. Duties will
include the organization and training of assigned village employees and
volunteers. Each department head shall formulate the operational plan for his
or her department which, when approved, shall be an annex to and a part of the
basic plan.
   (D)   Amendments to the basic plan shall be submitted to the Village
President. If approved, the Village President will submit the amendments to the
Board of Trustees with his or her recommendations for their approval. The
amendments shall take effect ten days from the date of approval unless action
is taken by the Board of Trustees disapproving the Village President’s
submission. In the event an amendment is pending at the time that a disaster is
proclaimed under provisions of this section, the amendment will be considered
approved immediately and will remain effective unless specifically revoked by
the Board of Trustees.
   (E)   When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not
available within the village government, the Village President is authorized to
seek assistance from persons outside of government. The assignment of duties,
when of a supervisory nature, shall also grant authority for the persons so
assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during and after the occurrence of
a disaster. The services from persons outside of government may be accepted by
the village on a volunteer basis. The persons shall be enrolled as civil
defense volunteers in cooperation with the heads of departments affected.
   (F)   Some of the duties ascribed to the Village President in this section
will ordinarily be handled as a matter of routine by the Civil Defense
Director, but the responsibility and authority stem from and remain with the
Village President.
(2000 Code, § 32.162) (Ord. 1385, passed 3-20-1989)
§ 32.118 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the municipality,
if called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the
time spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held. Members who are not municipal employees or officers shall receive for
such training time compensation as may be established by the President.
(2000 Code, § 32.163)
§ 32.119 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.
   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the state to the municipality for expenses incident to
training members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA,
compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile support team
while serving outside the municipality in response to a call by the Governor or
State Director of ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by
the state incident to ESDA activities as provided by law.
(2000 Code, § 32.164)
§ 32.120 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The President may, on recommendation of the Municipal Coordinator of
ESDA, authorize any purchase of contracts necessary to any place of the
municipality in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from
the explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the
public health and safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to
victims in the case of such disaster, or from human-made or natural disaster.
   (B)   In the event of enemy-caused or other disaster, the Municipal
Coordinator of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the municipality, to procure
such services, supplies, equipment, or material as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or
obligations, as authorized by the State ESDA Act, being 20 ILCS 3305. However,
if the President meets with the Village Board at such time, he or she shall act
subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(2000 Code, § 32.165)
§ 32.121 OATH.
   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the village ESDA
organization shall, before entering on his or her duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
      “I, _________________________, solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the
territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private,
against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely,
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do
further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and
that during such time as I am affiliated with the Matteson ESDA organization, I
will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this
state by force or violence.”
(2000 Code, § 32.166)
§ 32.122 OFFICE.
   The President is authorized to designate space in a municipal building, or
elsewhere, for the village ESDA as its office.
(2000 Code, § 32.167)
§ 32.123 APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES.
   The President may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the manner
provided by law, and may levy, in addition, for ESDA purposes only, a tax not
to exceed $0.05 per $100 of the assessed value of all taxable property in
addition to all other taxes, as provided by the State ESDA Act, being 20 ILCS
3305. However, the amount collectible under such levy shall in no event exceed
$0.25 per capita.
(2000 Code, § 32.168)
EDUCATION COMMISSION
§ 32.135 ESTABLISHMENT; APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees hereby establishes an Education Commission that
shall consist of seven regular members appointed by the Village President with
the consent of the Board of Trustees. The mission of the village’s Education
Commission shall be to assist the Boards of Education to promote education
excellence in the schools that serve the residents of the village.
   (B)   The members of the Commission shall be appointed for a one-year term
commencing June 1 and ending May 31 of the following year. All members of the
Education Commission must be residents in the village with a background,
experience or interest in the education of the residents of the village. The
Village President shall select one of the members as Chairperson. Compensation
of members shall be reviewed on an annual basis during the village’s budget
process and is subject to change.
   (C)   In addition, the Commission shall include ex officio members
representing each of the school districts operating within the corporate limits
of the village. Ex officio members shall serve at the discretion of the
respective school districts.
   (D)   The Village President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, may
appoint any number of alternate members to supplement the regular members.
Alternates may participate in all discussions and work activities, but shall
not be considered as voting members.
   (E)   If a member provides notification that he or she cannot fulfill the
term of service of the appointment, all alternate members who agree to serve
shall first be considered for appointment to finish out the term.
   (F)   No member of the Commission shall intentionally use any property or
resources of the village or the authority or title of his or her membership in
the Commission in connection with any prohibited political activity as defined
in § 5 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/1-5).
(Ord. 4118, passed 9-18-2011)
§ 32.136 CHAIRPERSON PRO TEM AND SECRETARY OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Village Administrator or his or her designee shall serve as staff
coordinator to the Commission and serve when necessary as Chairperson Pro-Tem.
The village may provide a Secretary to take minutes and handle communications.
   (B)   The Commission shall meet monthly on the second Wednesday of every
month at 7:30 p.m., with provision for additional special meetings as necessary
to fulfill the mission and charges set forth by the Board of Trustees. The
Commission may appoint subcommittees from its members to perform particular
functions and study particular issues.
(Ord. 4118, passed 9-18-2011)
§ 32.137 GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.
   The Commission will foster and facilitate the following goals and
objectives:
   (A)   To advise the Village Board on the policies and educational services
provided by the school districts serving the village to promote educational
excellence;
   (B)   To facilitate open communications with the school administrations and
the Village Board on a clear and shared focus to achieve educational goals and
objectives;
   (C)   To encourage parental involvement with the school system;
   (D)   To the extent requested by the Boards of Education, to utilize
community and political influence for positive change promoting educational
excellence for the respective school districts that serve the village;
   (E)   To promote village support of state, regional, county and local
initiatives that will enhance the mission of the school districts that service
our community;
   (F)   To assist the Boards of Education to implement new ideas, program
initiatives and improve the overall performance of the school districts;
   (G)   To support the goals of the Boards of Education for educational
excellence, improvement of test scores and overall performance of the students;
   (H)   To provide information to the Village Board of Trustees regarding the
district’s accomplishments in meeting their respective strategic plans;
   (I)   To act as a resource for community school-based groups focused on
quality education and promote positive involvement within the community;
   (J)   To advise the Board of Trustees with respect to any future requests
for referendum approval;
   (K)   To determine whether village resources may be appropriately devoted to
assisting such educational institutions; and
   (L)   To undertake such tasks as may be assigned from time to time by the
Village President and Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 4118, passed 9-18-2011)
§ 32.138 PERIODIC REPORTS.
   The Commission shall annually on or about June 1 of each year submit a
formal written report to the President and Board of Trustees. The annual report
shall set forth the findings and recommendations of the Commission with respect
to any matters analyzed or studied during the previous year. The Commission
shall at its discretion submit reports to the President and Board of Trustees
throughout the year on matters of particular interest or importance to the
village.
(Ord. 4118, passed 9-18-2011)
VETERANS COMMISSION
§ 32.150 ESTABLISHMENT, APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees hereby establishes a Veterans Commission that
shall consist of seven regular members appointed by the Village President with
the consent of the Board of Trustees. The mission of the village's Veterans
Commission shall be to assist the VFW and American Legions to promote veterans'
affairs and support the residents in the Village of Matteson that are veterans.
   (B)   The Commission members shall be appointed for a one-year term
commencing May 1 and ending April 30 of the following year. All members of the
Veterans Commission must be residents in the village with background,
experience, or interest in Military/Veterans support for the residents of the
Village of Matteson. The Commission shall vote on an annual basis one of the
members as Chaicperson. The compensation of members shall be reviewed annually
during the village's budget process and is subject to change.
   (C)   In addition, the Commission shall include ex officio members
representing each of the Auxiliary Posts operating within the corporate limits
of the village. Ex officio members shall serve at the discretion of the
respective VFW and American Legion Post.
   (D)   The Village President, with the consent of the Board of Trustees, may
appoint any number of alternate members to supplement the regular members.
Alternates may participate in all discussions and work activities but shall not
be considered voting members.
   (E) If a member provides notification that they cannot fulfill the term of
service of the appointment, all alternate members who agree to serve shall
first be considered for appointment to finish out the term.
   (F)   No member of the Commission shall intentionally use any property or
resources of the village or the authority or title of their membership in the
Commission in connection with any prohibited political activity as defined in §
5 of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/1-5).
(Ord. 4492, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 32.151 CHAIRPERSON PRO-TEM AND SECRETARY OF THE COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Village Administrator or their designee shall serve as staff
coordinator to the Commission and serve, when necessary, as Chairperson Pro-
Tem. The village may provide a secretary to take minutes and handle
communications.
   (B)   The Commission shall meet monthly on the second of every month at 7:00
p.m., with provision for additional special meetings as necessary to fulfill
the mission and charges set forth by the Board of Trustees. The Commission may
appoint sub-committees from its members to perform functions and study
particular issues.
(Ord. 4492, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 32.152 GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.
   The Commission will foster and facilitate the following goals and
objectives:
   (A)   To advise the Village Board on the policies and services provided by
the regionals Post that serve the village to promote veteran's support and
outreach;
   (B)   To facilitate open communications between the VFW and American Legion
and the Village Board with a clear and shared focus to achieve the goals and
objectives of the Commission;
   (C)   To encourage community involvement with the local veterans;
   (D)   To the extent requested by the veteran community, to utilize community
and political influence for positive change promoting veteran support for
veterans in the village;
   (E)   To promote village support of the state, regional, county, and local
initiatives that will enhance the mission of support to veteran services in our
community;
   (F)   To assist the local veteran initiatives and to implement new ideas
programs and improve the overall support of the veterans in our community;
   (G)   To provide information to the Village Board of Trustees regarding the
accomplishments of the VFW and American Legion Post in meeting their respective
goals;
   (H)   To act as a resource for community groups focused on quality support
to veterans and promote positive involvement within the community;
   (I)   To advise the Board of Trustees with respect to any future legislation
on the local, state, and federal levels that will affect veterans, active
military, and their families in our community;
   (J)   To determine whether village resources may be appropriately devoted to
assisting such veteran and military institutions; and
   (K)   To undertake such tasks as may be assigned from time to time by the
Village President and Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 4492, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 32.153 PERIODIC REPORTS.
   The Commission shall annually, on or about May 1 of each year, submit a
formal report to the President and Board of Trustees. The annual report shall
set forth the Commission's recommendations with respect to any matters analyzed
or studied during the previous year. The Commission shall at its discretion
submit reports to the President and Board of Trustees throughout the year on
matters of particular interest or importance to the village.
(Ord. 4492, passed 2-22-2022)
CHAPTER 33: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Creation; composition
   
33.02   Purpose
   
33.03   Duties of Fire Chief
   
33.04   Absence of Fire Chief
   
33.05   Members of the Department considered classified service
   
33.06   Members of the Department not considered classified service
   
33.07   Duties of members of the Department
   
33.08   Property outside of corporate limits
   
33.09   Paramedic and Firefighter II Certification required
   
33.10   Charges for ambulance services
   
33.11   Retirement
Pension Fund
   
33.25   Establishment
   
33.26   Board of Trustees of Fund; election; meetings
   
33.27   Sources of funds
   
33.28   Powers and duties of Board of Trustees of Fund
Foreign Fire Insurance Board
   
33.40   Creation
   
33.41   Election of officers
   
33.42   Duties and powers
   
33.43   Rules and regulations
   
33.44   Payment of funds
   
33.45   Budget
   
33.46   Annual audit
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   There is created a Municipal Fire Department for the village which shall
consist of a Fire Chief, classified service personnel and such other personnel
as may be authorized from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 33.01) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 33.02 PURPOSE.
   Fire protection and emergency medical services are the primary
responsibilities of the Fire Department. Actions to provide these services must
be proactive as well as reactive in order to properly protect life and property
within the village and other service areas of the Department. The enforcement
of fire prevention codes, education of the public on fire prevention methods,
pre-planning of firefighting strategies and routes for commercial, industrial
and public facilities, training of personnel in the safest most up-to-date
procedures, constant maintenance of equipment and vehicles, inspection of all
buildings open to the public and continual recertification of emergency medical
personnel are some of the proactive activities that occur within the Department
regularly, before a fire or emergency call even occurs. These actions help to
provide a water community and the most skilled personnel available to react to
emergency situations that may arise.
(2000 Code, § 33.02) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 33.03 DUTIES OF FIRE CHIEF.
   (A)   The Fire Chief is the chief executive officer of the Department and
the final Department authority in all matters of policy, operations and
discipline consistent with state law, village code, village personnel policies
and practices, and departmental rules and regulations. He or she exercises all
lawful powers of his or her office and issues lawful orders as are necessary to
assure the effective performance of the Department.
   (B)   Through the Fire Chief, the Department is responsible for the
protection of life and property within its legal jurisdiction. The Chief is
responsible for planning, directing, coordinating, controlling and staffing all
activities of the Department, for continuous and efficient operations, for the
enforcement of rules and regulations within the Department, for the completion
and forwarding of such reports as may be required by competent authority, and
for the Department’s relations with the citizens of the village, village
government and other agencies.
(2000 Code, § 33.03) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 33.04 ABSENCE OF FIRE CHIEF.
   In the absence of the Fire Chief, the authority to command shall be as
designated in the rules and regulations of the village’s Fire Department.
(2000 Code, § 33.04) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 33.05 MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT CONSIDERED CLASSIFIED SERVICE.
   All full-time, paid members of the Department, with the exception of the
Chief and Deputy Chief shall be considered to be members of the classified
service and shall be appointed, promoted and removed by the Board of Fire and
Police Commissioners of the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 33.05) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 33.06 MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT NOT CONSIDERED CLASSIFIED SERVICE.
   All part-time, volunteer members of the Department including the officers,
shall be appointed by the Chief and shall be able-bodied and have attained
their eighteenth birthday. Qualifications of candidates shall be as determined
by the Chief and outlined in departmental regulations.
(2000 Code, § 33.06) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 33.07 DUTIES OF MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   General responsibilities. Within the village jurisdiction and other
areas covered by contractual or mutual aid agreements, members shall at all
times take appropriate action to:
      (1)   Protect life and property; and
      (2)   Enforce all federal, state and local laws and ordinances coming
under the jurisdiction of the Department.
   (B)   Duty responsibilities. Firefighters shall perform duties delegated to
them, in the manner prescribed by law or ordinance, or by rules and
regulations, practices and procedures contained herein. Firefighters shall
acquire and utilize the knowledge of operation of all the various types of
apparatus, tools and equipment in use in the Department and under the direction
of their superior officers maintain such apparatus, tools and equipment (in
their care and possession) in a clean condition and in readiness for operation
at all times. Firefighters shall observe and study the principles of modern
firefighting, fire prevention, rescue work, resuscitation, first aid,
ventilation and salvage operations. Firefighters shall constantly promote their
physical and mental welfare.
(2000 Code, § 33.07) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 33.08 PROPERTY OUTSIDE OF CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (A)   The members of the Fire Department are not authorized to go beyond the
corporate limits of the municipality for the purpose of rendering aid to other
fire departments, or of extinguishing fires or rendering ambulance service;
however, the Fire Department shall render such service outside the corporate
limits only when the municipality has agreed to provide such services by an
existing written contract, or by a mutual aid agreement contract, or by a
mutual aid agreement with another municipality to render service to property
located beyond the corporate limits of the municipality, and on orders of the
Chief of the Fire Department, or his or her representative or the Village
President, and in such cases, the Fire Department may leave the corporate
limits of the municipality.
   (B)   The municipality may enter into a written contract for providing
emergency ambulance and other fire emergency services to individuals residing
in single-family residences, multiple-family residential dwellings, commercial
establishments and industrial establishments on private property not within the
corporate limits of the municipality shall be in such sums as may be determined
and approved by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   In the event that emergency ambulance and other fire emergency
services are rendered to individuals on private property not located within the
corporate limits of the municipality, and no other contract is in effect, then
in such case, the fee is established as outlined in §
33.10 for each call.
   (D)   The Fire Department shall respond to such calls so long as the
residents within the corporate limits of the municipality will not be denied
reasonable availability of the Fire Department’s personnel or equipment.
   (E)   In the event there is not a valid existing contract between the
individual and the municipality for such services rendered, then within five
days after such services have been provided by the Fire Department, the Chief,
or his or her appointed representative, shall prepare a statement of costs, and
shall forward the same by certified mail to the owner of the subject property
or to the individual receiving the services of the Department. In the event
that the statement is not paid in full within 90 days, the Village Attorney is
empowered to take such legal steps as may be necessary to secure payment,
including, but not limited to, the filing of a civil action, as well as the
perfecting of any and all liens relative to collecting such sums as may be due
and payable for the rendering of said services.
(2000 Code, § 33.08) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989; Ord. 1622, passed 2-7-1996;
Ord. 4528, passed 9- 26-2022)
§ 33.09 PARAMEDIC AND FIREFIGHTER II CERTIFICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   All candidates that become firefighters on the Fire Department must
become a State Certified Firefighter II within 12 months and a certified
paramedic within 18 months after they are appointed to the Fire Department, and
in the event that they fail to obtain either certification, or if they are not
paramedic certified within the 18 months, then they shall be deemed to have
failed the probation, and may be subject to dismissal by the Fire Chief.
   (B)   However, an extension of up to 12 months may be granted by the Fire
Chief in order to accomplish Paramedic or Firefighter II Certification if it is
felt that a reasonable effort has been made by the individual toward
certification. In no event shall the probation be extended past the date on
which the individual has failed to obtain certification after three
examinations.
   (C)   Each and every firefighter and lieutenant who is a member of the Fire
Department, having been appointed after August 6, 1979, must remain a certified
paramedic during the entire period that he or she is serving as a member of the
Fire Department. The failure to remain certified as a paramedic may be a basis
for immediate removal and discharge from the Fire Department by the Fire Chief.
(2000 Code, § 33.09) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989; Ord. 4550, passed 12-19-
2022)
§ 33.10 CHARGES FOR AMBULANCE SERVICES.
   (A)   There is hereby established the following rate schedule per call for
any ambulance services rendered by the Village Municipal Fire Department as
follows:
 
Category 1: Basic and Advanced life support ambulance service    $2,307
The cost for ambulance service is based on the cost analysis
provided by the Ground Emergency Medical Transport yearly report
   Mileage                                                    $10 per mile
 
   (B)   Any ambulance service provided pursuant to division (A) above shall be
charged the sum of $100 if said ambulance service call does not involve any
transporting of a party.
   (C)   The charges provided in this section, however, shall not be assessed
against any residents, nonresidents, individuals or corporations, residents of
other villages, or the employees of any of the parties, who heretofore have
entered into a written contract for fire department services to be rendered by
the village’s Municipal Fire Department, and which contract is in force and
effect at the time that the ambulance service is rendered.
   (D)   All charges shall be billed as soon as practicable after services are
rendered.
   (E)   All charges unpaid 60 days after being billed, will be subject to an
administrative review, for the purpose of determining if it would be
practicable to forward such charges to a collection agency designated by the
village as a representative of the village.
(2000 Code, § 33.10) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989; Ord. 1622, passed 2-7-1996;
Ord. 1702, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 1816, passed 6-18-2001; Ord. 1905, passed 4-
21-2003; Ord. 2020, passed 3-21-2005; Ord. 3033, passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 4023,
passed 11-2-2009; Ord. 4191, passed 6-3-2013; Ord. 4264, passed 4-13-2015; Ord.
4370, passed 5-7-2018; Ord. 4528, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 33.11 RETIREMENT.
   If a part-time or volunteer member has served the Fire Department for 15
years or more, and personally wishes to retire, he or she may do so at a
regular meeting in writing. He or she will then be eligible to receive one free
vehicle sticker per year.
(2000 Code, § 33.11) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
PENSION FUND
§ 33.25 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a Firemen’s Pension Fund in and for the municipality,
as provided by state law.
(2000 Code, § 33.20) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 33.26 BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF FUND; ELECTION; MEETINGS.
   (A)   There is created a Board of Trustees of the Fireman’s Pension Fund
which shall consist of the members as provided by the applicable Illinois
Compiled Statutes.
   (B)   The term of office of the members shall be as prescribed by the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, and the election of the Trustees shall be held at
those times and places as are required by law and in the manner required by
law.
   (C)   The Board of Trustees shall be organized and shall hold meetings as
provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(2000 Code, § 33.21) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 33.27 SOURCES OF FUNDS.
   The pension funds shall consist of the taxes, accumulations, assessments and
deductions as are provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, and shall include
an assessment or deduction of 8.25%, and any larger amount permitted by law,
from the salary of each firefighter covered under the fund.
(2000 Code, § 33.22) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
§ 33.28 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF FUND.
   The Board of Trustees of the Fund shall have all of the powers, duties and
obligations conferred and imposed on it by applicable state law.
(2000 Code, § 33.23) (Ord. 1413, passed 11-20-1989)
FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD
§ 33.40 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a five member Foreign Fire Insurance Board for the
village, comprised of officers elected as set forth below, whose purpose is to
establish rules and regulations with respect to the management of money to be
received by the village as foreign fire insurance tax receipts as provided for
by 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 et seq.
(2000 Code, § 33.35) (Ord. 4034, passed 2-1-2010)
§ 33.41 ELECTION OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Board shall consist of five Trustees, consisting of the Fire
Chief, who shall hold office by virtue of rank, and four members who shall be
elected at large by the sworn members of the Department. All members of the
Department shall be eligible to be elected as officers of the Department
Foreign Fire Insurance Board. The members of this Board shall annually elect
officers to be a Chairperson and a Treasurer. The Chairperson and Treasurer, as
well as a Vice-Chairperson and Secretary, shall be elected at the first regular
meeting of the Board and annually thereafter at the first regular meeting held
during the calendar year.
   (B)   The original election to the Board shall consist of the Fire Chief and
two of the officers elected from all of the regular full-time sworn members of
the Department, having a term of three years, and the remaining two officers
shall be elected for a period of two years. In subsequent elections each
officer (including the Treasurer) shall hold office on the Board for a term of
three years and until his or her successor is chosen. Election shall take place
within 30 days following the effective date of this subchapter, and thereafter,
during the final quarter of the calendar year in which the term of office
expires. The term of each officer (including the Treasurer) shall run from
January 1 of the year immediately following the year in which an election is
held, except that for the original election, the term of office shall begin
immediately following the election and shall include the period of time from
the election to January 1. Each officer shall hold office during the term
unless he or she no longer holds a qualifying position in the Fire Department,
in which case his or her term shall cease immediately and he or she is thereby
removed from the Board. The remaining Board officers shall appoint temporary
successors to complete the unexpired term of any Board officer (including
Treasurer).
   (C)   All elections shall be organized, conducted and supervised by the
Village Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 33.36) (Ord. 4034, passed 2-1-2010)
§ 33.42 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   (A)   Chairperson. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the
Foreign Fire Insurance Board. The Chairperson shall have such other powers as
may be given from time to time by action of the Village Board of Trustees,
consistent with 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 et seq.
   (B)   Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall carry out the duties of
the Chairperson during the absence or inability of the Chairperson to perform
such duties and shall carry out such other functions as are assigned from time
to time by the Foreign Fire Insurance President or the Village Board of
Trustees.
   (C)   Secretary. The Secretary shall take minutes at any and all meetings of
the Foreign Fire Insurance Board. The Secretary shall keep these minutes in a
manner identical to the manner in which Village Board minutes are kept. The
Secretary shall also perform any other duties and functions as are assigned
from time-to-time by the Chairperson of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board or the
Village Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Treasurer.
      (1)   The Treasurer shall:
         (a)   Have charge and custody of and be responsible for all funds
collected by the village from the Foreign Fire Insurance Company fees as
described in 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1;
         (b)   Deposit all such monies in the name of the Village Fire
Department in such banks, savings and loan associations or other depositories
as shall be selected by the Village Board of Trustees;
         (c)   Invest said funds as are not immediately required in such
securities as the Village Board of Trustees shall specifically or generally
select from time-to-time;
         (d)   Maintain the financial books and records of the Department;
provided, however, that all investments of the Foreign Fire Insurance Company’s
fees shall be made only in those securities which may be purchased by Illinois
non-home rule municipalities under the provisions of state law; and
         (e)   In general, perform all duties incidental to the office of
Treasurer and such other duties as from time-to-time may be assigned to him or
her by the Foreign Fire Insurance Board President or the Village Board of
Trustees.
      (2)   The Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall give a
sufficient bond to the village. The bond shall be approved by the Village
President, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the Treasurer of his or
her duties under this subchapter and the rules and regulations provided herein.
This bond shall be paid for from the funds collected from the Foreign Fire
Insurance Company fees.
      (3)   The Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall receive the
Foreign Fire Insurance Company fees so paid and shall pay out the money upon
the order of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board for the maintenance, use and
benefit of the Department.
(2000 Code, § 33.37) (Ord. 4034, passed 2-1-2010)
§ 33.43 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall make all needful rules and
regulations with respect to the management of the Foreign Fire Insurance
Company fees to be paid to the Treasurer. All such rules and regulations
promulgated by the Foreign Fire Insurance Board must be passed by the
affirmative vote of at least three of the five Board members. All rules and
regulations promulgated by the Foreign Fire Insurance Board must be in
accordance with all applicable state law.
(2000 Code, § 33.38) (Ord. 4034, passed 2-1-2010)
§ 33.44 PAYMENT OF FUNDS.
   The Village Treasurer shall pay the sums received from the insurance company
specified in 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 to the Treasurer of the Foreign Fire Insurance
Board of the village.
(2000 Code, § 33.39) (Ord. 4034, passed 2-1-2010)
§ 33.45 BUDGET.
   (A)   Preliminary budget.
      (1)   The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall develop and maintain a
listing of those items that the Board feels are appropriate expenditures under
this subchapter, and shall approve a preliminary budget for the expenditure of
the Foreign Fire Insurance Company fees collected by March of each year. Said
budget shall prescribe the purposes for which foreign fire insurance fees will
be expended for the maintenance, use and benefit of the Village Fire Department
for the upcoming fiscal year (May 1 through April 30).
      (2)   The items and purposes may include the following:
         (a)   Purchase of safety equipment;
         (b)   Training and materials and equipment;
         (c)   Attendance at training schools subject to approval by the Fire
Chief;
         (d)   Station furnishings and equipment;
         (e)   Emergency medical and fire suppression equipment;
         (f)   Membership assessments for the Community Firefighters
Association Death Benefit Fund and Illinois Firefighters Indemnity Fund;
         (g)   Rescue dive equipment; and
         (h)   Audit expense.
   (B)   Final budget. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall, by May of each
year, prior to the start of the fiscal year, adopt a final budget for the
collection and payment of the Foreign Fire Insurance Company fees. The final
budget shall be approved by the Village Board of Trustees in the same fashion
as any other regular village ordinance.
   (C)   Budget amendments. The Foreign Fire Insurance Board budget referred to
in division (B) above may be amended at any time by the unanimous vote of the
Foreign Fire Insurance Board and a majority vote of the Village Board of
Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 33.40) (Ord. 4034, passed 2-1-2010)
§ 33.46 ANNUAL AUDIT.
   The Foreign Fire Insurance Board shall provide to the Village Board an
annual audit of the financial affairs of the Foreign Fire Insurance Board to be
made by a certified public accountant at the end of each fiscal year in
accordance with the generally accepted auditing principles. The annual report
shall be delivered to the Village President, each Village Trustee and the
Village Administrator. Said audit shall be paid for from the funds collected
from the Foreign Fire Insurance Company fees.
(2000 Code, § 33.41) (Ord. 4034, passed 2-1-2010)
CHAPTER 34: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Creation
   
34.02   Personnel
   
34.03   Duties of Chief of Police
   
34.04   Absence of Chief of Police
   
34.05   Appointment of members of the Department
   
34.06   Duty of members of the Department
   
34.07   Records to be preserved
   
34.08   Service and program fees
Auxiliary Police Officers
   
34.20   Appointment
   
34.21   Auxiliary police not to be members of regular Police Department
   
34.22   Duties of auxiliary police
   
34.23   Auxiliary police not to carry firearms
   
34.24   Training course
   
34.25   Compensation
Pension Fund
   
34.40   Establishment
   
34.41   Board of Trustees of Fund; election; meetings
   
34.42   Sources of Fund
   
34.43   Powers and duties of Board of Trustees of Fund
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 CREATION.
   There is created for the municipality a Department of Police.
(2000 Code, § 34.01) (Ord. 671, passed 7-1-1968)
§ 34.02 PERSONNEL.
   The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police, a Deputy Chief of
Administrative Services Division, a Deputy Chief of Field Operations Division,
police lieutenants, police sergeants, police patrol officers and such other
personnel as may be provided for from time to time by the President and Board
of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 34.02) (Ord. 671, passed 7-1-1968; Ord. 1487, passed 12-16-1991;
Ord. 1897, passed 4-7-2003)
§ 34.03 DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief of Police shall have direct charge and control over the Police
Department, and shall be responsible for the faithful and efficient conduct of
the operation of the Department. The Police Chief shall be qualified through
training and experience to administer the Police Department and command men. He
or she shall be responsible for the enforcement and maintenance of law and
order. He or she shall have custody of all apparatus and property pertaining to
the Department, and shall be responsible for the maintenance thereof. He or she
need not be a member of the Police Department nor a resident of the
municipality at the time of his or her appointment.
(2000 Code, § 34.03) (Ord. 671, passed 7-1-1968)
§ 34.04 ABSENCE OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   In the absence of the Chief of Police, a Deputy Chief, as designated by the
Chief of Police, shall be the Acting Chief of Police, and shall assume all of
the powers and duties of the Chief of Police, and in the event of the absence
of the designated Deputy Chief of Police, the remaining Deputy Chief of Police
shall assume said powers and duties of the Chief of Police, and in the event of
the absence of both Deputy Chiefs of Police, the authority and command shall be
as designated in the rules and regulations of the Village Police Department.
(2000 Code, § 34.04) (Ord. 671, passed 7-1-1968; Ord. 1163, passed 11-15-1982;
Ord. 1487, passed 12-16-1991; Ord. 1897, passed 4-7-2003)
§ 34.05 APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Village President, by
and with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall have the authority to appoint two Deputy
Police Chiefs.
      (1)   Exempt rank. The Deputy Police Chief position will be an exempt
rank immediately below that of the Chief of Police.
      (2)   Eligibility for appointment. The Deputy Chief may be appointed
among any rank of sworn, full-time officers of the Village Police Department
provided that he or she has at least five years of full-time service as a
police officer in the Village Police Department.
      (3)   Term of service. The Deputy Police Chief shall serve at the
discretion of the Chief of Police, and, if removed from said position, shall
revert to the rank held immediately prior to the appointment to the Deputy
Police Chief position.
   (C)   Except as provided in divisions (A) and (B) above, all full-time paid
members of the Village Police Department shall be considered to be members of
the classified service, and shall be appointed, promoted and removed by the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners of the village, as provided by
applicable state law.
   (D)   (1)   For purposes of this section, FULLY-QUALIFIED OFFICER shall mean
in the case of the police department, an individual possessing all
certifications required by the Illinois Department of Law Enforcement and other
applicable regulations in order to serve as a full-time police officer, and who
is presently or who has previously been employed as a full-time police officer
in an Illinois unit of local government.
      (2)   Whenever the Police Chief certifies in writing to the Village
President and Board of Trustees and Village Administrator that there is a
present need to hire one or more fully-qualified officers to fill a vacancy
upon approval by the Village President or Village Administrator, the Village
Chief is authorized to approve the hiring of fully-qualified officers for such
vacancies. The Chief shall develop advertising and interviewing procedures in
order to secure applicants. The Village President shall advise the Fire and
Police Commission when this process is invoked and shall keep the Commission
apprised of interviewing and hiring progress.
      (3)   The hiring established pursuant to this section shall take
precedence over any names appearing on an eligibility list developed by the
Fire and Police Commission.
      (4)   In order to be eligible for hiring a fully-qualified officer, an
applicant must meet all other eligibility criteria established by the Fire and
Police Commission or this code for newly-hired employees.
      (5)   Nothing in this section authorizes the hiring of any employees over
and above the number of employees authorized and budgeted by the Mayor and
Board of Trustees from time to time.
      (6)   Any police officer hired under this section shall not be placed
above Step 4 of the wage scale provided for in the CBA in effect at the time of
appointment.
(2000 Code, § 34.05) (Ord. 671, passed 7-1-1968; Ord. 1487, passed 12-16-1991;
Ord. 1897, passed 4-7-2003; Ord. 4561, passed 5-15-2023)
§ 34.06 DUTY OF MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to enforce all
the ordinances of the municipality and all statutes and laws effective in the
municipality, to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law and to
arrest violators thereof. Every member of the Police Department is declared to
be a conservator of the peace.
(2000 Code, § 34.06) (Ord. 671, passed 7-1-1968)
§ 34.07 RECORDS TO BE PRESERVED.
   The Chief shall see that all records and original reports shall be preserved
and shall be accessible to any officer of the municipality, but not all records
shall be open to public inspection.
(2000 Code, § 34.07) (Ord. 671, passed 7-1-1968)
§ 34.08 SERVICE AND PROGRAM FEES.
   Fees for the following Police Department services and programs shall be as
follows:
 
Copy of a traffic accident report                 $5
Fingerprinting of nonresidents                    $35
Fingerprinting of residents                       $15
Report by accident reconstruction officer or team $20
 
(2000 Code, § 34.08) (Ord. 4147, passed 2-21-2012)
AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS
§ 34.20 APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The President of the municipality is authorized to appoint ten
auxiliary police officers as employees, subject to the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Prior to appointment, all proposed auxiliary police officers shall be
fingerprinted and their fingerprints shall be checked with the Federal Bureau
of Identification, Washington, D.C., for any possible criminal record.
   (C)   No person shall be appointed as an auxiliary police officers if he or
she has been convicted of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude.
   (D)   The appointment of any or all auxiliary police officers may be
terminated by the President subject to the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 34.20) (Ord. 700, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 34.21 AUXILIARY POLICE NOT TO BE MEMBERS OF REGULAR POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   Auxiliary police officers shall not be members of the regular Police
Department of the municipality. Auxiliary police officers need not be residents
of the municipality. Identification symbols worn by such auxiliary police
officers shall be different and distinct from those used by the regular Police
Department, and shall be selected and chosen by the Chief of Police. Auxiliary
police officers shall at all times during the performance of their duties be
subject to the direction and control of the Chief of Police.
(2000 Code, § 34.21) (Ord. 700, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 34.22 DUTIES OF AUXILIARY POLICE.
   Auxiliary police officers shall have the following powers and duties, when
properly assigned and on duty:
   (A)   To aid or direct traffic in the municipality;
   (B)   To aid in the control of natural or human-made disasters;
   (C)   To aid in case of civil disorders;
   (D)   To perform normal and regular police duties when assigned by the Chief
of Police on occasions when it is impracticable for members of the regular
Police Department to perform normal and regular police duties;
   (E)   To arrest or cause to be arrested, with or without process, all
persons who break the peace, or are found violating any municipal ordinance or
any criminal law of the state;
   (F)   To commit arrested persons for examination;
   (G)   If necessary, to detain arrested persons in custody overnight or
Sunday in any safe place, or until they can be brought before the proper
magistrate;
   (H)   To exercise all other powers as conservators of the peace that the
corporate authorities may prescribe; and
   (I)   To serve and execute all warrants for the violation of municipal
ordinances or the state criminal law within the limits of the municipality,
and, for this purpose, to have all the common law and statutory power of
Sheriffs.
(2000 Code, § 34.22) (Ord. 700, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 34.23 AUXILIARY POLICE NOT TO CARRY FIREARMS.
   Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms, except with the
permission of the Chief of Police, or, in his or her absence, of the ranking
officer on duty, and then only when in uniform and in the performance of their
duties.
(2000 Code, § 34.23) (Ord. 700, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 34.24 TRAINING COURSE.
   Auxiliary police officers, prior to entering on any of their duties, shall
receive a course of training in the use of weapons and other police procedures
by the Chief of Police. Such course of training shall be not less than 90 hours
in duration. On completion of the course of training, the Chief of Police shall
file a certificate attesting to the auxiliary police officers’s completion of
said course with the Village Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 34.24) (Ord. 700, passed 4-7-1969)
§ 34.25 COMPENSATION.
   Auxiliary police officers shall be paid at an hourly rate as established by
the President and Board of Trustees for each hour of service performed,
provided such service is performed at the direction of the Chief of Police.
(2000 Code, § 34.25)
PENSION FUND
§ 34.40 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is established a Police Officer’s Pension Fund in and for the
municipality, as provided by state law.
(2000 Code, § 34.35) (Ord. 865, passed 2-3-1975)
Statutory reference:
   Police Officer’s Pension Fund, see 40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
§ 34.41 BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF FUND; ELECTION; MEETINGS.
   (A)   There is created a Board of Trustees of the Police Officer’s Pension
Fund which shall consist of the members as provided by the applicable state
law.
   (B)   The term of office of the member shall be as prescribed by state law,
and the election of the Trustees shall be held at those times and places as are
required by law and in the manner required by law.
   (C)   The Board of Trustees shall be organized and shall hold meetings as
provided by state law.
(2000 Code, § 34.36) (Ord. 865, passed 2-3-1975)
Statutory reference:
   Board, see 40 ILCS 5/3-128 et seq.
§ 34.42 SOURCES OF FUND.
   The Pension Funds shall consist of the taxes, accumulation, assessments and
deductions as are provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes, and shall include
an assessment or deduction of 7.5%, or any larger amount permitted by law, from
the salary of each police officer covered under the fund.
(2000 Code, § 34.37) (Ord. 865, passed 2-3-1975)
§ 34.43 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF FUND.
   The Board of Trustees of the Fund shall have all the powers, duties and
obligations conferred and imposed on it by applicable state law.
(2000 Code, § 34.38) (Ord. 865, passed 2-3-1975)
CHAPTER 35: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
35.01   Local state of emergency
 
   
35.99   Penalty
§ 35.01 LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CURFEW. A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering,
standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant
premises within the corporate limits of the village except officials of any
governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to
said civil emergency.
      EMERGENCY.
         (a)   A riot of unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power
to execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law;
or
         (b)   Any natural disaster, epidemic, or manmade calamity, including
outbreak of disease, flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or
explosion, or eminent threat of any of those events within the corporate limits
of the village, resulting in or threatening the death or injury of persons or
the destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must
be taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Declaration. Whenever an emergency, as defined in division (A) of this
section exists, the Village President is authorized to declare the existence of
a local state of emergency by means of a written declaration of the Village
President, under oath, setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency,
describing the nature of the emergency and declaring that a local state of
emergency exists in accordance with the definitions set forth in this section.
This declaration must be filed with the municipal clerk as soon as practicable
after issuance.
   (C)   Curfew authorized. After proclamation of a local state of emergency by
the Village President, he or she may order a general curfew applicable to such
geographical areas of the village or to the village as a whole, as he or she
deems reasonable and advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or
night as he or she deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and
welfare.
   (D)   Orders authorized. After the proclamation of a local state of
emergency, the Village President may also, in the interest of public safety and
welfare, and to address this issue caused threatened by emergency, may take any
and all of the following actions by executive order during the state of
emergency:
      (1)   All actions reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency;
      (2)   Approve previously appropriated expenditures of the village for the
purpose of continuing the operations of the municipality;
      (3)   In the event the local state of emergency extends beyond the
current fiscal year and a new budget has not been approved, the Village
President shall be authorized to approve new spending by the village during the
existence of the local state of emergency;
      (4)   Order the closing of all retail liquor stores, including taverns
and private clubs or portions thereof wherein the consumption of intoxicating
liquor and beer is permitted;
      (5)   Order the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic liquor by any
wholesaler or retailer;
      (6)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixes to a motor vehicle; and
      (7)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
   (E)   Duration. The declaration herein authorized shall be effective until
the adjournment of the next regular or special meeting of the Village Board,
whichever comes first, unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the
Village President, or, his or her interim emergency successor, indicating that
the civil emergency no longer exists. The Village President or his or her
interim emergency successor, shall have the power to re-proclaim the existence
of an emergency on the fifteenth and thirty-first (or thirtieth) of each month,
during the time said emergency exists.
   (F)   Notice. Upon issuing the declaration herein authorized, the municipal
clerk shall notify the news media situated within the village, and shall cause
at least four copies of the proclamation declaring the existence of the
emergency and any curfew to be posted at the following places within the
village: the Village Hall, the police station, the post office and in the area
of any curfew.
   (G)   Violations. Any person violating the provisions of this section or
executive orders issued pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an offense against
the village and shall be punished as provided by §
35.99.
   (H)   Effect on other ordinances. Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to impair the powers contained in this code, giving power to the
police and fire departments, but shall be construed together with existing
sections now in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the
village.
(2000 Code, § 35.01) (Ord. 1379, passed 2-21-1989; Ord. 4407, passed 3-16-2020)
Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or executive order
issued pursuant thereto shall be guilty of an offense against the village and
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $750.
(2000 Code, § 35.99) (Ord. 1379, passed 2-21-1989)
CHAPTER 36: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Budget Management System
   
36.01   Passage of annual budget effect
   
36.02   Budget Officer appointment
   
36.03   Powers and duties of Budget Officer
   
36.04   Compilation and contents of annual budget
   
36.05   Capital Improvement, Repair or Replacement Fund
   
36.06   Revisions of annual budget
   
36.07   Funds for contingency purposes
   
36.08   Public inspection, notice and hearings on budget
Tax Increment Financing
   
36.20   Action of Village Clerk
   
36.21   Rules for registry
BUDGET MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
§ 36.01 PASSAGE OF ANNUAL BUDGET EFFECT.
   The annual municipal budget shall be adopted by the corporate authorities
before the beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies. Passage of the
annual budget by the corporate authorities shall be in lieu of passage of the
appropriation ordinance as required by 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9. The annual budget need
not be published except in a manner provided in §
36.08.
(65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.4) (2000 Code, § 36.01) (Ord. 1344, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 36.02 BUDGET OFFICER APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The position of Budget Officer is established. The Budget Officer
shall be appointed by the President with the approval of the Board of Trustees.
The Budget Officer shall take an oath and post a bond as provided in 65 ILCS 5/
3.1-10-25 and 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30.
   (B)   The Budget Officer may hold another municipal office, either elected
or appointed, and may receive compensation for both offices.
(65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1) (2000 Code, § 36.02) (Ord. 1344, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 36.03 POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUDGET OFFICER.
   The appointed Budget Officer shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures in all municipal departments, commissions and boards;
   (B)   Compile an annual budget in accordance with §
36.04;
   (C)   Examine all books and records of all municipal departments,
commissions and boards which relate to monies received by the municipality,
municipal departments, commissions and boards, and paid out by the
municipality, municipal departments, commissions and boards, debts and accounts
receivable, amounts owed by or to the municipality, municipal departments,
commissions and boards;
   (D)   Obtain such additional information from the municipality, municipal
departments, commissions and boards as may be useful to the Budget Officer for
purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be furnished by
the municipality, municipal departments, commissions and boards in the form
required by the Budget Officer. Any department, commission or board which
refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the Budget
Officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget
for the municipality until such municipal department, commission or board shall
comply in full with the request of the Budget Officer; and
   (E)   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no
expenditures are made by the municipality, municipal departments, commissions
or board except as authorized by the budget.
(65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.2) (2000 Code, § 36.03) (Ord. 1344, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 36.04 COMPILATION AND CONTENTS OF ANNUAL BUDGET.
   The Budget Officer shall compile a budget, such budget to contain estimates
of revenues available to the municipality for the fiscal year for which the
budget is drafted, together with recommended expenditures for the municipality
and all of the municipality’s departments, commissions and boards. Revenue
estimates and expenditure recommendations shall be presented in a manner which
is in conformity with good fiscal management practices. Substantial conformity
to a chart of accounts, now or in the future, recommended by the National
Committee on Governmental Accounting, or the Auditor of Public Accounts of the
state, or the Division of Local Governmental Affairs and Property Taxes of the
Department of Revenue of the state or successor agencies shall be deemed proof
of such conformity. The budget shall contain actual or estimated revenues and
expenditures for the two years immediately preceding the fiscal year for which
the budget is prepared. So far as is possible, the fiscal data for such two
preceding fiscal years shall be itemized in a manner which is in conformity
with the chart of accounts approved above. Each budget shall show the specific
fund from which each anticipated expenditure shall be made.
(65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.3) (2000 Code, § 36.04) (Ord. 1344, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 36.05 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT, REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT FUND.
   In the preparation of the annual budget, an amount not to exceed 3% of the
equalized assessed value of property subject to taxation by the municipality
may be accumulated in a separate fund for the purpose or purposes of specific
capital improvements, repairs or replacements of specific types of municipal
equipment or other tangible property, both real and personal, to be designated
as the “Capital Improvement Repair or Replacement Fund”. Expenditures from the
Fund shall be budgeted in the fiscal year in which the capital improvement,
repair or replacement will occur. Upon the completion or abandonment of any
object for which the Fund, or should any surplus monies remain after the
completion or abandonment of any object for which the Fund was inaugurated,
then such funds no longer necessary for capital improvement, repair or
replacement shall be transferred into the General Corporate Fund of the
municipality on the first day of the fiscal year following such abandonment,
completion or discovery of surplus funds.
(65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.5) (2000 Code, § 36.05) (Ord. 1344, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 36.06 REVISIONS OF ANNUAL BUDGET.
   The corporate authorities may delegate authority to heads of municipal
departments, boards or commissions to delete, add to, change or create sub-
classes within object classes budgeted previously to the department, board or
commission, subject to such limitation or requirement for prior approval by the
Budget Officer of the municipality as the Village Board, upon a two-thirds vote
of the corporate authorities then holding office, may establish. By a vote of
two-thirds of the members of the corporate authorities then holding office, the
annual budget for the municipality may be revised by deleting, adding to,
changing or creating sub-classes within object classes and object classes
themselves. No revision of the budget shall be made increasing the budget in
the event funds are not available to effectuate the purpose of the revision.
(65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.6) (2000 Code, § 36.06) (Ord. 1344, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 36.07 FUNDS FOR CONTINGENCY PURPOSES.
   The annual budget may contain money set aside for contingency purposes not
to exceed 10% of the total budget, less the amount set aside for contingency
purposes, which monies may be expended for contingencies upon a majority vote
of the corporate authorities then holding office.
(65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.7) (2000 Code, § 36.07) (Ord. 1344, passed 3-7-1988)
§ 36.08 PUBLIC INSPECTION, NOTICE AND HEARINGS ON BUDGET.
   The corporate authorities shall make the tentative annual budget
conveniently available to public inspection for at least ten days prior to the
passage of the annual budget, by publication in the journal of proceedings of
the corporate authorities or in such other form as the corporate authorities
may prescribe. Not less than one week after the publication of the tentative
annual budget, and prior to final action on the budget, the corporate
authorities shall hold at least one public hearing on the tentative annual
budget, after which hearing or hearings the tentative budget may be further
revised and passed without any further inspection, notice or hearing. Notice of
this hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the municipality at least one week prior to the time of the
hearing.
(65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.9) (2000 Code, § 36.08) (Ord. 1344, passed 3-7-1988)
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING
§ 36.20 ACTION OF VILLAGE CLERK.
   The Village Clerk or his or her designee is hereby authorized and directed
to create an “Interested Parties” Registry in accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-
74.4-4.2 for each Redevelopment Project Area created under the Act and not
terminated by the village, whether now existing or created after the date of
the adoption of this section.
(2000 Code, § 36.20) (Ord. 1796, passed 3-19-2001)
§ 36.21 RULES FOR REGISTRY.
   In accordance with 65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2, the village hereby adopts the
rules attached to Ord. 1796 as rules for each Registry. The Village Board of
Trustees may amend such registration rules from time to time as may be
necessary or desirable to comply with and carry out the purposes by the Act.
(2000 Code, § 36.21) (Ord. 1796, passed 3-19-2001)
CHAPTER 37: TAXATION
Section
Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
   
37.001   Imposition; rate
   
37.002   Report filed with State Department of Revenue
   
37.003   Tax paid at time of report
Automobile Renting Use Tax
   
37.015   Tax imposed; rate
   
37.016   Collection and payment
Municipal Hotel Tax
   
37.030   Tax required; amount
   
37.031   Exemption
   
37.032   Definitions
   
37.033   Tax return
   
37.034   Reimbursement of tax
   
37.035   Books and records
   
37.036   Interest and penalties
   
37.037   Application of proceeds
Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax
   
37.050   Tax imposed; rate
   
37.051   Report filed with State Department of Revenue
Municipal Service Occupation Tax
   
37.065   Tax imposed; rate
   
37.066   Report filed with State Department of Revenue
Municipal Use Tax
   
37.080   Tax imposed; rate
   
37.081   Collection and payment
Emergency 911 Telephone System Surcharge
   
37.095   Surcharge imposed
   
37.096   Rate
   
37.097   Definitions
   
37.098   Exemptions
   
37.099   Implementation
   
37.100   Payment
   
37.101   Remittance statement
   
37.102   Credit
Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Procedures
   
37.115   Title
   
37.116   Scope
   
37.117   Definitions
   
37.118   Notices
   
37.119   Late payment
   
37.120   Payment
   
37.121   Certain credits and refunds
   
37.122   Audit procedure
   
37.123   Appeal
   
37.124   Hearing
   
37.125   Interest and penalties
   
37.126   Abatement
   
37.127   Installment contracts
   
37.128   Statute of limitations
   
37.129   Voluntary disclosure
   
37.130   Publication of tax ordinances
   
37.131   Review procedures
   
37.132   Application
Municipal Utility Tax on Gas
   
37.145   Tax imposed; rate
   
37.146   Exceptions
   
37.147   Additional taxes
   
37.148   Definitions
   
37.149   Effective date
   
37.150   Reports to municipality
   
37.151   Mistake or error/credit
   
37.152   Recovery limit
   
37.153   Violation or fraud
   
37.154   Notice to utility companies
Municipal Utility Tax on Electricity
   
37.165   Definitions
   
37.166   Tax imposed
   
37.167   Exceptions
   
37.168   Additional taxes
   
37.169   Collection
   
37.170   Reports to municipality
   
37.171   Mistake or error/credit
   
37.172   Recovery limit
   
37.173   Violation or fraud
   
37.174   Notice to utility companies
Municipal Telecommunications Tax
   
37.185   Simplified municipal telecommunications tax
Municipal Cannabis Retailers' Occupation Tax
   
37.220   Tax imposed
   
37.221   Tax collection
   
37.222   Records
   
37.223   Cannabis license
Municipal Motor Fuel Tax
   
37.235   Tax imposed
   
37.236   Illinois Department of Revenue to administer
   
37.237   Clerk to file ordinance with Illinois Department of Revenue
Amusement Tax
   
37.400   Amusement tax based on admissions
   
37.401   Definitions
   
37.402   Business license required
   
37.403   Filing of statement and payment of tax; records; inspection of records
   
37.404   Penalties for nonpayment
   
37.405   Determination of tax due by Finance Director
   
37.406   Exemption for certain amusements and entertainments
 
   
37.999   Penalty
AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX
§ 37.001 IMPOSITION; RATE.
   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of renting
automobiles in this village at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from the
sales made in the course of the business while this subchapter is in effect, in
accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-7.
(2000 Code, § 37.001) (Ord. 1126, passed 1-4-1982)
§ 37.002 REPORT FILED WITH STATE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   Every person engaged in the business of renting automobiles in the village
shall file all reports to the State Department of Revenue, as required by 35
ILCS 120/3.
(2000 Code, § 37.002) (Ord. 1126, passed 1-4-1982)
§ 37.003 TAX PAID AT TIME OF REPORT.
   At the time the report is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax imposed on account of the renting of automobiles
during the preceding month.
(2000 Code, § 37.003) (Ord. 1126, passed 1-4-1982)
AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX
§ 37.015 TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
   A tax is imposed on the privilege of using in this village an automobile
which is rented from a renter outside the state and which is titled or
registered with an agency of this state’s government in this village, at the
rate of 1% of the rental price of the automobile while this subchapter is in
effect in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-8.
(2000 Code, § 37.015) (Ord. 1125, passed 1-4-1982)
§ 37.016 COLLECTION AND PAYMENT.
   The tax shall be collected from the persons whose state address for titling
or registration purposes is given as being in this village and shall be paid to
the State Department of Revenue.
(2000 Code, § 37.016) (Ord. 1125, passed 1-4-1982)
MUNICIPAL HOTEL TAX
§ 37.030 TAX REQUIRED; AMOUNT.
   There is hereby levied and imposed upon the use and privilege of engaging in
the business of leasing, renting, making, facilitating, or servicing the
leasing or renting of a hotel or motel room in the Village of Matteson, a tax
of seven percent on the gross rental receipts (not including taxes or other
non-room rental charges added to the hotel or motel bill) for each such hotel
or motel room rented for every 24-hour period, or any fraction thereof,
excluding, however, from the gross rental receipts, the proceeds of such
renting or leasing or letting to permanent residents of that hotel or motel.
(Ord. 4394, passed 8-20-2018; Ord. 4526, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 37.031 EXEMPTION.
   A taxpayer subject to the tax imposed in §
37.030 may claim an exemption for gross rental receipts subject to said tax, if
gross rental receipts are derived from binding and guaranteed room contract(s)
entered into on or before September 1, 1986. In order to claim this exemption,
the taxpayer must submit written proof of said binding and guaranteed contract
in a form satisfactory to the corporate authorities on the monthly tax return
required in §
37.033 during the month in which said exempt gross receipts are received by the
taxpayer. Failure by the taxpayer to claim said exemption in the month in which
said gross receipts are received shall constitute an automatic waiver and bar
to receipt of said exemption.
(Ord. 4394, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 37.032 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS RENTAL RECEIPTS. The total amount of consideration for occupancy,
valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all
receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature,
including, but not limited to, amounts charged for the making, servicing or
facilitating reservations.
   HOTEL. Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a
consideration, obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
The term includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses,
rooming houses and apartment houses.
   PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any
room or rooms in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, or a receiver,
executor, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any
court.
   ROOM OR ROOMS. Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
(Ord. 4394, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 37.033 TAX RETURN.
   (A)   Each person, business, corporation, partnership or other entity,
subject to the tax imposed in §
37.030 shall make a tax return as required by this section to the Village
Treasurer on or before the twentieth day of each month stating:
      (1)   Name;
      (2)   Principal place of business;
      (3)   Gross receipts during the prior month upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax; and
      (5)   Any such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   Each person making the return shall, at the time of making such
return, pay to the Village Treasurer the amount of tax herein imposed.
(Ord. 4394, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 37.034 REIMBURSEMENT OF TAX.
   Persons subject to the tax imposed by this subchapter may reimburse
themselves for their tax liability for such tax by separately stating such tax
as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single
amount, with the state tax imposed under "the hotel operators occupation tax
act."
(Ord. 4394, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 37.035 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every person subject to the tax imposed by this subchapter shall keep
separate books or records of his business so as to show the rents and
occupancies taxable under this subchapter separately from his transactions not
taxable hereunder. If any such person fails to keep such separate books or
records, he shall be liable to the tax at the rate designated in §
37.030 upon the entire proceeds from his hotel or motel.
(Ord. 4394, passed 8-20-2018)
§ 37.036 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of any tax due hereunder
shall be subject to interest and penalties as set forth in the locally imposed
and administered tax rights and responsibility provisions of this code. Any
person violating any other provision of this subchapter, upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum amount
permitted by §
37.999(B) of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting any additional
or further remedies that the village may have relating to the enforcement of
this subchapter, or the collection of the amount of any tax due hereunder.
   (C)   When any person shall fail to pay the tax provided herein, or when the
owner, operator, or licensee of a hotel in the village shall fail to collect
the tax from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of the same,
the village attorney shall, upon requires of the finance director, bring or
cause to be brought an action to enforce payment of the tax on behalf of the
village in any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 4394, passed 8-20-2018; Ord. 4526, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 37.037 APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS.
   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the hotel tax, including
penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of the village and shall be credited
to and deposited in the general corporate fund of the village. The proceeds
from the tax collected pursuant to this subchapter shall be used for any lawful
purposes of the fund. No such funds shall be used to advertise for or otherwise
promote new competition in the hotel business.
(Ord. 4394, passed 8-20-2018; Ord. 4526, passed 8-15-2022)
MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
§ 37.050 TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible personal
property title or registered with an agency of this State's government, at
retail in this municipality at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts
from such sales made in the course of such business while this ordinance is in
effect. This “Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax” shall not be
applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which is to be consumed
off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks,
and food that has been prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and
non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical appliances and insulin, urine
testing materials, syringes and needles used by diabetics. The imposition of
this home rule tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of
Section 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-1 and 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5).
(2000 Code, § 37.045) (Ord. 708, passed 9-2-1969; Ord. 4523, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 37.051 REPORT FILED WITH STATE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions set forth herein.
(2000 Code, § 37.046) (Ord. 708, passed 9-2-1969; Ord. 4523, passed 8-15-2022)
MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
§ 37.065 TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality
in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of 1% of the selling
price of all tangible personal property transferred by such serviceman as an
incident to a sale of service. This “Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation
Tax” shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human consumption which
is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other than alcoholic
beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for immediate
consumption) and prescription and non-prescription medicines, drugs, medical
appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles used by
diabetics.
   (B)   The imposition of this home rule tax is in accordance with and subject
to the provisions of Sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 AND 5/8-11-5).
(2000 Code, § 37.060) (Ord. 709, passed 9-2-1969; Ord. 4523, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 37.066 REPORT FILED WITH STATE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions set forth herein.
(2000 Code, § 37.061) (Ord. 709, passed 9-2-1969; Ord. 4523, passed 8-15-2022)
MUNICIPAL USE TAX
§ 37.080 TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
   (A)   A tax is imposed in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-
6 on the privilege of using in the municipality any item of tangible personal
property which is purchased outside the state at retail from a retailer, and
which is titled or registered with an agency of state government.
   (B)   The tax shall be at a rate of 1% of the selling price of the tangible
property, with SELLING PRICE to have the meaning as defined in 35 ILCS 105/2.
(2000 Code, § 37.075) (Ord. 860, passed 11-18-1974)
§ 37.081 COLLECTION AND PAYMENT.
   The tax shall be collected by the State Department of Revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax, and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.
(2000 Code, § 37.076) (Ord. 860, passed 11-18-1974)
EMERGENCY 911 TELEPHONE SYSTEM SURCHARGE
§ 37.095 SURCHARGE IMPOSED.
   A surcharge is imposed upon all telecommunication carriers engaged in the
business of transmitting messages by means of electricity originating within
the corporate limits of the village, and terminating within the state for
funding of a 911 emergency telephone system.
(2000 Code, § 37.085) (Ord. 1375, passed 1-17-1989)
§ 37.096 RATE.
   (A)   A surcharge is imposed at a rate of $0.80 per month per in-service
network connection, as hereinafter defined.
   (B)   A network connection shall not be deemed to be in service where a
subscriber’s account is deemed uncollectible by the telecommunication carrier.
(2000 Code, § 37.086) (Ord. 1375, passed 1-17-1989)
§ 37.097 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NETWORK CONNECTIONS. The number of voice grade communications channels
directly between a subscriber and a telecommunications carrier’s public
switched network without the intervention of any other telecommunications
carriers switched network which would be required to carry the subscribers
inter-premises traffic.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate,
partnership, association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation,
municipal corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver,
trustee, conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court
engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of electricity.
   TRANSMITTING MESSAGES. Has the meaning ascribed to the term in 65 ILCS 5/8-
11-2.
(2000 Code, § 37.087) (Ord. 1375, passed 1-17-1989)
§ 37.098 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall provide any telecommunication carrier subject
to the surcharge with a certified list of those network connections assigned to
the municipality to be exempt from imposition of the surcharge.
   (B)   The certified list may be revised by the municipality on 60 days’
prior written notice provided to the telecommunication carriers.
(2000 Code, § 37.088) (Ord. 1375, passed 1-17-1989)
§ 37.099 IMPLEMENTATION.
   The surcharge shall be imposed on the first day of the month following the
expiration of 30 days from the date the Village Clerk certifies to any of the
telecommunication carriers who are subject to the surcharge.
(2000 Code, § 37.089) (Ord. 1375, passed 1-17-1989)
§ 37.100 PAYMENT.
   Every telecommunication carrier shall remit to the Village Treasurer the
amount of surcharge due and owing for each calendar month within 30 days
following expiration of any month to which the surcharge applies, net of any
network or other 911 or sophisticated 911 system charge then due the particular
telecommunication carrier as shown on an itemized bill.
(2000 Code, § 37.090) (Ord. 1375, passed 1-17-1989)
§ 37.101 REMITTANCE STATEMENT.
   Simultaneously with the remittance subscribed in §
37.100, each telecommunication carrier shall make a return to the Village
Treasurer for the period to which the remittance applies stating as follows:
   (A)   The name of the telecommunication carrier;
   (B)   The telecommunication carrier’s principal place of business;
   (C)   The number of network connections to which the surcharge applies;
   (D)   The amount of surcharge due; and
   (E)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
(2000 Code, § 37.091) (Ord. 1375, passed 1-17-1989)
§ 37.102 CREDIT.
   If it shall appear that an amount of surcharge has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake
of act or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any
surcharge due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the
telecommunication carrier who made the erroneous payments; provided that no
amounts erroneously paid more than three years prior to the filing of a claim
therefor shall be so credited.
(2000 Code, § 37.092) (Ord. 1375, passed 1-17-1989)
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY PROCEDURES
§ 37.115 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “Locally Imposed
and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Subchapter”.
(2000 Code, § 37.105) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.116 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the village’s procedures in
connection with all of the village’s locally imposed and administered taxes.
(2000 Code, § 37.106) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.117 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The “Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act,” being 50 ILCS
451.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The village’s President and Board of Trustees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The village’s Administrator or his or her designee,
is charged with the administration and collection of the locally imposed and
administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are
authorized by the LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR to act in the LOCAL TAX
ADMINISTRATOR’S stead. The LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR shall have the authority to
implement the terms of this subchapter to give full effect to this subchapter.
The exercise of such authority by the LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR shall not be
inconsistent with this subchapter and the Act.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village, not an agency or department
of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under
the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the village other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.
   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village’s locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Matteson, Cook County, Illinois.
(2000 Code, § 37.107) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.118 NOTICES.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given,
the notice is to be in writing, mailed not less than seven calendar days prior
to the day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of
the local Tax Administrator.
   (B)   The notice shall be sent by the local Tax Administrator as follows:
      (1)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the person’s last known address; or
      (2)   Personal service or delivery.
(2000 Code, § 37.108) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.119 LATE PAYMENT.
   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:
   (A)   Physically received by the village on or before the due date; or
   (B)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable United States postmark dated on or before the due date, properly
addressed to the village, with adequate postage prepaid.
(2000 Code, § 37.109) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.120 PAYMENT.
   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order:
   (A)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;
   (B)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and
   (C)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.
(2000 Code, § 37.110) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.121 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
four years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the local Tax Administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer’s recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      (2)   Within ten days of the receipt by the local Law Administrator of
any claim for a refund or credit, the local Tax Administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (3)   In the event the local Tax Administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of 6% per annum, based on a year of 365
days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to the
date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(2000 Code, § 37.111) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.122 AUDIT PROCEDURE.
   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The tax;
      (2)   The time period of the audit; and
      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local Tax Administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven days nor more than
30 days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the local
Tax Administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the event the
taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question, the
taxpayer may request another date within the 30 days, approved in writing, that
is convenient to the taxpayer and the local Tax Administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer’s
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or Tax
Collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the Tax Administrator’s determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer’s tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
village’s determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local Tax Administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
(2000 Code, § 37.112) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.123 APPEAL.
   (A)   (1)   The local Tax Administrator shall send written notice to a
taxpayer upon the local Tax Administrator’s issuance of a protestable notice of
tax due, a bill, a claim denial or a notice of claim reduction regarding any
tax.
      (2)   The notices shall include the following information:
         (a)   The reason for the assessment;
         (b)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
         (c)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
         (d)   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund
and collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local Tax
Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer’s request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local Tax Administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
45 day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final
bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local Tax Administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
(2000 Code, § 37.113) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.124 HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a Tax Collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under §
37.123, the local Tax Administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any
appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
   (C)   At the hearing the local Tax Administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local Tax Administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or Tax Collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision.
(2000 Code, § 37.114) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.125 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest. The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment or nonpayment of the tax, to be 12%
per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties.
      (1)   If a tax return is not filed within the time and manner provided by
the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing penalty, of 5% of the amount of
tax required to be shown as due on a return shall be imposed; and a late
payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be imposed.
      (2)   If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period
for which the return was required to be filed.
      (3)   A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if failure to file
penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 37.115) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.126 ABATEMENT.
   The local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing payment, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
local Tax Administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
(2000 Code, § 37.116) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.127 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local Tax
Administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local Tax Administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14 working day period or fails to demonstrate
good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the local
Administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further
notice to the taxpayer.
(2000 Code, § 37.117) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.128 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The village, through the local Tax Administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing.
   (B)   The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the reviewed
tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still due and
owing.
      (1)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than four
years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
      (2)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four-year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of
limitations shall be six years maximum after the end of the calendar year in
which return for the applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in
which the return for the applicable period was filed.
      (3)   No statute of limitations shall not apply if a fraudulent tax
return was filed by the taxpayer.
(2000 Code, § 37.118) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.129 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
been received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from
the local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with
the local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A
taxpayer filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount
of tax due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the
filing of the application but not more than four years before the date of
filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the
filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the
local Tax Administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an
underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this section must be
paid within 90 days after a final determination and the exhaustion of all
appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed to by the local Tax
Administrator, whichever is longer.
(2000 Code, § 37.119) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.130 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village
Clerk’s office.
(2000 Code, § 37.120) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.131 REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review
procedure regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes.
Upon a determination by the local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid, the
lien shall remain in full force and effect.
   (B)   If the lien is determined to be improper, the local Tax Administrator
shall:
      (1)   Timely remove the lien at the village’s expense;
      (2)   Correct the taxpayer’s credit record; and
      (3)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(2000 Code, § 37.121) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
§ 37.132 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement
all of the village’s tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this subchapter shall be
controlling.
(2000 Code, § 37.122) (Ord. 1787-A, passed 1-2-2001)
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX ON GAS
§ 37.145 TAX IMPOSED; RATE.
   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of 5% of the
gross receipts therefrom.
(2000 Code, § 37.125) (Ord. 1907, passed 4-28-2003)
§ 37.146 EXCEPTIONS.
   No tax is imposed by this subchapter with respect to any transaction in
interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not
under the Constitution and statutes of the United States, be made subject to
taxation by this state or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any
persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling
or transmitting gas be subject to taxation under the provisions of this
subchapter for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under
the provisions of the Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act authorized by 65
ILCS 5/8-11-1.
(2000 Code, § 37.126) (Ord. 1907, passed 4-28-2003)
§ 37.147 ADDITIONAL TAXES.
   Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products
or services furnished to this municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for
the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or installation and
maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s business.
(2000 Code, § 37.127) (Ord. 1907, passed 4-28-2003)
§ 37.148 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services
and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however,
that GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include any amounts specifically excluded from
the definition of gross receipts in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2(d).
   PERSONS. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political subdivisions,
any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
(2000 Code, § 37.128) (Ord. 1907, passed 4-28-2003)
§ 37.149 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect after publication and the tax provided for
herein shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined, actually paid
to the taxpayer for services billed on or after June 1, 2003.
(2000 Code, § 37.129) (Ord. 1907, passed 4-28-2003)
§ 37.150 REPORTS TO MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   On or before the last day of July, 2003 each taxpayer shall make a
return to the Village Treasurer for the month of June, 2003, stating:
      (1)   His or her name;
      (2)   His or her principal place of business;
      (3)   His or her gross receipts during those months upon the basis of
which the tax is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax; and
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer
shall make a like return to the Village Treasurer for a corresponding one-month
period.
   (C)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the Village Treasurer, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he or
she so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts.
(2000 Code, § 37.130) (Ord. 1907, passed 4-28-2003) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.151 MISTAKE OR ERROR/CREDIT.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
(2000 Code, § 37.131) (Ord. 1907, passed 4-28-2003)
§ 37.152 RECOVERY LIMIT.
   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such
amount.
(2000 Code, § 37.132) (Ord. 1907, passed 4-28-2003)
§ 37.153 VIOLATION OR FRAUD.
   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return,
or who willfully violates any other provision of this subchapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(2000 Code, § 37.133) (Ord. 1907, passed 4-28-2003) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.154 NOTICE TO UTILITY COMPANIES.
   The Village Clerk is hereby directed to send a certified copy of this
subchapter to each utility company affected by this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 37.134) (Ord. 1907, passed 4-28-2003)
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX ON ELECTRICITY
§ 37.165 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, municipal corporation, estate or any of its political subdivisions,
any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or
other representative appointed by order of the court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation, facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other
representative, operating within the state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in the state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2,
directly in generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of
electricity.
   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes within the corporate limits of
the village electricity acquired in purchase at retail.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Matteson.
(2000 Code, § 37.135) (Ord. 1908, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1917, passed 6-2-2003;
Ord. 1919, passed 6-16-2003)
§ 37.166 TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
   (A)   (1)   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a
purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the
municipality at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each
purchaser:
         (a)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.610 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (b)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.400 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (c)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.360 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (d)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.350 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (e)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.340 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (f)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.320 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (g)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.315 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (h)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.310 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (i)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.305 cents per kilowatt-hour;
         (j)   For the next 20,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month: 0.300 cents per kilowatt-hour; and
         (k)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt-hours in a month: 0.300 cents per kilowatt-hour.
      (2)   The tax shall be in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue
measures imposed by the village in the state or any other political subdivision
of the state.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall not
be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the Constitution
of the state; and
   (C)   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential and nonresidential customers beginning with the
first bill issued on or after December 15, 2014.
(2000 Code, § 37.136) (Ord. 1908, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1917, passed 6-2-2003;
Ord. 1919, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 4250, passed 12-15-2014) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.167 EXCEPTIONS.
   None of the taxes authorized by this subchapter may be imposed with respect
to any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which
the business or privilege may not, under the Constitution and statutes of the
United States, be made subject of taxation by this state or any political
subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling or transmitting gas, water or
electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this subchapter for those transactions that are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the Municipal Retailers’
Occupation Tax Act authorized by 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1; nor shall any tax authorized
by this subchapter be imposed upon any person engaged in a business or on any
privilege unless the tax is imposed in a like manner and at the same rate upon
all persons engaged in the business of the same class in the municipality,
whether privately or municipally owned or operated, or exercising the same
privilege within the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 37.137) (Ord. 1908, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1917, passed 6-2-2003;
Ord. 1919, passed 6-16-2003)
§ 37.168 ADDITIONAL TAXES.
   Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its
business.
(2000 Code, § 37.138) (Ord. 1908, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1917, passed 6-2-2003;
Ord. 1919, passed 6-16-2003)
§ 37.169 COLLECTION.
   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from the purchaser
by the person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. Any tax required to be collected by this chapter,
and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by
the person delivering the electricity, provided that the person delivering
electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of
electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and
provided further that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering
supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. Persons delivering electricity
shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge
for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be
authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax to
reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expense incurred in keeping
records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and
supplying date to the municipality upon request. If the person delivering
electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the purchaser
shall be required to pay the tax directly to the municipality in the manner
prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering electricity who file returns
pursuant to this subchapter shall, at the time of filing such return, pay the
municipality the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 37.139) (Ord. 1908, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1917, passed 6-2-2003;
Ord. 1919, passed 6-16-2003)
§ 37.170 REPORTS TO MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the village for the preceding month stating:
      (1)   His or her name;
      (2)   His or her principal place of business;
      (3)   His or her gross receipts and/or kilowatt-hour usage during the
month upon the basis of which the tax is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax; and
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the village the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he or she so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments for later
payments based upon any differences between such billings, and the taxable
gross receipts.
(2000 Code, § 37.140) (Ord. 1908, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1917, passed 6-2-2003;
Ord. 1919, passed 6-16-2003)
§ 37.171 MISTAKE OR ERROR/CREDIT.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three
years prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
(2000 Code, § 37.141) (Ord. 1908, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1917, passed 6-2-2003;
Ord. 1919, passed 6-16-2003)
§ 37.172 RECOVERY LIMIT.
   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be commenced more than three years after the due date of such
amount.
(2000 Code, § 37.142) (Ord. 1908, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1917, passed 6-2-2003;
Ord. 1919, passed 6-16-2003)
§ 37.173 VIOLATION OR FRAUD.
   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return,
or who willfully violates any other provision of this subchapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(2000 Code, § 37.143) (Ord. 1908, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1917, passed 6-2-2003;
Ord. 1919, passed 6-16-2003) Penalty, see §
37.999
§ 37.174 NOTICE TO UTILITY COMPANIES.
   The Village Clerk is hereby directed to send a certified copy of this
subchapter to each utility company affected by this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 37.144) (Ord. 1908, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1917, passed 6-2-2003;
Ord. 1919, passed 6-16-2003)
MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
§ 37.185 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX.
   (A)   A simplified municipal telecommunications tax is hereby imposed upon
the act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving in the
municipality intrastate or interstate telecommunications by a person under the
provisions of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act, 35 ILCS 636/
5-1, at a rate of 6% of the gross charges for such telecommunications purchased
at retail from a retailer.
   (B)   (1)   The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the
Department of Revenue of the state.
      (2)   The State Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer
and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
   (C)   (1)   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect from and after
its passage and approval and publication in pamphlet form as required by law,
provided, however, that this section shall take effect for all gross charges
billed by telecommunications retailers on and after July 1, 2004.
      (2)   The Village Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of
this subchapter with the State Department of Revenue prior to March 31, 2004.
(2000 Code, § 37.145) (Ord. 1909, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1967, passed 3-22-
2004)
MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX
§ 37.220 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of the
Illinois Municipal Code upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
cannabis at retail in the village, at the rate of three percent of the gross
receipts from the sales made in the course of that business.
   (B)   This tax does not apply to cannabis purchased under the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act.
   (C)   This tax is in addition to all other taxes and fees imposed by the
Village of Matteson and State of Illinois.
(Ord. 4399, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 37.221 TAX COLLECTION.
   (A)   The tax imposed by this subchapter and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident of the tax shall be collected and enforced by the
Illinois Department of Revenue.
   (B)   Persons subject to any tax imposed under this section may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any state tax that sellers are required to collect.
(Ord. 4399, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 37.222 RECORDS.
   Every person who is subject to this tax shall keep and maintain accurate and
complete documents, books, and records of each transaction or activity subject
to this section, from start to complete, including all original source
documents. All such books and records shall be kept by the owner and shall, at
all reasonable times during normal business hours, be open to inspection, audit
or copying by the Mayor or his/her designee.
(Ord. 4399, passed 10-21-2019)
§ 37.223 CANNABIS LICENSE.
   If any holder of a village adult-use cannabis business license fails to
remain current in the payment of the tax imposed by this section, the adult-use
cannabis business license may be suspended or revoked by the local cannabis
commissioner or his or her designee, or the Mayor if the position of cannabis
commissioner is not established, until said tax is made current. No adult-use
cannabis may be sold from said premises until the tax has been paid.
(Ord. 4399, passed 10-21-2019)
MUNICIPAL MOTOR FUEL TAX
§ 37.235 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the Village of
Matteson in the business of selling motor fuel, as defined in the Motor Fuel
Tax Law, at retail for operation of motor vehicles upon public highways or for
the operation of recreational watercraft upon waterways, at the rate of $0.03
per gallon of motor fuel sold at retail in the municipality for the purpose of
use or consumption and not for the purpose of resale.
   (B)   The imposition of this municipal motor fuel tax is in accordance with
and subject to the provisions of § 8-11-2.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-2.3).
(Ord. 4425, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 37.236 ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER.
   The tax hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 4425, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 37.237 CLERK TO FILE ORDINANCE WITH ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   The Village Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this
subchapter with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before October 1,
2020.
(Ord. 4425, passed 9-21-2020)
AMUSEMENT TAX
§ 37.400 AMUSEMENT TAX BASED ON ADMISSIONS.
   A tax is imposed on every operator of an entertainment or amusement of 4% of
every admission charge. The amusement tax is in addition to all other taxes
imposed by law.
(Ord. 4540, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 37.401 DEFINITIONS.
   The following terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
      ADMISSION CHARGE means any charge for the right or privilege to any
entertainment or amusement and shall include, without being limited to, the
following: all charges for space, seats, chairs, tables, benches, reserved or
otherwise, and other similar accommodations; all charges made for the use or
rental of equipment or facilities for purposes of entertainment and amusement;
and all automobile parking charges in connection with any place of
entertainment or amusement where the charge is determined by the number of
passengers in an automobile; and any other charge normally made for admission,
food, goods or services that in fact represent a charge for an entertainment or
amusement.
      AMUSEMENT RIDE means any device, conveyance, seat, or vehicle designed or
intended for occupancy by one or more persons, propelled electrically,
mechanically, manually, or by an internal combustion engine, and which, when
set in motion, conveys the occupants on or through a prescribed or repetitive
course, over rails or tracks, or in a revolving, rotating, or undulating motion
in a horizontal or vertical plane, or any combination thereof, and that
provides either regular or startling and surprising motions and sensations for
the occupants thereof, such as but not limited to, merry- go-rounds, Ferris
wheels, roller coasters, tilt-a-whirls, loop-the-loop devices, bump and go-
carts and other similar contrivances commonly known as carnival rides.
      ENTERTAINMENT or AMUSEMENT includes all forms of diversion, sport,
pastime, or recreation, including, but not limited to, the following: amusement
rides, carnivals, circuses, pony rides, motion pictures, plays, shows, and
theatrical performances of all kinds, all sporting contests, and athletic
events, exhibitions, concerts, lectures, skating, bowling, dancing, golf,
swimming, billiards, pool, amusement parks, arcades, centers and places, and
all forms of recreation therein, and coin-operated and mechanical devices of
entertainment and games of skill or amusement.
      NOT-FOR-PROFIT. When used with respect to any entertainment or amusement,
means an entertainment or amusement both operated and sponsored by any
governmental agency or any not-for-profit civic, religious, or philanthropic
agency, the admission charges for which are devoted exclusively to defraying
the costs of such amusement or entertainment and to the furtherance of the
purposes for which such agency is established.
      OPERATOR means any person who provides or conducts entertainments or
amusements within the limits of the village for which an admission charge is
collected or any person who engages in the sale of tickets for entertainments
or amusements within the limits of the village for which an admission charge is
collected. The term OPERATOR shall also mean any person (a "third party
operator") who charges for the use or rental of facilities or equipment for the
purposes of entertainment or amusement on premises that are owned, leased,
possessed, or otherwise controlled by the third-party operator.
      PARTICIPATORY AMUSEMENT means any business premises used for
entertainment or amusement in which the customer actively participates in the
entertainment or amusement and shall include billiard parlors, pool halls, game
rooms, miniature golf, go-cart tracks, and bowling alleys.
(Ord. 4540, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 37.402 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   Every operator of an amusement or entertainment subject to the tax imposed
by this subchapter shall, prior to commencing the operation of such amusement
or entertainment, procure a business license.
(Ord. 4540, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 37.403 FILING OF STATEMENT AND PAYMENT OF TAX; RECORDS; INSPECTION OF
RECORDS.
   (A)   Every operator of an entertainment or amusement subject to the tax
imposed by this section shall, on or before the 20th day of each month, file
with the Finance Director of the village a statement signed and sworn by such
person indicating the number of respective prices of admission charges and the
total admission charges collected by such person during the next preceding
calendar month. A remittance of the amount of the tax imposed by this section
shall accompany the statement.
   (B)   All records pertaining to admission charges collected and taxed paid
by any operators pursuant to this section shall be retained by such operators
for a period of seven years.
   (C)   The Finance Director, or his or her authorized agents, shall have the
right to inspect and examine the records of every operator of an amusement or
entertainment within the village.
(Ord. 4540, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 37.404 PENALTIES FOR NONPAYMENT.
   (A)   An operator who fails to remit the amount of any tax due hereunder
when due shall, in addition to all other penalties, pay a penalty of 5% of the
amount of the tax due. For each successive 30 days elapsing before payment,
there shall be added an additional penalty of 1% of the amount of the tax due.
   (B)   A tax due and unpaid under this section, together with penalties
thereon, shall be a debt due to the village. By obtaining a business license,
an operator of an entertainment or amusement shall be deemed to have consented
and agreed that any taxes become due pursuant to this subdivision shall be a
personal obligation of the operator and shall be a lien upon the real and
personal property of the operator devoted to or used in the operation of
entertainments or amusements subject to tax under this section. The lien shall
have priority over all other liens and obligations except those due to the
state and the United States.
(Ord. 4540, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 37.405 DETERMINATION OF TAX DUE BY FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   If an operator fails to file a statement required by this section, or
if the Director of Finance has reasonable cause to believe that an erroneous
statement has been filed, the Finance Director or his or her authorized agent,
may proceed to determine and assess the amount of tax due, and any penalty
incurred by reason of nonpayment thereof, and in connection therewith shall
make such investigations and take such testimony and evidence as may be
necessary; provided, however, that the operator shall be given notice and an
opportunity to be heard before any determination is made by the Finance
Director or his or her authorized agent.
   (B)   Any tax or penalty determined and assessed pursuant to this section
shall be due and collectible immediately upon notice thereof to the operator.
(Ord. 4540, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 37.406 EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS.
   The following are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:
   (A)   An entertainment or amusement both operated by and sponsored by any
governmental agency or any not-for-profit civic, religious, or philanthropic
agency, the admission charges for which are devoted exclusively to defraying
the costs of such amusement or entertainment and to the furtherance of the
purposes for which such agency is established; provided, however, any charges
paid by the not-for-profit, civic, religious or philanthropic agency to a third
party operator for the use or rental of equipment or facilities under the
ownership, possession or control of the third party operator for conducting the
amusement or entertainment shall not be exempt from the amusement tax provided
for herein and shall be taxable as an admission charge as set forth in this
section.
   (B)   Temporary amusements and entertainments
(Ord. 4540, passed 9-26-2022)
§ 37.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person found guilty for violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter, except when otherwise
specifically provided, upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $300 for the first offense, and not less than
$200 nor more than $500 for the second and each subsequent offense in any 180-
day period, provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines
only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the
Illinois Civil Practice Act (ILCS 735 5/1-101 et seq.). Repeated offenses in
excess of three within any 180-day period may also be punishable as a
misdemeanor by incarceration for a term not to exceed six months under the
procedure set forth in § 1-2-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-
21.1), and under the provisions of the Illinois Code of Criminal Procedure (725
ILCS 5/100-1 et seq.). A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as
committed each day upon which each person shall continue any such violations.
(2000 Code, § 37.999)
   (C)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §§
37.145 through
37.154 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $750 and in addition shall be liable in a
civil action for the amount of tax due.
(2000 Code, § 37.133)
   (D)   Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent
return, or who willfully violates any other provision of §§
37.165 through
37.174 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $750 and in addition shall be liable in a
civil action for the amount of tax due.
(2000 Code, § 37.143)
(Ord. 1310, passed 12-1-1986; Ord. 1907, passed 4-28-2003; Ord. 1908, passed 4-
28-2003; Ord. 1917, passed 6-2-2003; Ord. 1919, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 4394,
passed 8-20-2018)
CHAPTER 38: MUNICIPAL CODE ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
38.01   Purpose
   
38.02   Creation
   
38.03   Administrative composition
   
38.04   Notice of violation
   
38.05   Service and notice of hearing
   
38.06   Administrative hearings
   
38.07   Final determination of liability
   
38.08   Judicial review
   
38.09   Enforcement of judgment
   
38.10   Schedule of fines/penalties
   
38.11   Failure to appear; notice
   
38.12   Impending suspension of driver’s license; notice
   
38.13   Towing and impoundment of motor vehicles
   
38.14   Request for hearing in the case of towing and impoundment of motor
vehicles
   
38.15   Post-impoundment notice
   
38.16   Hearing in case of vehicle impoundment
   
38.17   Fines and fees for impoundment
   
38.18   Towing services
   
38.19   Eviction, rights of occupants
   
38.20   Defenses to building code violations
   
38.21   Sanctions applicable to the building owner
   
38.22   Liability of parent or legal guardian for ordinance violations
 
   
38.99   Penalty
§ 38.01 PURPOSE.
   The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide for fair and efficient
enforcement of village ordinances as may be allowed by law and directed by
ordinance, through an administrative adjudication of violations of such village
ordinances and establishing a schedule of fines and penalties, and authority
and procedures for collection of unpaid fines and penalties.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.02 CREATION.
   There is hereby established an executive department of the municipal
government to be known as the Village Ordinance Enforcement Department and to
have the power to enforce compliance with all municipal ordinances (65 ILCS 5/
1-2.1-1 et seq.) and any offense under the Illinois Building Code (65 ILCS 5/
11-31.1-3 et seq.), but not any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a
similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles
and except for any reportable offense under 625 ILCS 5/6-204 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.) The establishment of the Village
Ordinance Enforcement Department does not preclude the Village Board from using
any other method to enforce ordinances of the village.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009; Ord. 4128, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 38.03 ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Village Ordinance Enforcement Department shall be composed of a
Hearing Officer, an Ordinance Enforcement Administrator, System Coordinator/
Computer Operator and such other personnel hereinafter appointed, with the
power and authority as hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   The Village President is hereby authorized to appoint all Hearing
Officers of this village. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to appoint
all other persons to hold the positions hereinafter set forth below, and such
other personnel as needed. Other than the Hearing Officer, one person may hold
and fulfill the requirements of one or more of the above stated positions, and
compensation for each of the hereinafter stated positions shall be as approved
by the President and Board of Trustees.
      (1)   Hearing Officer.
         (a)   The Hearing Officer shall preside over all adjudicatory hearings
and shall have the following powers and duties:
            1.   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine
whether or not a code violation exists;
            2.   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the code of ordinances violation;
            3.   Issue subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give
relevant testimony at the hearing, upon the request of the parties or their
representatives;
            4.   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
            5.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating
whether a village code violation exists; and
            6.   Impose penalties, sanctions or such other relief consistent
with applicable village code provisions and assess costs upon finding a party
liable for the charged violation, except however, that in no event shall the
Hearing Officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration.
         (b)   Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings
under this chapter, the Hearing Officer shall have successfully completed a
formal training program which includes the following:
            1.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative
hearings over which the Hearing Officer shall preside;
            2.   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that
he or she will adjudicate;
            3.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
            4.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on
evidence and issuing final orders.
         (c)   A Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law
in the state for at least three years.
      (2)   Ordinance Enforcement Administrator. The Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator is authorized and directed to:
         (a)   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
village ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by
ordinance;
         (b)   Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required
under this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the purpose of
this chapter;
         (c)   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a
final determination of liability;
         (d)   Certify copies of final determinations of an ordinance violation
adjudicated pursuant to this chapter, and any factual reports verifying the
final determination of any violation liability which was issued in accordance
with this chapter, the laws of the state, including 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3, as
from time to time amended;
         (e)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation
of suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter as hereinafter set forth, and those of state law;
         (f)   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate
and maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created; and
         (g)   Collect unpaid fines and penalties through private collection
agencies and pursuit of all post-judgment remedies available by current law.
      (3)   System Coordinator/Computer Operator. The System Coordinator/
Computer Operator is hereby authorized and directed to operate and maintain the
computer programs for the administrative adjudication system of the Village
Ordinance Enforcement Department hereby created, on a day-to-day basis,
including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Input of violation notice information;
         (b)   Establishing court dates and notice dates;
         (c)   Record fine and penalty assessment and payments;
         (d)   Issue payment receipts;
         (e)   Issue succeeding notice of hearing dates and/or final
determination of liability; issue notice of impending impoundment; issue notice
of impending driver’s license suspension, as directed by the Ordinance
Enforcement Administrator in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set
forth; and
         (f)   Keep accurate records of appearances and non-appearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, judgments entered, sanctions imposed,
if any, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.04 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   The system of administrative adjudication of any village ordinance violation
authorized to be adjudicated hereunder, shall be in accordance with the
following procedures.
   (A)   Violation notice of any ordinance violation including violations of
the Village Traffic Code, Title VII of this code of ordinances, other than any
offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense that is a traffic
regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable
offense under § 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (hereinafter the “Village
Traffic Code”), shall be issued by the persons authorized under this Code and
shall contain information and shall be certified and constitute prima facie
evidence of the violation cited as hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   All full-time police officers as well as other specifically authorized
individuals of any village department shall have the authority to issue
violation notices.
   (C)   Any individual authorized hereby to issue violation notices and who
detects an ordinance violation authorized to be adjudicated under this chapter
or a violation of any section of any village ordinance, is authorized to issue
notice of violation thereof and shall make service thereof as is hereinafter
set forth.
   (D)   The violation notice shall contain, but shall not be limited to, the
following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the party violating the ordinance, if
known;
      (2)   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance);
      (3)   The type and nature of the ordinance violated;
      (4)   Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable);
      (5)   The penalty which may be assessed for failure to appear;
      (6)   The names and witnesses of the violation;
      (7)   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice; and
      (8)   The docket number, date and location of the adjudicating hearing of
ordinance violations, if applicable, other than violations of the Village Motor
Vehicle Code and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
   (E)   The date of the hearing shall not be less than 30 nor more than 40
days after the violation is reported.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.05 SERVICE AND NOTICE OF HEARING.
   (A)   Service of any violation notice shall be made by the person issuing
such notice:
      (1)   In the case of violation of the Village Traffic Code, service shall
be made by:
         (a)   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an
unlawfully standing or parked vehicle, unstickered vehicle or vehicle violating
any compliance regulation;
         (b)   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee
of the vehicle, if present; or
         (c)   Mailing the notice by first-class mail to the person responsible
for the ordinance violation, along with a summons commanding the individual to
appeal at the hearing.
      (2)   In the case of violation of any other provision of this code
relating to buildings or structures, service shall be made by:
         (a)   First class mail on the owner of the structure, along with a
summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing; and
         (b)   If the name of the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained
or if service on the owner cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the
owner by posting or nailing a copy of the notice on the front door of the
structure where the violation is found, not less than 20 days before the
hearing is scheduled.
      (3)   In the case of any ordinance violation other than a violation of
the village traffic code or building code, service shall be made by mailing the
notice by first-class mail to the person responsible for the ordinance
violation, along with a summons commanding the individual to appear at the
hearing.
   (B)   The correctness of facts contained in any violation notice shall be
verified by the person issuing said notice by:
      (1)   Signing his or her name to the notice at the time of issuance; or
      (2)   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate, to be kept by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his or her control.
   (C)   The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained
by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary
course of business.
   (D)   Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith,
or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie
evidence of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.06 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.
   (A)   An administrative hearing shall be granted for the following:
      (1)   To adjudicate any alleged ordinance violation on its merits; and
      (2)   To contest the validity of a notice of impending impoundment, or,
the validity of a notice of impending driver’s license suspension. The hearing
shall be granted to the registered owner or operator of the “cited vehicle”,
pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3 or the lessee of the “cited vehicle”, 625 ILCS
5/11-1306, incorporated herein by reference, and at the date, time and place as
is set forth by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator and served upon the
registered owner, operator or lessee for hearings contesting the validity of
notices of impending impoundment.
   (B)   No continuances shall be authorized by the Hearing Officer at the
hearing except where absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the
individual. Lack of preparation does not constitute cause for a continuance. No
continuance may be granted for more than 25 days.
   (C)   All administrative hearings shall be recorded and shall culminate in a
determination of liability or non-liability, made by the Hearing Officer, who
shall consider facts and/or testimony without the application of the formal or
technical rules of evidence. Evidence including hearsay, may be admitted only
if it is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonable prudent persons in the
conduct of their affairs.
   (D)   The Hearing Officer shall, upon a determination of liability, assess
fines and penalties in accordance with §
38.10. Persons appearing to contest the alleged violation on its merits may be
represented by counsel at their own expense. The burden of proof shall be on
the alleged offender to refute the prima facie case set forth in the verified
notice of violation.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.07 FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   A final determination of liability shall occur following the failure
to pay the fine or penalty after the Hearing Officer’s determination of
liability and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, any administrative
review procedures hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   Where a person fails to appear at the administrative hearing to
contest the alleged violation on the date and at the time and place specified
in a prior served or mailed notice pursuant to §
38.11, the Hearing Officer’s determination of liability shall become final
either upon a denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination or
upon the expiration of the period for filing a petition without a filing having
been made.
   (C)   A notice of final determination of liability shall be sent following
the conclusion of an administrative hearing within five days after the final
determination of liability is made, as is hereinafter set forth, and shall
contain, but not be limited to, the following information and warnings:
      (1)   The Hearing Officer’s findings of fact;
      (2)   A decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the
findings of fact;
      (3)   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a debt
due and owing the village;
      (4)   A statement of any sanction ordered or costs imposed which costs
are debts due and owing the village;
      (5)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and
owing the village within the time specified may result in proceeding with
collection procedures;
      (6)   A warning that the person’s driver’s license may be suspended for
failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or more vehicular standing or parking
violations under state law, incorporated herein by reference;
      (7)   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located within
the village may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten or
more vehicular standing or parking regulation violations; and
      (8)   Any other warning of possible impoundment as permitted by law or
ordinance.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.08 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that a code violation does or does
not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial
review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law, 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1 et seq.
and 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.09 ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the Illinois
Administrative Review Law are a debt due and owing the municipality and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a
code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the Circuit Court of
the county for the purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision
and order.
   (C)   In any case in which a Hearing Officer finds that an individual has
failed to comply with a judgment ordering an individual to correct a code
violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of a code
violation, any expenses incurred by a municipality to enforce the judgment
including, but not limited to, attorney fees, court costs and costs related to
property demolition or foreclosure after they are fixed by the Hearing Officer,
shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   (D)   A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or
both, of the individual in the amount of any debt due and owing the
municipality under this chapter. The lien may be recorded and enforced in the
same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent
jurisdiction. No lien may be enforced under this chapter until it has been
recorded in the manner provided by Article XII of the Code of Civil Procedure,
being 735 ILCS 5/12-101, or by the Uniform Commercial Code. An administrative
fee of $75 will be assessed for the filing of all liens.
   (E)   A Hearing Officer may set aside any judgment entered by default and
set a new hearing date upon a petition filed within 21 days after the issuance
of the order of default if the Hearing Officer determines that the petitioner’s
failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause or at any time if the
petitioner establishes that the municipality did not provide proper service of
process.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009; Ord. 4461, passed 7-19-2021)
§ 38.10 SCHEDULE OF FINES/PENALTIES.
   Fines and penalties shall be imposed in accordance with this code of
ordinances, or where no fine or penalty is expressed in this code of
ordinances, the Hearing Officer may impose a fine or penalty according to his
or her judgment. However, in no case may the fines imposed by the Hearing
Officer exceed $750 per violation per day, or a maximum of $2,500 for all code
violations relating to buildings or structures.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.11 FAILURE TO APPEAR; NOTICE.
   (A)   Upon failure of the person receiving a notice of a violation of a
village ordinance, other than a Village Traffic Code violation, to appear at
the time and date designated for a hearing, or, in the case of a violation of
the Village Traffic Code, the registered owner, operator or lessee of the
“cited vehicle” to pay the fine in full as stated on said notice, the Ordinance
Enforcement Administrator shall send or cause to be sent notices by first class
mail, postage prepaid to the person who received the notice of an ordinance
violation; or, in the case of the violation of the Village Traffic Code, the
registered owner or operator of the “cited vehicle” at the address as is
recorded with the Secretary of State, and shall be sent to the lessee of the
“cited vehicle” at the address last known to the lessor of the “cited vehicle”
at the time of the lease. Service of notices sent in accordance herewith shall
be complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   (B)   (1)   The notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the
following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following
information.
      (2)   Upon the failure of the person receiving notice of an ordinance
violation or, in the case of a notice of a violation of the Village Traffic
Code, the registered owner, operator or lessee of the “cited vehicle” to pay
the fine in full as stated on said notice, a notice shall be sent, as above set
forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to the following information:
         (a)   Date and location of violation cited in the violation notice;
         (b)   Particular ordinance violated;
         (c)   Vehicle make and state registration number (if applicable);
         (d)   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment;
         (e)   A section entitled “notice of hearing” which shall clearly set
forth that the person receiving a notice of ordinance violation, in the case of
a violation of the Village Traffic Code, Title VII of this code of ordinances,
or the registered owner, operator or lessee may appear at an administrative
hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the date and at the
time and place as specified in the notice of hearing;
         (f)   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits;
         (g)   Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable
penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at
the time and place specified will result in a final determination of liability
for the “cited” violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated; and
         (h)   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust,
available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or
penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the village.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.12 IMPENDING SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE; NOTICE.
   A notice of impending suspension of a person’s driver’s license shall be
sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine or
penalty that remains due and owing on ten or more vehicular standing or parking
regulation violations:
   (A)   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or penalty
owing within 45 days of the date of the notice will result in the village
notifying the Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of
suspension proceedings under state law, incorporated herein by reference; and
   (B)   The notice of impending driver’s license suspension shall be sent by
first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary
of State.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.13 TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Any motor vehicle whose registered owner has been determined to be liable
for ten or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s), for
which the fines or penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be towed and impounded
if:
   (A)   The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator has determined that a person
has been determined to be liable for ten or more ordinance violations, for
which the fines or penalties remain unpaid;
   (B)   The person determined to be liable for ten or more violations is the
registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the village geographical
boundaries;
   (C)   A seizure notice has been sent to the registered owner of the motor
vehicle located within the geographical boundaries of the village which
contains, but shall not be limited to the following:
      (1)   A final determination has been made on ten or more ordinance
violations, for which the fines and penalties remain unpaid;
      (2)   A listing of the violations for which the person has been
determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
         (a)   The ordinance violation notice number;
         (b)   Date of issuance; and
         (c)   Total amount of fines and penalties assessed.
      (3)   The motor vehicle owned by the person and located within the
village are subject to towing and impoundment if the fines and penalties are
not paid within 15 days of the date of the notice;
      (4)   Date of impending towing and impoundment; and
      (5)   The registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by
appearing in person before the Ordinance Administrator within 15 days of the
date of the notice and submitting evidence which would conclusively disprove
liability, such as the following:
         (a)   The registered owner was not the owner or lessee of the vehicle
on the date or dates the notices of violation were issued;
         (b)   The fines or penalties for the violations cited in the notice
were paid in full; or
         (c)   The registered owner has not accumulated ten or more ordinance
violation notices which are unpaid, not adjudicated or for which no appearance
was made.
   (D)   The motor vehicle of the registered owner to whom notice is sent has
failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice and
has failed to appear with evidence to conclusively disprove liability before
the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator to contest the validity of the notice.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.14 REQUEST FOR HEARING IN THE CASE OF TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR
VEHICLES.
   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity of the
towing and impoundment, the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall schedule
an administrative hearing to contest the validity of the towing and impoundment
on the next scheduled hearing date or if sooner scheduled by the Ordinance
Enforcement Administrator for good cause shown, but in no case shall the
hearing be scheduled later than 30 days after the request for hearing is filed
and shall serve notice of the hearing date upon the registered owner by first-
class mail, postage prepaid to the address as is set forth on the request for
hearing. Service of the notice shall be complete on the date it is placed in
the United States mail.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.15 POST-IMPOUNDMENT NOTICE.
   Within ten days after a vehicle has been impounded, notice of impoundment
shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered
owner of the vehicle. The notice shall state that the owner has the right to a
post-towing hearing as provided in §
38.14 and that if the vehicle is not claimed within 30 days from the date of
the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with
the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.16 HEARING IN CASE OF VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The owner of an impoundment vehicle or other interested person shall
have the right to a hearing to determine whether the impoundment and any
subsequent towing was erroneous, if the owner files a written demand for a
hearing before the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator within 14 days after
issuance of the notice specified in §
38.15 or within 14 days of impoundment, whichever is later.
   (B)   A hearing shall be conducted on any business day within 48 hours of
receipt of a written demand for hearing, unless otherwise mutually agreed by
the parties. Failure to request or attend a scheduled hearing shall be deemed a
waiver of the right to a hearing. In the event of such failure, any amount
deposited shall be forfeited. A hearing provided by this section shall not
determine the validity of or otherwise adjudicate any citation or notice of
ordinance violation issued relative to the impounded vehicle, but shall only
relate to whether the vehicle was properly impounded or towed by determining
whether the owner previously submitted evidence required by this chapter.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.17 FINES AND FEES FOR IMPOUNDMENT.
   The fine for impoundment and towing shall be an amount not to exceed $500.
The owner of the vehicle shall also be charged reasonable storage and towing
fees should the vehicle be removed to a private storage facility, provided that
no fees shall be assessed for any tow which has been determined to be
erroneous.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.18 TOWING SERVICES.
   The Chief of Police shall appoint or retain the services of an individual,
agency or company to tow and impound vehicles in accordance herewith, provided
that that individual, agency or company is fully insured and licensed according
to local or state law and has available a secured impound area within which to
retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of this section, a SECURED
AREA shall mean an area bounded by a fence, chain-link or otherwise, of a
sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize or prevent
unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.19 EVICTION, RIGHTS OF OCCUPANTS.
   In the case of a building code violation relating to buildings or
structures, no action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and
detainer or other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against
an occupant of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or
testifies at a code violation hearing.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.20 DEFENSES TO BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a defense to a building code violation if the owner, his or her
attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the Hearing Officer’s
satisfaction that:
   (A)   The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at
the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed;
   (B)   The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants
and that in spite of reasonable attempt by the owner to maintain the dwelling
free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the
violations; and
   (C)   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or his or her agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of
correcting the code violation.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.21 SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO THE BUILDING OWNER.
   The order to correct a code violation relating to buildings or structures
and the sanctions imposed by a municipality as the result of a finding of a
code violation shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of the
property, so that a finding of a code violation against one owner cannot be
avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any
subsequent transferee or owner of property takes subject to the findings,
decision and order of a Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.22 LIABILITY OF PARENT OR LEGAL GUARDIAN FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS.
   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides with such
parent or legal guardian is liable for any judgment rendered against such minor
for violation of any section of this code, provided that such parent or legal
guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the cause. For
purposes of this section, LEGAL GUARDIAN shall mean a person appointed
guardian, or given custody, of a minor by a Circuit Court of this state, but
does not include a person appointed guardian, or given custody, of a minor
under the Illinois Juvenile Court Act of 1987, 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq. For
purposes of this section, the term MINOR shall mean a person who is above the
age of 12 years but not yet 18 years of age.
(Ord. 4013, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 38.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever in this code the doing of any act or the omission to do any
act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this code, and there
shall be no fine or penalty declared for such breach, any person who shall be
convicted of such breach shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than
$750 for each offense. When applicable, each day during which a violation is
permitted to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   Whenever any fine, charge, penalty or payment is due pursuant to any
provision in this code and is not paid after the village sends, mails or
otherwise delivers notice (unless a different period is stated elsewhere in
this code) to the person responsible for such fine, charge, penalty or payment
(the “responsible person”), the village may transfer such fine, charge, penalty
or payment to a private collection agency of the village’s choosing or to an
attorney for collection purposes. Any such collection agency or attorney shall,
for purposes of collection of such fine, charge, penalty or payment, be deemed
an agent of the village. All costs or attorneys’ fees incurred by the village
for the collection of any fines, charges, penalties or payments transferred to
any such collection agency or attorney shall be assessed against the
responsible person as an additional fine, charge, penalty or payment, subject
to any applicable statutory limits.
(Ord. 4368, passed 7-16-2018)
CHAPTER 39: VILLAGE POLICIES
Section
General Provisions
   
39.01   Prevailing wage rates
   
39.02   Paid leave for all workers
Employee Residency Requirements
   
39.15   Title
   
39.16   Definitions
   
39.17   Applicability
   
39.18   Residency required
   
39.19   Failure to establish or maintain residency
   
39.20   Determination of nonresidence
Sexual Harassment Policy
   
39.30   Sexual harassment policy adopted
Anti-Nepotism Policy
   
39.40   Anti-nepotism policy
 
   
Appendix A:   Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 39.01 PREVAILING WAGE RATES.
   (A)   To the extent and as required by “An Act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workmen employed in any public works by the state, county,
city or any public body or any political subdivision or by any one under
contract for public works”, approved June 26, 1941, as amended, the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other
workers engaged in the construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of the village is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the Cook County area, as
determined by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois as of June of
the current year, a copy of that determination being attached hereto and
incorporated herein by reference. As required by said Act, any and all
revisions of the prevailing rate of wages by the Department of Labor of the
State of Illinois shall supersede the Department’s June determination and apply
to any and all public works construction undertaken by the village. The
definition of any terms appearing in this section which are also used in the
aforesaid Act shall be the same as in said Act.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of this village to the extent required by the
aforesaid Act.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection
by any interested party in the main office of this village this determination
of such prevailing rate of wage. A copy of this determination or of the current
revised determination of prevailing rate of wages then in effect shall be
attached to all contract specifications.
   (D)   The Village Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to any
employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or association
or employees who have filed, or file their names and addresses, requesting
copies of any determination stating the particular class of workmen whose wages
will be affected by such rates.
   (E)   The Village Clerk shall promptly file a certified copy of this section
with both the Secretary of State and Department of Labor of the state.
   (F)   The Village Clerk shall cause to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the village a notice of its determination, and such
publication shall constitute notice that the determination is effective and
that this is the determination of this public body.
(2000 Code, § 39.01) (Ord. 4004, passed 6-15-2009; Ord. 4049, passed 6-21-2010;
Ord. 4103, passed 5-16-2011; Ord. 4194, passed 7-1-2013; Ord. 4236, passed 6-9-
2014; Ord. 4276, passed 7-20-2014; Ord. 4317, passed 6-20-2016; Ord. 4345,
passed 6-19-2017; Ord. 4366, passed 6-18-2018)
Statutory reference:
   Prevailing Wage Rate Act, see 820 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq.
§ 39.02 PAID LEAVE FOR ALL WORKERS.
   The village hereby adopts its current paid leave policy for all village
employees as set forth in the Village's Code of Ordinances, employee handbook,
annual salary ordinances, any collective bargaining agreements to which the
village is a party and all other binding legislative actions governing paid
leave adopted by the President and Board of Trustees of the village, as the
same may be amended from time to time. However, in no event shall the village,
as an employer, provide less than one day of paid leave per year to any village
employee.
(Ord. 4586, passed 12-18-2023)
EMPLOYEE RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
§ 39.15 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Matteson Employee Residency
Ordinance”.
(2000 Code, § 39.15) (Ord. 1553, passed 4-18-1994)
§ 39.16 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RESIDENCE. This term is synonymous with domicile, meaning the place where a
person lives and actually resides as the person’s permanent abode or home and
requires that person’s physical presence and intent to make that location his
or her permanent home.
   VILLAGE. The municipal boundaries of the Village of Matteson, Cook County,
Illinois.
   VILLAGE EMPLOYEES. All employees of the village who shall be hired after the
effective date of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 39.16) (Ord. 1553, passed 4-18-1994)
§ 39.17 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions and requirements of this subchapter shall apply only to new
employees who begin employment after the effective date of this subchapter, and
for only the following full-time positions, namely, to wit: police officers,
police sergeants, police lieutenants, police commanders, Deputy Police Chief,
community service officers, and all other sworn positions, sworn supervisors or
command staff positions which may be created or established in the future;
firefighter, firefighter/paramedics, firefighter/inspectors, fire lieutenants,
Deputy Fire Chief and all other sworn positions, sworn supervisors or command
staff positions which may be created or established in the future; public works
maintenance workers, public works foreman, public works mechanics and any other
such maintenance or supervisory positions which may be created or established
in the future.
(2000 Code, § 39.17) (Ord. 1553, passed 4-18-1994)
§ 39.18 RESIDENCY REQUIRED.
   All persons who begin employment in positions described in §
39.17 after the effective date of this subchapter shall either be residents of
the village at the time that they are hired, or they shall become residents of
the village within 18 months of the beginning of their term of employment, and
shall thereafter continuously reside within the village while so employed by
the village. The 18-month period described in this section shall begin on the
effective date of employment, notwithstanding that at the time of the
commencement of the employee’s hiring the employment shall be contingent upon
any required probationary period.
(2000 Code, § 39.18) (Ord. 1553, passed 4-18-1994)
§ 39.19 FAILURE TO ESTABLISH OR MAINTAIN RESIDENCY.
   In the event that any village employee required to maintain a village
residence shall fail to comply with the provisions of this subchapter, then he
or she shall be discharged from his or her employment by the village. Such
dismissal shall be effective upon written notice to the employee by the Village
Administrator.
(2000 Code, § 39.19) (Ord. 1553, passed 4-18-1994)
§ 39.20 DETERMINATION OF NONRESIDENCE.
   Prior to the dismissal of an employee for noncompliance with the residency
provisions of this subchapter, the Village Administrator shall conduct an
investigation of all relevant facts concerning the employee’s failure to
maintain residency in the village. Within seven days after the written notice
of dismissal by the Village Administrator, the decision of the Village
Administrator may be appealed in writing by the dismissed employee to the
President and Board of Trustees, and they shall render a decision within 30
days after receipt of the appeal.
(2000 Code, § 39.20) (Ord. 1553, passed 4-18-1994)
SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY
§ 39.30 SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY ADOPTED.
   The policy prohibiting sexual harassment in Appendix A at the end of this
chapter is adopted.
(Ord. 4354, passed 1-8-2018)
ANTI-NEPOTISM POLICY
§ 39.40 ANTI-NEPOTISM POLICY.
   (A)   The employment of immediate family can cause various problems,
including charges of favoritism, conflicts of interest, family discord, and
scheduling conflicts that work to the disadvantage of the village, its
employees and elected officials. Therefore, it is the policy of the Village of
Matteson to not hire relatives, as defined.
   (B)   No individual shall be hired or employed by the Village of Matteson
for any position if that individual is a relative, as defined by this section,
of an elected village official. Any employee who is a relative of an elected
village official must either voluntarily quit or terminate his/her employment
within 30 days of the date of the election of the village official. However,
any current employee that meets these requirements on the date that this
section is approved by the Village Board is specifically exempted from this
provision and may retain his/her job.
   (C)   Relatives of village employees who are not relatives of village
elected officials may be hired or employed by the Village of Matteson only
where that individual would not supervise a relative or be supervised by a
relative, as defined by this section. The employee also may not evaluate a
relative's job performance and may not recommend a salary increase for a
relative.
   (D)   If two village employees are currently in the same department and if
there is a supervisory/subordinate relationship, one of the two must transfer
departments, if a position for which he or she is qualified is available. If no
position is available, one employee must either voluntarily quit or terminate
his/her employment within 90 days of the date in which the two became
relatives. The choice regarding which employee shall leave, shall be made by
the employees. If there is an unwillingness to make a decision, the employee
with the least seniority shall be terminated, unless the Village Board
determines that the needs of the village demand otherwise.
   (E)   For purposes of this section and policy the term "relative" is defined
as the employee's spouse, civil union spouse/partner, dependent child
(biological, foster or step), father, mother, son/daughter (including step and
in-law), sister, brother, grandparent or grandchild.
(Ord. 4385, passed 4-1-2019)
APPENDIX A: POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT
I.   PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT
It is unlawful to harass a person because of that person's sex. The courts have
determined that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination under Title VII
of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a
right to work in an environment free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment
is unacceptable misconduct which affects individuals of all genders and sexual
orientations. It is a policy of the Village of Matteson, Illinois to prohibit
harassment of any person by any municipal official, municipal agent, municipal
employee or municipal agency or office on the basis of sex or gender. All
municipal officials, municipal agents, municipal employees and municipal
agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually harassing any person,
regardless of any employment relationship or lack thereof.
II.   DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
This policy adopts the definition of sexual harassment as stated in the
Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently defines sexual harassment as:
Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any conduct of a
sexual nature when;
   (1)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a
term or condition of an individual's employment,
   (2)   Submission, to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is used
as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
   (3)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering
with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or
offensive working environment.
Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
   • Verbal: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor, and jokes
about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions, threats,
repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even outside
of their presence, of a sexual nature.
   • Non-verbal: suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering, obscene
gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, “catcalls”, “smacking” or
“kissing” noises.
   • Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature, viewing
pornographic material or websites.
   • Physical: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching, brushing the
body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
   • Textual/Electronic: “sexting” (electronically sending messages with sexual
content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually explicit language,
harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of electronic,
communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line postings,
blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and Twitter).
The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to determine.
On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more subtle and
depends, to some extent, on individual perception, and interpretation. The
courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what would offend a
“reasonable person.”
III.   PROCEDURE FOR REPORTING AN ALLEGATION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes herself/himself
to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the incident(s) as
directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his position to
the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not necessary
for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual harassment,
including the following;
   • Electronic/Direct Communication. If there is sexual harassing behavior in
the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly express her/
his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the offending
behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent messages are
needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
   • Contact with Supervisory Personnel. At the same time direct communication
is undertaken, or in the event the employee feels threatened or intimidated by
the situation, the problem must be promptly reported to the immediate
supervisor of the person making the report, a department head, a director of
human resources, an ethics officer, the city manager or administrator, or the
chief executive officer of the municipality.
The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual harassment must
not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there are no witnesses
and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other responsible officer, the
municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of the harassment.
   • Resolution Outside Municipality. The purpose of this policy is to
establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding riling a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within 180 days of the alleged
incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense, A complaint with the EE&C must
be filed within 300 days.
Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report (what was said
or done, the date, the time and the place;), including, but not limited to,
written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone messages.
All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and investigated
regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the municipality.
However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment charges and
the difficulties associated with their investigation and the questions of
credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a vital component
of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
IV.   PROHIBITION ON RETALIATION FOR REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT ALLEGATIONS
No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or municipal agency
or office Shall take any retaliatory action against any municipal employee due
to a municipal employee's:
   1.   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this policy,
   2.   The provision of information related to or testimony before any public
body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation of this
policy, or
   3.   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the provisions
of this policy.
For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the reprimand,
discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or change in
the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that is taken
in retaliation for a municipal employee's involvement in protected activity
pursuant to this policy.
No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a report made
in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will be protected
from retaliation.
Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein, the State
Officials and Employees Ethics Act (5 ILCS 430/15-10) provides whistleblower
protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand, discharge, suspension,
demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs in retaliation for an
employee who does any of the following:
   1.   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a public body
an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, State agency, or other
State employee that the State employee reasonably believes is in violation of a
law, rule, or regulation,
   2.   Provides information to or testifies before any public body conducting
an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law, rule, or
regulation by any officer, member, State agency or other State employee, or
   3.   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the provisions of
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (740 ILCS 174/15(a)), an employer may not
retaliate against an employee who discloses information in a court, an
administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or committee, or in
any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that
the information discloses a violation of a state or federal law, rule, or
regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an employee for
disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency, where the
employee, has reasonable cause to believe that the information discloses a
violation of a state or federal law, rule, or regulation. (740 ILCS 174/15(b)).
According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/6-101), it is a civil
rights violation for a person, or for two or more people to conspire, to
retaliate against a person because he/she has opposed that which he/she
reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in employment,
because he/she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the Illinois
Human Rights Act.
An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or passed over
for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC may file a
retaliation charge — due within 180 days (IDHR) or 300 days (EEOC) of the
alleged retaliation.
V.   CONSEQUENCES OF A VIOLATION OF THE PROHIBITION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT
Any person who violates this policy will be subject to any and all other
discipline that may be applicable pursuant to municipal policies, employment
agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/or collective bargaining
agreement. Each violation may constitute a separate offense.
VI.   CONSEQUENCES FOR KNOWINGLY MAKING A FALSE REPORT
A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser using the
sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping sexual
harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false report is
not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the seriousness
of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is a severe
offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
(Ord. 4354, passed 1-8-2018)
CHAPTER 40: ETHICS
Section
   
40.01   Adoption of State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
§ 40.01 ADOPTION OF STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   The regulations of 5 ILCS 430/5-15 and 5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40
of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.
(hereinafter referred to as the “Act”) are hereby adopted by reference and made
applicable to the officers and employees of the village to the extent required
by 5 ILCS 430/70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officers or any employee of the village, is
hereby prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered, or made to
an officer or employee of the village under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms OFFICER and EMPLOYEE shall be
defined as set forth in 5 ILCS 430/70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in 5 ILCS 430/50-5 for similar violations of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of 5 ILCS 430/70-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   (I)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village if the Act is found unconstitutional
by the Illinois Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the village.
(2000 Code, § 40.01) (Ord. 1977, passed 5-17-2004)
CHAPTER 41: FINES
 
Section
   
41.01   Imposition of fines
§ 41.01 IMPOSITION OF FINES.
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 4541,
adopted 10-7-2022). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when
the ordinance is codified.
   In lieu of attendance at an adjudicatory hearing, the following fines are
hereby imposed for violations of this village code and may be paid to the
village in lieu of appearing before a Hearing Officer of the Ordinance
Enforcement Department as established pursuant to
Chapter 38, but only where payment is made no less than 48 hours prior to the
date and time assigned for said adjudicatory hearing:
Violation Code Section Fine
Violation                                              Code Section    Fine
2 vehicles headlights/tail lights required             70.002          $75
3 in. snowfall violation                               72.03(A)        $100
Abandoned, unlicensed inoperable vehicle               72.25           $100
Brake/signal light required                            70.002          $75
Bumpers required                                       70.002          $75
Certain vehicles to carry flares or warning lights     70.002          $75
Child restraints age 5 and up                          70.002          $100
Cover or tarpaulin                                     70.002          $150
Damage to municipal property                           72.06           $150
Defective/cracked windshield                           70.002          $75
Defective/no brakes                                    70.002          $75
Displaying for sale/peddling merchandise               72.05           $75
Double parking                                         70.002          $75
Dripping road oil on highway                           70.002          $75
Driver’s license not on person                       70.002          $100
Driving vehicle in unsafe conditions                   70.002          $75
Expired registration                                   70.002          $100
Failure to dim headlights                              70.002          $75
Failure to display safety lights when required         70.002          $75
Failure to display village sticker                     70.060          $75
Failure to notify SOS of change of address             70.002          $75
Failure to use headlights with wipers                  70.002          $75
Failure to wear safety belts                           70.002          $100
Fire lane                                              72.02           $150
Hazardous vehicle left unattended                      72.25           $150
Height of vehicle                                      70.002          $150
Illegal suspension                                     70.002          $100
Illegal tires                                          70.002          $100
Improper display of registration                       70.002          $75
Improper loading school bus passengers                 70.002          $100
Improper stopping/standing                             70.002          $75
Improper towing/illegal trailer hitch spilling load on 70.002          $100
highway
Improper use of registration or title                  70.002          $100
Lamp/flag projecting load                              70.002          $75
Length of vehicle                                      70.002          $150
License plate light required                           70.002          $75
Motorcycle headlight required                          70.002          $75
Muffler required/bypass prohibited                     70.002          $75
Name/address on Second Division vehicles               70.002          $75
No rear view mirror                                    70.002          $75
No valid registration                                  70.002          $100
No windshield                                          70.002          $100
Number of driving lights permitted                     70.002          $75
Obstructing to drivers view/control                    70.002          $75
Other flashing lights                                  70.002          $75
Parked blocking driveway                               70.002          $75
Parked in alley                                        72.09           $100
Parked in crosswalk                                    70.002          $75
Parked in cul-de-sac                                   Ch. 77, Sch. II $75
Parked in intersection                                 70.002          $75
Parked in safety zone                                  70.002          $100
Parked obstructing traffic                             70.002          $75
Parked on bridge, viaduct, subway or tunnel            72.02(G)        $75
Parked on central access highway                       70.002          $100
Parked on median                                       70.002          $100
Parked on parkway                                      98.41           $75
Parked on sidewalk                                     70.002          $75
Parked over 1 hour                                     72.10           $75
Parked over 12 in. from curb                           70.002          $75
Parked over 48 hrs.                                    72.08           $100
Parked where prohibited                                70.002          $75
Parked where prohibited by sign                        70.002          $75
Parked with expired registration                       70.002          $100
Parked with left wheel to curb                         70.002          $75
Parked within 15 ft. of a fire hydrant                 70.002          $100
Parked within 20 ft. of crosswalk or intersection      70.002          $75
Parked within 30 ft. of traffic signal                 70.002          $75
Person obstructing roadway                             70.002          $75
Red light on front of vehicle                          70.002          $100
Selling merchandise from vehicle                       72.05           $100
Size, weight and load                                  70.002          $150
Splash guards and replacements                         70.002          $75
Stopping in intersection/crossing traffic obstruction  70.002          $75
Tinted registration place cover                        70.002          $75
Trucks/tow trucks/commercial vehicles parked           72.07           $150
TV in vehicle-drivers view                             70.002          $75
Unattended motor vehicle                               70.002          $75
Unauthorized vehicle in park                           97.04           $100
Unlawful use of siren                                  70.002          $100
Unlawful use of sound amplification system             70.002          $100
Unsafe tires                                           70.002          $75
Vehicle in traffic/roadway hazard                      70.031          $100
Wearing headset while driving                          70.002          $100
Width of vehicle                                       70.002          $150
Windshield must be unobstructed                        70.002          $75
Windshield obstructed/illegal tinting                  70.002          $100
Wipers required snow/ice removed                       70.002          $75
 
Animal Offense # Fine
Animal                                                 Offense # Fine
Allowing a cat to run at large                         92.11(A)  $50
Allowing a domestic animal to commit nuisance on       92.11     $100
public/private property
Allowing a domestic animal to run at large or bite any 92.11     $75
person/animal
Allowing animals to run loose in park                  97.15     $75
Allowing pet excreta to accumulate in yard, pen or     92.11(E)  $75
property
Cruelty to animals                                     92.02     $150
Failure to purchase a cat license                      92.04     $50
Failure to purchase a dog license (dogs >3 months)     92.04     $50
Failure to wear current dog license/tag                92.04     $50
Own/harbor more than 3 cats                            92.04(C)  $100
Own/harbor more than 3 dogs                            92.04(C)  $100
***Must meet requirements as stated in village         ***       ***
ordinance
                                                       92.99     No prepayment
 
(Ord. 4168, passed 10-15-2012)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   ELECTRIC UTILITIES
      
54.   STORMWATER UTILITY
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Definitions
Garbage, Rubbish and Yard Waste Disposal
   
50.015   Exclusive household refuse contractor
   
50.016   Waste containers
   
50.017   Collection day
   
50.018   Service charges
   
50.019   Multi-family, institutional, commercial or industrial garbage
   
50.020   Collection and storage of institutional, industrial or commercial
garbage
   
50.021   License required to collect garbage
   
50.022   Vehicles used in collection of garbage, refuse and yard waste
Unlawful Disposal of Garbage, Refuse and Yard Waste
   
50.035   Unlawful disposal
   
50.036   Burning of garbage, rubbish and yard waste
   
50.037   Sweeping or depositing of refuse or yard waste in public places
Recycling Program
   
50.050   Program established
   
50.051   Recyclables container
   
50.052   Separation of recyclable and placement for removal
   
50.053   Authorized recycling contractor
   
50.054   Theft of recyclables
   
50.055   Additional methods of recycling
Yard Waste Collection
   
50.070   Yard waste collection
Yard Waste Composting
   
50.085   Composting by property owners
   
50.086   Permit required
   
50.087   Nuisance violations
 
   
50.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMPOSTING. The controlled decomposition of organic materials through the
use of aerobic bacteria.
   GARBAGE. Wastes resulting from packaging, handling, storing, preparing,
cooking and consuming food of all kinds, and dead animals.
   RECYCLABLES. Aluminum, steel, tin and bi-metal cans, glass (all colors),
recyclable HDPE and PET plastics, newsprint, magazines, corrugated and
paperboard containers and any other items as approved as recyclable by the
State Environmental Protection Agency for which the village’s licensed
residential scavenger has a collection program.
   RUBBISH. Such matter as clothing articles, household appliances, furniture,
wood products, metal ware, glass, crockery, paper, ashes, boxes, plastic
articles and litter of any kind.
   YARD WASTE. Organic material such as grass clippings, leaves, tree and
shrubbery trimmings, wood chips, lawn rakings, dead plants, sod and garden
waste.
(2000 Code, § 50.01) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 4120, passed 10-17-2011)
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND YARD WASTE DISPOSAL
§ 50.015 EXCLUSIVE HOUSEHOLD REFUSE CONTRACTOR.
   Subject to the provisions of this chapter, and except as otherwise provided
for by ordinance, the village shall provide a means for the collection and
disposal of garbage, rubbish and yard waste as defined in §
50.001 from each dwelling unit in a detached single-family dwelling and in
multiple-family dwellings with not more than two dwelling units. The village
shall enter into an exclusive contract with a scavenger or disposal firm for
the collection of all household garbage, refuse and yard waste within the
village.
(2000 Code, § 50.15) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 4120, passed 10-17-2011)
§ 50.016 WASTE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   All garbage and rubbish shall be drained and stored in a 95-gallon
wheeled and covered cart provided by the village’s licensed residential
scavenger. Yard waste material shall not be stored or mixed in the same waste
container as garbage and rubbish for collection and disposal.
   (B)   Each collection day not more than one bulk rubbish article such as a
“white good” shall be set out in a neat, orderly manner for collection at no
cost as further described and regulated in the collection services agreement
with the village’s licensed residential scavenger. Additional bulk rubbish
articles shall be collected in compliance with the terms of the collection
services agreement.
   (C)   Yard waste materials intended for collection and disposal by the
exclusive household refuse contractor shall be placed only in those containers
authorized by the village contract with said disposal service. The village
shall inform the public of the type of approved container authorized for
disposal of yard waste, and where they may be obtained. Bulk items such as tree
branches and shrubbery trimmings, intended for collection by the village
disposal service, shall be cut into lengths not greater than four feet and
securely bundled into clusters easily handled by one person. In no instance
shall yard waste materials be mixed with garbage or rubbish as defined in §
50.001 for collection and disposal.
   (D)   Garbage cans must be stored behind the front of the principal
building, not including a garage which may project forward of the principal
building of the residence.
(2000 Code, § 50.16) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 4120, passed 10-17-2011;
Ord. 4279, passed 7-20-2015) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.017 COLLECTION DAY.
   (A)   The exclusive household refuse contractor shall collect garbage,
rubbish and yard waste once a week on a day designated by agreement between the
village and the scavenger or disposal service. There shall be no change in the
day of collection, except on written notification by the scavenger to the
village and to each owner, occupant or lessee receiving garbage disposal
service under this chapter, and on any contract in implementation thereof.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of any person having household garage, rubbish or
yard waste, to place sealed, durable containers not to exceed 96 gallons in
capacity or tightly closed plastic garbage bags, and yard waste bags or
containers, on the curb in front of the premises, or in the alley adjacent to
the premises, if garbage is made in the alley, not before 4:00 p.m. of the day
prior to garbage collection being made, and also to remove the containers prior
to 7:00 a.m. the day after collection has been made.
(2000 Code, § 50.17) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 4120, passed 10-17-2011;
Ord. 4279, passed 7-20-2015) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.018 SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Effective with invoices after November 1, 2011, the service charge to
owners, occupants or lessees for the collection and disposal of household
garbage and rubbish shall be as provided in this section. Every owner, occupant
or lessee of a dwelling unit in a detached single-family dwelling, and in
multiple-family dwellings with not more than two dwelling units, shall pay to
the village $2 per month administrative fee, plus the monthly sum of the
following for disposal services furnished to said dwelling unit.
 
Period                        Rate
Until June 30, 2012           $15.85
July 1, 2012 to June 30, 2013 $16.50
July 1, 2013 to June 30, 2014 $17.15
July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2015 $17.85
July 1, 2015 to June 30, 2016 $18.55
 
   (B)   If the price the licensed residential scavenger pays for fuel rises
above $4.35 per gallon then the rate shall be increased by $0.01 for each $0.08
increase above $4.35 per gallon. The village shall include charges for these
services with the quarterly water billings.
(2000 Code, § 50.18) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 1905, passed 4-21-2003;
Ord. 4120, passed 10-17-2011)
§ 50.019 MULTI-FAMILY, INSTITUTIONAL, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL GARBAGE.
   It shall be the duty of the owner, occupant or lessee of each institutional,
industrial or commercial unit in the village and of each dwelling unit in a
multiple-family dwelling with more than two dwelling units, at his or her
expense, to arrange with a properly licensed scavenger for the disposal of his
or her garbage, rubbish and yard waste as herein defined, as well as of his or
her business and industrial wastes. The owner, occupant or lessee of each such
institutional, industrial or commercial unit, and of each dwelling unit in a
multiple-family building with more than two dwelling units, including any
corporation, partnership or person engaged in running a store, business or
commercial or industrial enterprise of any kind, shall keep its premises free
and clear of any accumulation of garbage, rubbish and yard waste as above
defined, and of business or industrial waste of any kind. Yard waste shall be
disposed of separately from garbage, rubbish and industrial waste.
(2000 Code, § 50.19) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 4120, passed 10-17-2011)
Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.020 COLLECTION AND STORAGE OF INSTITUTIONAL, INDUSTRIAL OR COMMERCIAL
GARBAGE.
   (A)   Institutional, commercial and industrial garbage, rubbish and yard
waste, including business and industrial waste, and the garbage and rubbish and
yard waste of each dwelling unit in a multiple-family building with more than
two dwelling units, shall be collected as often as is necessary to prevent any
accumulation of garbage, rubbish and yard waste which would cause any nuisance
or health hazard or the breeding of insects. In no event shall such collection
be made less frequently than once in each week.
   (B)   Institutional, commercial and industrial garbage, rubbish and yard
waste shall be stored in containers as approved by the village.
   (C)   Yard waste shall be disposed of separately from garbage, rubbish and
industrial waste.
(2000 Code, § 50.20) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 4120, passed 10-17-2011)
Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.021 LICENSE REQUIRED TO COLLECT GARBAGE.
   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of collection or
disposing of garbage, refuse, yard waste or recyclables unless licensed in the
village as a scavenger in accordance with provisions of §§
115.45 through
115.51 of this code of ordinances.
(2000 Code, § 50.21) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.022 VEHICLES USED IN COLLECTION OF GARBAGE, REFUSE AND YARD WASTE.
   (A)   All public or private vehicles used for the collection or disposal of
rubbish and yard waste shall have enclosed bodies, or suitable provisions for
covering the bodies.
   (B)   Vehicles used for the collection or disposal of garbage, or rubbish
containing garbage, shall have water-tight, enclosed metal bodies of easily
cleanable construction, shall be cleaned at sufficient frequency to prevent
nuisance or insect-breeding, and shall be maintained in good repair.
(2000 Code, § 50.22) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE, REFUSE AND YARD WASTE
§ 50.035 UNLAWFUL DISPOSAL.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dispose of any
garbage, refuse or yard waste in any public property, or on any privately owned
property within the limits of the village, whether owned by such person, firm
or corporation or not, unless said property is licensed for said purpose by all
required governmental agencies. Public property shall include all public
streets, rights-of-way, storm drainage facilities, sanitary sewer lines, park
sites and municipal facilities. Discarding of garbage, refuse or yard waste on
drainage ways, streams, ponds or retention areas is also prohibited.
(2000 Code, § 50.35) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.036 BURNING OF GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND YARD WASTE.
   The burning of any garbage, rubbish or yard waste at any place within the
limits of the village is prohibited.
(2000 Code, § 50.36) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.037 SWEEPING OR DEPOSITING OF REFUSE OR YARD WASTE IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the village the accumulation of refuse or yard waste from
any building or lot, or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
   (B)   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the village the
accumulation of refuse or yard waste from any building or lot, or from any
public or private sidewalk or driveway.
(2000 Code, § 50.37) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
RECYCLING PROGRAM
§ 50.050 PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established the village recycling program for the voluntary
separation of recyclables from household garbage and rubbish by participating
residents. Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, and as may be further
set forth from time to time by contract, the village shall provide a means for
the collection of recyclables from households within the village. It is the
public policy of the village to encourage residents to participate in the
recycling program so established.
(2000 Code, § 50.50) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990)
§ 50.051 RECYCLABLES CONTAINER.
   (A)   In order to promote the separation of recyclable materials from
garbage and rubbish, the village shall provide each dwelling unit in a detached
single-family dwelling and in multiple-family dwelling with not more than two
dwelling units, a wheeled and covered 95-gallon capacity recycling cart for the
placement of prepared recyclables to be collected as part of the village’s
recycling program.
   (B)   Recyclables shall not be placed outside the cart nor shall non-
recyclables be mixed with recyclables in the cart.
(2000 Code, § 50.51) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 4120, passed 10-17-2011)
§ 50.052 SEPARATION OF RECYCLABLE AND PLACEMENT FOR REMOVAL.
   (A)   Recyclables to be collected as part of the village program shall be
separated from other garbage and rubbish and prepared as required.
   (B)   Recyclables placed in the special container described in §
50.051 may then be placed at the curb or alley for collection on the same day
as the regular household garbage and refuse collection.
(2000 Code, § 50.52) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.053 AUTHORIZED RECYCLING CONTRACTOR.
   (A)   The exclusive household refuse contractor shall be the sole party
authorized to collect the recyclables set out for collection as described in §
50.052.
   (B)   The cost of providing this service shall be included as part of the
monthly fee for garbage and refuse collection.
(2000 Code, § 50.53) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990)
§ 50.054 THEFT OF RECYCLABLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation other than the
exclusive household refuse contractor to collect or pick up any recyclable
articles placed for collection as part of the village recycling program.
(2000 Code, § 50.54) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.055 ADDITIONAL METHODS OF RECYCLING.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit any person from donating or
selling recyclables to any person, firm or organization, whether operating for
profit or not for profit provided, however, that the time, location and manner
of collecting said recyclables in no way conflicts with the village recycling
program.
(2000 Code, § 50.55) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990)
YARD WASTE COLLECTION
§ 50.070 YARD WASTE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Yard waste shall not be placed for collection unless contained in a
“Kraft” type paper bag or durable metal or plastic container, with handles, of
not less than 20 gallons or more than 32 gallons in size.
   (B)   If metal or plastic containers are used, the owner must identify the
container as a yard waste container with a decal approved by the village.
   (C)   Yard waste that cannot be placed in an approved container such as
brush and branches must be cut in four-foot lengths and tied with twine into
bundles weighing not more than 50 pounds, exceed a diameter of two feet, not
contain branches exceeding one inch in diameter, not cut by a private
contractor.
(Ord. 4120, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 4255, passed 3-2-2015; Ord. 4502, passed 5-
16–2022) Penalty, see §
50.999
YARD WASTE COMPOSTING
§ 50.085 COMPOSTING BY PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Property owners desiring to compost yard waste originating exclusively on
their own property may be permitted to do so subject to the regulations
contained in this subchapter and as may be further defined by village policies.
Under no circumstances shall any property owner allow the composting of yard
waste originating from property other than their own except as may be allowed
under §
50.035.
(2000 Code, § 50.65) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.086 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to compost yard waste materials
generated on the subject property must first obtain a permit from the village.
Applications for such a permit must identify the proposed size of the
composting area, its location in relationship to adjoining properties,
structures, fences and drainage easements, and the design and materials used in
the construction of any compost bin, device or structure. The applicant must
also demonstrate a knowledge in proper composting techniques. The village
reserves the right to regulate or deny the granting of a composting permit.
(2000 Code, § 50.66) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.087 NUISANCE VIOLATIONS.
   Compost materials which are maintained in violation of the compost permit,
which harbor or attract rodents, insects or other wild animals, or which result
in odor conditions offensive to neighboring property owners shall be in
violation of this code. The owner shall be subject to revocation of the
composting permit, required to eliminate the composting condition, and shall be
subject to a fine as set forth in §
50.999.
(2000 Code, § 50.67) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of §§
50.035 through
50.037 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 for the first
violation, $250 for the second violation and $750 for each succeeding
violation. In addition to the fines provided herein, any person, firm or
corporation found guilty of a violation of §§
50.035 through
50.037 shall be liable for any and all costs and expenses incurred relative to
removing and properly disposing of the said garbage, rubbish or yard waste, and
shall further reimburse the village for any and all costs and expenses incurred
by the village relative thereto.
   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation found in violation of §§
50.054 or
50.087 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $750 for
each offense.
(2000 Code, § 50.99) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 1453, passed 10-1-1990)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Definitions
   
51.002   Unlawful to connect certain drains to sanitary sewer system
   
51.003   Private drainage lines to connect to storm sewer, catch basins
   
51.004   Unlawful to discharge sewage into storm sewer
   
51.005   Unlawful to dump petroleum into sanitary sewer
   
51.006   Disposal of trash, debris and unwanted material into stormwater
conveyance system
   
51.007   Restriction on sanitary sewer connections
   
51.008   Damaging, interfering with or destroying sewage works property
prohibited
   
51.009   Effective date of rates and charges
Superintendent
   
51.020   Office created
   
51.021   Appointment
   
51.022   Oath and bond
   
51.023   Duties of Superintendent
Connections
   
51.035   Application for permit
   
51.036   Permit approved or denied
   
51.037   Charge for connection servicing single-family use
   
51.038   Charge for connection servicing multi-family, commercial or industrial
use
   
51.039   Connection to be inspected before covered
   
51.040   Application for connection outside municipality
   
51.041   Unlawful to make connections to Lincoln Highway improvement
   
51.042   Unlawful to allow discharge to 216th Street improvement
Building Connections
   
51.055   Unauthorized connection to, interference with public sewer prohibited
   
51.056   Prohibited discharges
   
51.057   Building sewer permits
   
51.058   Inspection of sewer mains
   
51.059   Excavations
   
51.060   Extraneous flows unlawful
   
51.061   Illegal connections
   
51.062   Maintenance the responsibility of the owner
   
51.063   Downspouts, roof drains and sump pumps
Sewage Systems
   
51.075   Installation of sewage system
   
51.076   Construction requirements
   
51.077   Certification of compliance
Connection to Public Sewer Required
   
51.090   Prohibited deposits
   
51.091   Prohibited discharges
   
51.092   Privies and the like prohibited
   
51.093   Connection to public sewer system required
   
51.094   Unlawful to make connection without permit
   
51.095   Issuance of permit
   
51.096   Costs, expense of building sewer installation
   
51.097   Separate sewer for each building required; exception
   
51.098   Old building sewers connected to new buildings
   
51.099   Specifications
   
51.100   Adoption of Manual of Procedures for Administration of Sewer Permit
Ordinance
   
51.101   Prohibited connections to public sanitary sewers
   
51.102   Connection standards
Use of Public Sewers
   
51.115   Discharges into sanitary sewers
   
51.116   Discharges into storm sewers
   
51.117   Prohibited discharges
   
51.118   Discharge of harmful wastes
   
51.119   Remedies for harmful waste discharges
   
51.120   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
51.121   Preliminary treatment
   
51.122   Control manholes
   
51.123   Measurements, tests and analyses; when required
   
51.124   Grab samples
Wastewater Service Charges
   
51.135   Basis for wastewater service charges
   
51.136   Basic user charges
   
51.137   Adequacy of wastewater service charge
   
51.138   Notice of charges to users
   
51.139   Measurement of flow
   
51.140   Rates
   
51.141   Flat rate charge
Billing and Administration Procedures
   
51.155   Billing procedures
   
51.156   Disconnection for late payment
   
51.157   Lien-notice of delinquency
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
   
51.170   Inspection
   
51.171   Liability
   
51.172   Entry on private property
   Appendix A:   Application Forms
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Village Board of the Village of Matteson or its
designee.
   BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   BOD (DENOTING BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (one and one-half meters) outside the
inner face of the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   CHAPTER. This chapter.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Includes transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering services.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA. As defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) as
amended.
   FEDERAL GRANT. The United States government participation in the financing
of the construction of treatment works as provided for by Title II Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly preheated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS. Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into products.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any solid, liquid or gaseous substances discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Includes schools, churches, penal
institutions and users associated with federal, state and local governments.
   LOCAL CAPITAL COST CHARGE. Charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, such as debt service and capital improvement
costs.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that: has a flow of 10,000 gallons or more per average work
day; has a flow greater than 5% of the flow carried by the municipal system
receiving the waste; is found by the permit issuance authority to have in its
waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under
§ 307(a) of the Act, 33 U.S.S. § 1317(a); or, in connection with the issuance
of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving the waste,
to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
   MAY. Permissible.
   MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent of 1,000 ml of water. It has
replaced the unit formerly used commonly, PARTS PER MILLION, to which it is
approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document and its requirements issued
by the administration, or, where appropriate by the Director, after enactment
of the Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant
to § 402 of the Federal Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm, company, municipal or private corporation, association,
society, institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division
of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. ONE POPULATION EQUIVALENT is 100
gallons of sewage per capita per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20
pounds of suspended solids.
   ppm. Parts per million by weight.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village
sanitary (or combined sewer) system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with village funds.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
REPLACEMENT.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments and multi- family dwellings.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and groundwater or polluted
industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. Is used interchangeably with WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   SEWERAGE FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.
   SHALL. Mandatory.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given pollutant, as measured by a grab sample, exceeds for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
   STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970, 30 ILCS 405/1 et
seq (repealed).
   STATE GRANT. The State of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution
Bond Act and for making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of the
state.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. The portion of the precipitation that is drained into the
sewers.
   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the basic user charge which is
levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the
concentration values established in §§
51.135 through
51.141.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS or SS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are
in suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are recoverable
by a laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of SUSPENDED
SOLIDS shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA
Division of Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
   USER CLASS. The type of user either: residential; instructional-
governmental; commercial; or industrial, as defined herein.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Matteson, Illinois.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and waste-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment and processes required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge levied on all users of the wastewater
facilities.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludges. Sometimes used as
synonymous with SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT, WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or POLLUTION
CONTROL PLANT.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. As defined in the water pollution regulations of
the state.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.002 UNLAWFUL TO CONNECT CERTAIN DRAINS TO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM.
   No roof drains or down spouts, surface water drains, field tile or new or
repaired installations of drain tiles which surround foundation walls, or other
drains or pipes which carry stormwater or water which was caught as stormwater
or ground water shall be connected to the sanitary sewer system or pipes which
lead to the sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.003 PRIVATE DRAINAGE LINES TO CONNECT TO STORM SEWER, CATCH BASINS.
   Private drainage lines carrying only stormwater or ground water may be
connected to the storm sewer system, as approved by the Superintendent of
Public Works. Wherever possible, such drainage shall enter into a catch basin,
and shall be required to enter a catch basin or lead to a catch basin where
sand, silt, stone or debris is carried with the water.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.004 UNLAWFUL TO DISCHARGE SEWAGE INTO STORM SEWER.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge sewage or putrescible liquids into storm
sewers, pipes which lead to storm sewers, or into roadside ditches, or any
ditches, streams or creeks.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.005 UNLAWFUL TO DUMP PETROLEUM INTO SANITARY SEWER.
   It shall be unlawful to dispose of or dump petroleum or petroleum products
into the sanitary sewer system or storm sewer system.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.006 DISPOSAL OF TRASH, DEBRIS AND UNWANTED MATERIAL INTO STORMWATER
CONVEYANCE SYSTEM.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FLOODWAY. The area adjacent to a watercourse which has been or may be
intermittently included in the regulatory flood boundary and floodway map for
the Village of Matteson.
      HUMAN-MADE AND NATURAL WATERCOURSES. A natural or artificial channel of
perceptible extent, with definite bed and banks to confine and conduct
continuously or periodically flowing water.
      STORM SEWERS. A watercourse which carries storm and surface waters and
drainage, but excludes sewer and polluted industrial wastes.
   (B)   It is unlawful to keep or dispose of grass clippings, trash, debris,
earth, stone, obstructions or unwanted materials into the catch basins or storm
sewer lines; or into roadside shoulders or ditches; or within or along banks of
human-made or natural watercourses; or in adjacent floodway areas which may
wash into streams and sewers; or within surface drainage easements.
   (C)   The Director of Community Development, Superintendent of Public Works
and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation and measurement, in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.007 RESTRICTION ON SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause the
discharge of sanitary and industrial wastewater into any storm sewer
constructed as a part of the Cicero Avenue improvement in the municipality from
205th to 219th Street, and further, it shall be illegal for any additional
storm sewer water connections to be made into any storm sewers constructed as
part of this Cicero Avenue improvement plan.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.008 DAMAGING, INTERFERING WITH OR DESTROYING SEWAGE WORKS PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.009 EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATES AND CHARGES.
   The rates and service charges established for user charges in this chapter
shall be as determined by the President and Board of Trustees and effective on
the bill rendered for the next succeeding month following that date.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
SUPERINTENDENT
§ 51.020 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is created the office of Superintendent of Public Works. Said
Superintendent shall hold his or her office for the term of one year and until
his or her successor shall be appointed and qualified.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.021 APPOINTMENT.
   The Superintendent shall be appointed by the President and with the consent
and advice of the Board of Trustees on the first Monday in May of each year, or
as soon thereafter as may be practicable.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.022 OATH AND BOND.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall, before entering on the duties of
his or her office, make and subscribe the oath prescribed by law for municipal
officers, and shall give a bond to the municipality in the penal sum and
securities as may be required by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.023 DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT.
   The Superintendent of Public Works shall have the general management of the
pumping station, and shall be responsible for all property contained therein.
He or she shall have control and prescribe the duties of all assistants,
subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the Board of
Trustees. It shall be the duty of the Superintendent to inspect the
construction and installation of all water service pipes and meters. He or she
shall also read all meters and keep a record thereof, and report such record to
the Water Billing Clerk at such time as may be provided by this chapter. He or
she shall also inspect and test defective meters on complaint of property
owners.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
CONNECTIONS
§ 51.035 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to make a sanitary sewerage
connection with any of the laterals or mains of the village shall make a
written application to the Village Clerk, which written application shall
contain the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant;
   (B)   The legal description of the property on which the building or
structure is situated from which the connection is to be made to the sewer main
or lateral;
   (C)   The number of rooms contained in the structure which shall discharge
its sanitary sewage through the connection into the sewage lateral or main;
   (D)   The number of bathrooms and kitchens contained in the structure; and
   (E)   The type of structure, whether hotel, boarding house, private
dwelling, flat, building or store, and such other information as the Village
Clerk shall require.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.036 PERMIT APPROVED OR DENIED.
   (A)   On the payment of the permit fee as provided herein, the application
shall be referred to the Superintendent of Public Works for an investigation
and a report, and in the event the application shall be approved, a permit
shall be issued to the applicant to make a connection to the municipal sanitary
lateral or main at the place described in the permit under the supervision and
inspection of the Superintendent of Public Works.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued until either a building permit has been
acquired or it is shown that there presently is service to an existing
structure.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.037 CHARGE FOR CONNECTION SERVICING SINGLE-FAMILY USE.
   The base charge for a six-inch sewer shall be $400 to cover costs of
administrative services and inspection.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.038 CHARGE FOR CONNECTION SERVICING MULTI-FAMILY, COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL
USE.
   The base charge for a multi-family, commercial or industrial connection with
the municipal sewerage laterals or mains, shall be $1,000 for administrative
services, including review of the plans, the inspection for the first 100 feet
of sewer line. This fee does not cover engineering costs for preparation of the
plan and the application for securing the Metropolitan Sanitary District
permit, which cost shall be borne entirely by the applicant.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.039 CONNECTION TO BE INSPECTED BEFORE COVERED.
   No trench or connection shall be backfilled or covered until same has been
inspected and approved by the Superintendent of Public Works.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.040 APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION OUTSIDE MUNICIPALITY.
   All applications for the connection of any premises lying outside of the
municipality with the sewer mains or laterals of the municipality shall be
submitted to the President and Board of Trustees for their approval. Any such
application shall be granted only on the payment by the owner of the premises
to the Village Clerk of a sewer tap-in fee of one and one-half times the tap-in
fee chargeable to such owner under §§
51.037 and
51.038, where such premises are situated within the municipality.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.041 UNLAWFUL TO MAKE CONNECTIONS TO LINCOLN HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow any storm
sewer, sanitary sewer or industrial wastewater connections to be made to any
drainage facility constructed as part of the intersection located at Lincoln
Highway, also known as U.S. Route 30 and Central Avenue in the municipality.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.042 UNLAWFUL TO ALLOW DISCHARGE TO 216TH STREET IMPROVEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to allow the
discharge of any storm sewer, sanitary sewer or industrial wastewater into any
storm sewer constructed as a part of the improvement of 216th Street from
Governors Highway East to Main Street, and Main Street from 216th Street North
to Lincoln Highway (U.S. Route 30), in the village.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
BUILDING CONNECTIONS
§ 51.055 UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTION TO, INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC SEWER PROHIBITED.
   No unauthorized person shall: uncover; make any connections with or opening
into; use; alter; or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Director of Community Development or
his or her designee.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.056 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those
discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to the
Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.057 BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.
   There are two classes of building sewer permits: residential wastewater
service; and commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial wastewater
service. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the village (see Appendix A). The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director of Community
Development or designee. A permit and inspection fee in accordance with the
Community Development Department fee schedule for a residential or commercial
building sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time the application
is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization, must provide
information describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of
activity.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.058 INSPECTION OF SEWER MAINS.
   (A)   Sewer mains shall be inspected by closed-circuit television within two
months of the end of the final guarantee period. Inspection shall be at the
subdivider’s expense, with a detailed report in triplicate filed with the
Superintendent of Public Works, prior to termination of the one-year guarantee.
   (B)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director
of Community Development or his or her designee when the building sewer is
ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall
be made under the supervision of the Director of Community Development or his
or her designee.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.059 EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.060 EXTRANEOUS FLOWS UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to discharge, or cause to be discharged, directly
or indirectly, into the sanitary sewer system of the municipality any ground
waters, surface waters, stormwaters or any other extraneous flows.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to make a connection or to maintain or operate a
connection which serves any home, building or any other establishment, premises
or facility, and which contributes, directly or indirectly, to the sanitary
sewer system of the municipality any ground waters, stormwaters or any other
extraneous flows.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.061 ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS.
   All drains or connections designed or intended to receive and discharge
ground waters, surface waters, stormwaters and other drainage shall be
considered illegal connections if they discharge directly or indirectly into
the sanitary sewer system. Such illegal connections include, but are not
limited to, roof drains, downspouts, footing drains, areaway drains, drain
tiles (and sump pumps used to collect and discharge same), yard drains, catch
basins and inlets. Such connections shall not be allowed to discharge directly
or indirectly into the sanitary sewers.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.062 MAINTENANCE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE OWNER.
   The proper maintenance and operation of a building service sewer, house
connection or sanitary sewer line to the point of connection to the municipal
sanitary sewer system shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises
served by the sanitary sewer pipes. Maintenance means keeping the sanitary
sewer connection, sewer lines or other sewer facilities or structures in
satisfactory working condition and good state of repair, including, but not
limited to, preventing any obstruction or extraneous materials or flows from
entering said facilities, protecting said facilities from any damage and
keeping the same free from defects or malfunctions, and making the necessary
provisions and taking the necessary precautions to assure that the sewer
facilities are at all times capable of satisfactorily performing the services,
adequately discharging the functions and producing the final results and
purposes the facilities are intended to perform, discharge or produce.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.063 DOWNSPOUTS, ROOF DRAINS AND SUMP PUMPS.
   (A)   (1)   All downspouts or roof drains shall discharge onto the ground or
connect to the storm sewer, drainage ditches or drainage system.
      (2)   Footing drains shall be connected to sump pumps and discharge shall
be made into storm sewers, drainage ditches or other drainage systems.
   (B)   Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge ground waters or other
stormwaters shall be connected to the storm sewer or discharge into a drainage
ditch or drainage system. Sump pumps installed to receive and discharge floor
drain flow, laundry tubs or other sanitary sewage shall be connected to the
sanitary sewers. A sump pump shall be used for one function only, either the
discharge of stormwaters or the discharge of sanitary sewage. The point of
discharge of any new or existing sump pump shall not be less than five feet
from any lot line.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
SEWAGE SYSTEMS
§ 51.075 INSTALLATION OF SEWAGE SYSTEM.
   A sanitary sewage system, including service pipes to each lot and
appurtenances, shall be installed to serve each development.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.076 CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   All sanitary sewage systems shall be constructed in compliance with the
standards set forth by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater
Chicago, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and other applicable
governmental agencies.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.077 CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   When all improvements and all appurtenances thereto, based on approved
plans, have been constructed or installed, the engineer for the developer shall
provide the Village Engineer or designee with a letter certifying completion of
improvements in substantial compliance with the plans and specifications
therefor.
   (B)   On receipt of the letter of completion, the Village Engineer shall
schedule a final inspection of the improvements installed at which
representatives of the engineer for the developer, the Village Engineer and any
other agency having jurisdiction over construction shall be present. When the
Village Engineer is satisfied that the improvements have been satisfactorily
installed in substantial compliance with the plans and specifications therefor,
he or she shall address a letter of acceptance stating such to the President
and the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Such letter shall not constitute acceptance by the public; it shall be
the responsibility of the agency intending to maintain and operate the facility
to provide the developer with a letter of acceptance.
   (D)   All improvements and all appurtenances thereto shall be guaranteed by
the developer and contractor against defects and workmanship for one year,
subsequent to the date of acceptance by the municipality by motion adopted at a
meeting of the President and the Board of Trustees.
   (E)   Sewer mains shall be inspected by closed-circuit television within two
months of the end of the final guarantee period. Inspection shall be at the
developer’s expense, with detailed report in triplicate to the Board of
Trustees, prior to termination of the one-year guarantee. Pictures shall be
included in the report.
   (F)   Three copies of the “as built” drawings for all utilities installed
shall be submitted to the Village Engineer before he or she writes his or her
letter recommending acceptance.
   (G)   Prior to acceptance by the municipality, the engineer for the
developer shall be responsible for the completion, execution and submission of
the necessary final documents required by governmental agencies who have issued
permits for the improvements; and a copy of the document approved by the
cognizant agency must be furnished to the municipality and the Village
Engineer.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED
§ 51.090 PROHIBITED DEPOSITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.091 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village
or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.092 PRIVIES AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct any privy,
privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the
disposal of sewage.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.093 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM REQUIRED.
   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the village and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located any public sanitary sewer of the village, is
hereby required at his or her expense to install suitable toilet facilities
therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the property public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of
official notice to do so, provided said public sewer is within 250 feet of the
property line.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.094 UNLAWFUL TO MAKE CONNECTION WITHOUT PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall make any connections to the
municipal sanitary sewer laterals or mains without securing a permit as
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   There are two classes of building sewer permits: residential
wastewater service; and commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial
wastewater service. In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the village (see Appendix A). The
permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Director of the
Community Development or designee. A permit and inspection fee in accordance
with the Community Development Department fee schedule for a residential or
commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time the
application is filed. The industry, as a condition of permit authorization,
must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics and type of activity.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.095 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall
only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.096 COSTS, EXPENSE OF BUILDING SEWER INSTALLATION.
   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.097 SEPARATE SEWER FOR EACH BUILDING REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.098 OLD BUILDING SEWERS CONNECTED TO NEW BUILDINGS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Director of Community
Development, or his or her designee, to meet all requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.099 SPECIFICATIONS.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
village. In the absence of code provisions or in application thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9 and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois shall apply.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.100 ADOPTION OF MANUAL OF PROCEDURES FOR ADMINISTRATION OF SEWER PERMIT
ORDINANCE.
   There is adopted by the President and Board of Trustees the Manual of
Procedures for the Administration of the Sewer Permit Ordinance of the
Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago as adopted by the Board of
Trustees of the MWRD on September 3, 1970, as from time to time amended. Three
copies of the Manual have been and now are filed in the office of the Village
Clerk, and the same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at
length herein, together with insertions or deletions, and from June 7,1971, its
provisions shall be controlling within the limits of the municipality.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.101 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS TO PUBLIC SANITARY SEWERS.
   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.102 CONNECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code; or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village of the MWRD ordinance
requirements.
   (B)   All such connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight.
   (C)   Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Director of Community Development or his or her designee before
installation.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 51.115 DISCHARGES INTO SANITARY SEWERS.
   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.116 DISCHARGES INTO STORM SEWERS.
   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
approved by the village. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters
may be discharged, on approval of the village, to a storm sewer or natural
outlet.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.117 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas;
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant;
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works; and
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of a size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like,
whether whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.118 DISCHARGE OF HARMFUL WASTES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the village and MWRD that such wastes can harm any sewer or sewage
treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream;
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance.
In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the village and
MWRD will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory
agencies.
   (B)   The substance prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F
(0°C and 64°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the village and MWRD;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the village and MWRD for such materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances in concentrations exceeding limits which may been
established by the village and MWRD, as necessary after treatment of the
composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other
public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the village and MWRD, in
compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
      (8)   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the village or MWRD in compliance with
applicable state and federal regulations;
      (10)   Any cyanide at any time except as permitted by the village and
MWRD in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate);
         (b)   Excess discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; and
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.119 REMEDIES FOR HARMFUL WASTE DISCHARGES.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in §
51.118, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment
provided in 40 C.F.R. Part 403, June 26, 1978 and any amendments thereto, and
which in the judgment of the village or MWRD may have a deleterious effect upon
the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the village and MWRD
may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes;
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      (4)   Require payment of a surcharge to cover the added costs of handling
and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges.
   (B)   If the village and MWRD permit the pretreatment or equalization of
waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the village and MWRD, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.120 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Director of Community Development or his or her designee, they are
necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in
excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients.
All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Director of
Community Development or his or her designee and shall be located so as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.121 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT.
   Where preliminary treatment of flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his or her expense.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.122 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the Director of Community Development or his or her designee, the
owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes
shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters
and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the Director of Community Development or his or her designee.
The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his or her expense, and shall be
maintained by him or her so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.123 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES; WHEN REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
   (B)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed
by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than once per
year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents or the
wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with federal, state and local
standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of measurements and
laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such a manner as
prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the village. At such times as
deemed necessary, the village reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.124 GRAB SAMPLES.
   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with MWRD standards. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a
premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from
24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are determined from periodic
grab samples.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES
§ 51.135 BASIS FOR WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES.
   The wastewater service charge for the use of and for the service supplied by
the wastewater facilities of the village shall consist of a basic user charge
and applicable surcharges.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.136 BASIC USER CHARGES.
   (A)   The basic user charge is levied on all users to recover operation,
maintenance plus replacement (O, M and R) costs and shall be based on water
usage as recorded by water meters or sewage meters for wastes having the
following normal domestic concentrations:
      (1)   A five-day, 20°C biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of 119 mg/l; and
      (2)   A suspended solids content of 168 mg/l.
   (B)   The basic user charge shall be computed as follows:
      (1)   Estimate the annual wastewater volume;
      (2)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities, including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories;
      (3)   Proportion the estimated O, M and R costs to each user class by
volume; and
      (4)   Compute costs per 100 cubic feet for normal domestic strength
sewage.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.137 ADEQUACY OF WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE.
   The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be reviewed, not less
often than annually, by certified public accountants for the village in their
annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be revised
periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or O, M and R costs.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.138 NOTICE OF CHARGES TO USERS.
   The users of the wastewater treatment services will be notified annually, in
conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that portion of the user
charges which are attributable to the wastewater operation, maintenance and
replacement.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.139 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges shall be the
metered water consumption read in increments of cubic feet.
   (A)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type
approved by the village for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.
   (B)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the village if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
   (C)   Metering devised for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the village.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.140 RATES.
   A charge of a flat rate of $2 plus $1.75 per cubic feet of metered water.
Consumption is hereby established as the basic user charge for the use of the
municipal wastewater facility to recover operation, maintenance and replacement
costs.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 4202, passed 9-23-2013; Ord. 4249, passed
12-15-2014; Ord. 4266, passed 4-27-2015)
§ 51.141 FLAT RATE CHARGE.
   (A)   All non-metered residential users of the wastewater facilities shall
pay a flat rate charge of $7.50 per month. The flat rate charge will allow a
maximum of $3,000 c.f. per quarter.
   (B)   In the event that use of the wastewater facilities is determined by
the village to be in excess of 3,000 c.f. per quarter, the village may require
such flat rate user to install metering devices on the water supply or sewer
main to measure the amount of service supplied.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
BILLING AND ADMINISTRATION PROCEDURES
§ 51.155 BILLING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Rates or charges for service shall be payable bi-monthly depending on
the classification of service for which bills are rendered. The owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for the service to such premises. Service is furnished
to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises, and the occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally
liable therefor to the village. Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by
the village as part of the water billing on a bi-monthly basis.
   (B)   All sewer bills are due and payable 21 days after being sent out. A
penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the twenty-first day
after they have been rendered.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.156 DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   (A)   It is the policy of the village to discontinue sewer service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The village’s form for application
for sewer service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title,
address, room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing,
clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on
the bill;
      (2)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a shut-off notice
will be mailed stating that if the bill is not paid within ten days of the
mailing of the notice, service will be discontinued for nonpayment; and
      (3)   Any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill shall
have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in person
and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may present
orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the village
official in charge of sewer billing. This official shall be authorized to order
that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to
make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the village to discontinue sewer service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge in
the sum of $75.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.157 LIEN-NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 105 days after it
has been rendered, the Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall file with
the County Recorder of Deeds a notice of lien. This notice shall contain the
legal description of the premises served, and the date when such amount became
delinquent.
   (B)   Prior to filing the notice of lien, the village must send notice to
the taxpayer of record informing him or her that the charges or rates have
become delinquent and that unpaid charges or rates may create a lien on the
real estate.
   (C)   The failure of the village to record such lien or to mail such notice
or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right
to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as set forth in this chapter. All liens
shall run with the land.
   (D)   An administrative fee of $75 will be assessed for the filing of all
liens.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 4202, passed 9-23-2013; Ord. 4461, passed 7-
19-2021)
POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
§ 51.170 INSPECTION.
   The Community Development Director or his or her designee and other duly
authorized employees of the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency and MWRD, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The Community Development Director or his or her representative shall
have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical,
chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point
having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers,
waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.171 LIABILITY.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in §
51.170, the Director of Community Development or other duly authorized
employees of the village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, the
United States Environmental Protection Agency and MWRD shall observe all safety
rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company
shall be held harmless for injury or death to the village employees.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 51.172 ENTRY ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The Director of Community Development and other duly authorized employees of
the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, employing, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
APPENDIX A: APPLICATION FORMS
Section
§ 1 RESIDENTIAL BUILDING SEWER APPLICATION.
   The Village of Matteson:
   A.   THE UNDERSIGNED, being the  (Owner, Owner’s Agent)  property located at
(Address)  DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to install and connect a building to
serve the  (residence)  at said location.
      1.   The following indicated fixtures will be connection to the proposed
building sewer:
         Number      Fixtures         Number      Fixtures
                   Kitchen Sinks                   Water Closets
                   Lavatories                      Bath Tubs
                   Laundry Tubs                   Showers
                   Urinals                         Garbage Grinders
         Specify other fixtures                                  .
      2.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the
proposed work is                     .
      3.   Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewer are
attached hereunto as Exhibit “A”.
   B.   In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED
AGREES:
      1.   To accept and abide by all provision of the village code of the
Village of Matteson, and of all other pertinent ordinances or regulations that
may be adopted in the future;
      2.   To maintain the building sewer at no expense to the Village; and
      3.   To notify the Director of Community Development or designee when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer, but
before any portion of the work is covered.
DATE:                              SIGNED:                               
                               Applicant
                                                                  
                               Address of Applicant
                                                                                             
For Village Use Only:
$                connection fee paid.
$                inspection fee paid.
Application approved and permit issued:
DATE:                    SIGNED:                             
                      Approving Authority
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 2 COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL AND INDUSTRIAL SEWER CONNECTION
APPLICATION.
   To the Village of Matteson:
   A.   THE UNDERSIGNED, being the  (Owner, Lessee, Tenant, etc.)  of the
property located at  (Address)  DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to (install, use)
an industrial sewer connection serving the  (Name of Company)  at said
location.
      1.   A plat of the property showing accurately all sewers and drains now
existing is attached hereunto as Exhibit “A”.
      2.   Plans and specifications covering any work proposed to be performed
under this permit is attached hereunto as Exhibit “B”.
      3.   A complete schedule of all process waters and industrial wastes
produced or expected to be produced at said property, including a description
of the character of such waste, the daily volume and maximum rates of
discharge, and representative analyses, is attached hereunto as Exhibit “C”.
      4.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work
covered by this permit is
                                                                                        .
   B.   In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED
AGREES:
      1.   To furnish any additional information relating to the installation
or use of the industrial sewer for which this permit is sought as may be
adopted in the future.
      2.   To operate and maintain a control manhole and any waste pretreatment
facilities, as may be required as a condition of the acceptance into the public
sewer of the industrial wastes involved in an efficient manner at all times,
and at no expense to the village.
      3.   To cooperate at all times with the Director of Community Development
or designee, and his or her representative in their inspecting, sampling and
study of the industrial wastes, and any facilities provided for pretreatment.
      4.   To notify the Director of Community Development or designee
immediately in event of any accident, negligence or other occurrence that
occasions discharge to the public sewers of any wastes or process waters not
covered by this permit.
 
   DATE:                           SIGNED:                       
                            Applicant
                                                               
                            Address of Applicant
For Village Use Only:
$                connection fee paid.
$                inspection fee paid.
Application approved and permit issued:
DATE:                    SIGNED:                              
                      Approving Authority
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.001   Water main specifications
   
52.002   No private water supply permitted
   
52.003   Abandoned water wells
Consumer Regulations
   
52.015   Rules and regulations for connections
   
52.016   Restrictions on lawn sprinkling and other water uses
Rates and Charges
   
52.030   Consumers of water
   
52.031   Measurement of flow
   
52.032   Rates
   
52.033   Faulty meters
   
52.034   Unlawful to turn on water without permission
   
52.035   Connection made with service main prohibited
   
52.036   Failure to make payment
   
52.037   Billing procedures
   
52.038   Responsibility for payment
   
52.039   Disconnection for late payment
   
52.040   Lien-notice of delinquency
   
52.041   System of accounts; annual audit
Cross-Connection Control Devices and Testing
   
52.055   Purpose
   
52.056   Application
   
52.057   Policy
   
52.058   Definitions
   
52.059   Water system
   
52.060   Cross-connection prohibited
   
52.061   Survey and investigations
   
52.062   Where protection is required
   
52.063   Type of protection required
   
52.064   Backflow prevention devices
   
52.065   Inspection and maintenance
   
52.066   Booster pumps
   
52.067   Notice to install device
   
52.068   Prohibited connections
   
52.069   Surveys and investigations
   
52.070   Right of entry of inspector
   
52.071   Disconnection of water service for violations
   
52.072   Cost of cleanup
   
52.073   Permit required
   
52.074   Violations
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
   
52.085   Right of entry
   
52.086   Liability
   
52.087   Entry onto private property
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.001 WATER MAIN SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Water main pipe and fittings.
      (1)   All water mains shall be ductile iron pipe, Class 2, cement lined.
      (2)   The contractor shall have the option of using a “push-on” or
mechanical-type joint.
      (3)   All fittings shall have mechanical joints.
   (B)   Valves and vaults.
      (1)   All valves shall be gate type and of a brand approved by the
Superintendent of Water.
      (2)   All valves shall be in vaults.
      (3)   The word “WATER” in raised letters shall be on the lid of the
vault.
      (4)   Sixteen-inch valves shall be Butterfly type, A.W.W.A.
   (C)   Fire hydrants.
      (1)   All fire hydrants shall be equipped with auxiliary valve and valve
box.
      (2)   Fire hydrants shall have a four-inch “steamer” connection and
national standard threads.
   (D)   Sampling tap.
      (1)   Two one-inch sampling taps shall be installed in the water main in
each valve vault; one on each side of the gate valve therein.
      (2)   These taps shall be similar or equal to that manufactured by the
Mueller Company of Decatur, Illinois, as shown in their catalogue as No. H-
l 500.
   (E)   Pressure test.
      (1)   The Village Engineer shall be present at all testing of water
mains.
      (2)   The Engineer shall be given 48-hours’ notice previous to starting
the pressure test (125 psi).
   (F)   Chlorination report. One copy of the approved chlorination report
shall be given to the Village Engineer.
   (G)   Copper services. Shall be one and one-half inch type “K”.
      (1)   Curb stop: Mueller Co. H-15160, one and one-half inch Minneapolis
Pattern Copper inlet and outlet.
      (2)   “B”-box: Mueller Co. H-10302, one and one-half inch Minneapolis
Pattern five and one-half foot length, fully extended.
      (3)   Corporation stop: Mueller Co. H-15000, one and one-half inch.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 52.002 NO PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY PERMITTED.
   No person shall build, establish, expand or maintain a private water supply
system within the village unless there shall be no public water supply system
within 250 feet from the point on property of such person which is nearest the
public water supply system.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.003 ABANDONED WATER WELLS.
   (A)   When any water well in the municipality shall be abandoned and is no
longer being used, the owner of the real estate on which the abandoned water
well is located shall, within 30 days after its abandonment, seal the abandoned
water well pursuant to Rule XI-A, as amended, of the State Department of Mines
and Minerals, Oil and Gas Division.
   (B)   The owner is required to complete the “water well plugging affidavit,”
as required by the State Department of Mines and Minerals, Oil and Gas
Division, and to file with the Village Engineer the completely executed
affidavit.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
CONSUMER REGULATIONS
§ 52.015 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS.
   The following rules and regulations shall govern all connections with the
municipal mains for the purpose of conveying water to any building or premises
for all uses of municipal water and the maintenance of all hydrant connections
connected with the municipal water works system.
   (A)   No person, except a legally authorized agent of the municipality,
shall take water from any public or private hydrant plug, hose, pipe or
fountain except for fire purposes and for the use of the Fire Department in
case of fire, nor shall any person use in any way or take any water for private
use (drinking at public fountains excepted) except through a meter which shall
be furnished him or her by the municipality after he or she has deposited with
the Village Clerk an amount equal to the cost of the meter, connection and plug
wrench, which money shall be returned to him or her on the return of the meter,
connection and plug wrench in good condition. He or she shall then pay the
Clerk for water used through the meter at meter rates then in effect.
   (B)   No person shall willfully break, injure, mar, deface, interfere with
or disturb any building, machinery, apparatus, attachments or appurtenances of
the municipal water works, or any public or private hydrant, or any stop cock,
service plug, water or service pipe, or any part thereof; nor shall any person
injure or deposit anything in any service box or commit any act tending to
obstruct or impair the intended use of any of the above mentioned things,
without the permission of the Board of Trustees, Water Committee or some person
duly authorized to issue such permits, except in cases herein provided.
   (C)   No person shall make any excavation in any street, alley or public
ground for the purpose of laying water pipe or connecting to any water or
service pipe already laid without written permission from the Director of
Community Development; and only such persons as are authorized to perform such
work shall do the same.
   (D)   All applications for the introduction of water into any premises, or
for the extension of any water pipe, shall be made to the Director of Community
Development by the owner or some duly authorized person on printed blanks for
that purpose to be had at the office of the Director of Community Development.
The application will state fully and truthfully all purposes for which the
water is required. Should the additional use of water be required, the person
desiring the same must make a new application before such additional use will
be allowed. The applicant must subscribe to and agree to be bound to such rules
governing the use of water as may be in force at the time or may be passed from
time to time by the Board of Trustees. If there is no available objection
existing, the Director of Community Development will issue a permit authorizing
the Village Engineer to tap the main and insert a corporation cock for such
service, and place a stop cock and service box three feet inside of the curb
line on the same side of the street where the premises to be supplied are
located. No person, unless duly authorized by the Board of Trustees, will be
permitted under any circumstances to tap the main or insert a corporation cock
therein. Special permits must be secured from the municipality authorizing a
licensed plumber to insert the service pipe from the stop cock into the
premises.
   (E)   Whenever any premises becomes vacant and remains vacant for a period
of 30 days or more, an affidavit served on the owner or duly authorized agent
of the premises, at the written request of the owner of such premises, the
water supply of such building or premises may be shut off. If the owner or
authorized agent shall make a formal request that the water be turned on, at a
cost of $75, and the Director of Community Development shall cause same to be
done.
   (F)   Service pipes will not be permitted to go from one lot to another
along streets wherein mains are laid. Water must be obtained directly from the
mains in front of the premises adjacent, provided that one service may be used
to supply all parties occupying the same building. All service must be laid at
least three and one-half feet below the surface of the ground.
   (G)   No claim shall be made against the municipality by reason of the
breakage of any main, pipe, service pipe or cock, or for any interruption of
the water supply, or by reason of the breaking of the machinery or stoppage for
necessary repairs.
   (H)   Water will not be turned on into any house or private service pipe
except on order of the Director of Community Development, nor until all the
water fees or charges against the premises for which the supply is intended
shall have been paid. Plumbers are strictly prohibited from turning water on
into any service pipe except on order or permission from the Director of
Community Development, provided this rule is not to be construed to prevent any
plumber from admitting water to test pipes.
   (I)   No hydrant, except public drinking fountains, shall be placed within
the limits of any street which has an opening for which it can be used as a
source of domestic supply.
   (J)   Persons taking water must keep their service pipe, curb boxes and all
fixtures connected therewith in good condition and protected from frost at
their own expense, and must prevent all unnecessary waste under penalty of
having the water shut off.
   (K)   Hydrants, hose attachments or valves which the consumer may adopt for
obtaining water from the service pipe shall not be located as to be accessible
to persons living or occupying neighboring premises, or to the public, and the
water shall not be turned on in such hydrant, hose attachment or valve until
the same has been removed to some unexposed place on the premises. Persons
taking water are solely responsible for the water service lines from their
premises to the “B” box, a.k.a. buffalo box.
   (L)   Consumers of water from the water works who shall permit others not
members of his or her family to use water from his or her hydrants, faucets or
other devices, without first being assured by the Village Clerk that the proper
rate has been paid for the use of the same.
   (M)   There shall be a stop and waste cock attached to every service pipe at
the point where it enters the building.
   (N)   Plumbers shall, within 48 hours after the completion of any work in
connection with the water works, make a full and complete return, on the back
of the permit authorizing such work, of the number of rooms in the premises and
of the contemplated use of the water therein, a complete list of the articles
and fixtures used, and whether it is the first introduction of service pipes
into the premises, an extension or repairs, or a thorough testing of the same.
The plumber must turn off the supply from such premises at the service cock,
and the water will not be turned on until after the report of the work is made.
The work certificate shall be okayed by the Water Superintendent, and approved
as in accordance with the rules and regulations herein prescribed.
   (O)   No plumber or other person shall make any attachment to any old pipe
or water fixture from which water has been shut off and the supply discontinued
without the party desiring such work done having made application for and
obtained a permit for the same; nor shall any plumber or any person make an
attachment or addition to any pipe or water fixture attached to the water works
to conduct water into adjoining premises or into stables, baths, water closets,
wash basins or for any purpose whatever, without having made application and
obtained a written permit from the Village Clerk for each and every separate
job of such modification in the water fixtures.
   (P)   All service pipes extending from the service cock to the inner line of
the building shall be copper.
   (Q)   The interior plumbing of any premises must be capable of withstanding
a pressure of 100 pounds to the square inch, materials and installation shall
be subject to the approval and inspection of the Plumbing Inspector. The owner
of the premises shall be subject to all damages due to the breaking of water
pipes within the premises.
   (R)   No excavation or trench in any public place must be left open
overnight unless the same is well guarded with proper barriers, and lights
placed thereon not more than 50 feet apart. Before filling the trench or
excavation, the earth must be well rammed under the main level with the top
thereof. Then the trench or excavation must be filled with layers of not more
than 15 inches in depth, and each layer thoroughly rammed or puddled to prevent
settling. The street or alley shall be left in as good condition as it was
previous to making the excavation, and all rocks, boulders, dirt and rubbish
must be removed immediately after the completion of the work. Should any
excavation in any street or alley be left open and unfinished for the space of
24 hours, or should the work be improperly done, the Water Superintendent shall
have the right to finish or correct the work, and the expense thus incurred
shall be charged to the plumber whose work is thus finished or corrected, and
shall be paid by him or her or them before securing another permit.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.016 RESTRICTIONS ON LAWN SPRINKLING AND OTHER WATER USES.
   (A)   The village purchases Lake Michigan water from the Village of Oak
Lawn, subject to the two tier emergency restrictions set forth below. In order
for the village to comply with the Department of Natural Resources’ Rules and
Regulations for the Allocation of Water from Lake Michigan dated January 1985,
as amended November 3, 1988, commencing from May 15 through September 15 of
each year, it shall be unlawful for any person to use water for the sprinkling
or irrigation of lawns or gardens, except on an odd/even basis only (on odd
calendar days if the last digit in the street address is odd or on the even
calendar days if the last digit in the street address is even) between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m.
   (B)   Under emergency conditions, as determined by the Oak Lawn President or
the Oak Lawn President and Board of Trustees based on the recommendation of Oak
Lawn’s Director of Public Works relative to the operational capacity of its
water distribution system, the demands placed on the system by the users and
the risk of damage to or failure of the system, it shall be unlawful for any
person to use water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns or gardens,
except during the permitted days and hours set forth below.
      (1)   Tier I (Conservation emergency). Sprinkling or irrigation of lawns
or gardens shall be permitted only on an odd/even basis between the hours 7:00
a.m. and 11:00 a.m. Notwithstanding the provisions of this division (B)(1) for
Tier I regulations, new sod, hydraseed, seed and/or landscaping may be watered
more frequently than otherwise permitted, upon application for and receipt of a
special permit from the Public Works Department.
      (2)   Tier II (Total ban). Sprinkling or irrigation of lawns or gardens
(manually or by an automatic lawn sprinkler or irrigation system) is
prohibited.
   (C)   The Oak Lawn President or the Oak Lawn President and Board of
Trustees, or their designee, shall provide notice by telephone, facsimile
transmission, e-mail, United States mail, messenger delivery or personal
service to the President or the Administrator, or one of their designees,
whenever the Tier I or Tier II restrictions are in effect; the notice shall
specify the type of tier emergency restriction and the duration of such
restriction. Upon receipt of notice that such an emergency restriction is in
effect, the Board of Trustees or the President of Matteson, or their designee,
shall provide notice in accordance with division (E) below of the necessity to
limit or suspend the use of water within the village for the sprinkling or
irrigation of lawns and gardens or for any other special purpose(s) under this
code.
   (D)   The village reserves the right to further limit the use of water for
the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and gardens or for any other special
purposes whenever the President and Board of Trustees shall determine that the
public exigencies require such action. If public exigencies so require, the
President may unilaterally take such action prior to the earliest opportunity
available for consultation with the Board of Trustees.
   (E)   Whenever the President or the President and Board of Trustees limit or
suspend the use of water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and gardens
or for any other special purpose(s), it shall be unlawful for any person to use
water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and gardens or for any other
special purpose(s) designated, other than during the times allowed for such use
(s) of water, provided that said person has been given notice of said
limitation on, or the suspension of, the use of water, from the village, by
telephone, facsimile transmission, e-mail, United States mail, messenger
delivery or personal service. In addition, the village shall post the notice of
the water use restriction, including the type and duration of such restriction,
within the customary posting place in the Village Hall, on the village’s cable
access television channel, its website and in any other medium normally used by
the village to communicate information of public concern to the residents and
public.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 52.030 CONSUMERS OF WATER.
   All consumers of water in the municipality shall be required to receive and
pay for the same through a meter installed on the service pipe of such
consumers, in accordance with the rates hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 52.031 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   The volume of flow used for computing basic user charges shall be the
metered water consumption read in increments of cubic feet.
   (A)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type
approved by the village for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.
   (B)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the village if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
   (C)   Metering devised for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the village.
   (D)   Any commercial property with separate water lines used for fire
protection, sometimes known as “by passes,” whether connected with automatic
sprinkling devices or otherwise, shall be supplied with a separate independent
meter to control and register the amount of water flowing through such pipe.
Such meter shall be of a type, design and size to be approved by the water
department and Village Code and so constructed as to permit, in case of
necessity, an uninterrupted flow of water. Charges for water consumption
supplied by any separate independent meter shall be as provided in §
52.030.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 4529, passed 9-26-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.032 RATES.
   Commencing January 1, 2012, the flat rate per 100 cubic feet shall be
increased by the amount of the increase imposed upon the village by the Village
of Oak Lawn.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 4131, passed 12-5-2011)
§ 52.033 FAULTY METERS.
   Any person believing that the water meter on his or her premises is not
accurate may, by depositing the sum equal to the expenses incurred for testing
with the Municipal Clerk, have the same tested. If the meter is found to under-
register, the sum of deposit shall be retained to cover the cost of the test.
If the meter is found to over-register, a tested meter shall be installed and
the deposit returned to the consumer advancing the same. All meters on premises
shall be open to the Municipal Inspector at all reasonable hours, and shall be
kept open and free from obstructions. Consumers shall be held responsible for
all damages to meters not due to defects in the meter, and will be charged as a
part of their monthly bill for any expenses incurred in repairing meters due to
negligence of the consumers.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 52.034 UNLAWFUL TO TURN ON WATER WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on water leading to any premises
without permission of the village where the same has been shut off by the
village for nonpayment or delinquent water bills. No person shall tamper with
any municipal meter.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.035 CONNECTION MADE WITH SERVICE MAIN PROHIBITED.
   No connection shall be made with any service pipe between the street and the
meter, and no person shall use water from such connection.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.036 FAILURE TO MAKE PAYMENT.
   Any person failing to pay his or her water charges within the time period
prescribed within this chapter shall be charged a late payment penalty
equivalent to 10% of the bimonthly charge. The penalty shall be added to the
whole amount charged. Failure to pay the water charge will result in
disconnection as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 52.037 BILLING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Rates or charges for service shall be payable bi-monthly depending on
the classification of service for which bills are rendered. The owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for the service to such premises. Service is furnished
to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner of the
premises, and the occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally
liable therefore to the village. Bills for water service shall be sent out by
the village as part of the water billing on a bi-monthly basis within 30 days
succeeding the period for which the service is billed.
   (B)   All water bills are due and payable on or before 21 days after being
sent out. A penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the twenty-
first day after they have been rendered.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 52.038 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT.
   (A)   Water customers shall be billed bi-monthly for water consumed. The
owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall
be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such premises, and
the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon condition
that the owners of the premises, occupant and user of the service are jointly
and severally liable therefore.
   (B)   If the applicant for water service is not the legal owner of the
premises to which service is to be given, the applicant shall make as a
condition precedent a cash deposit in advance to insure payment of final bills
in an amount equal to the estimated maximum bimonthly bill of the applicant.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 52.039 DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   (A)   It is the policy of the village to discontinue water service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The village’s form for application
for water service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title,
address, room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing,
clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on
the bill; and
      (2)   If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a shut-off notice
will be mailed stating that, if the bill is not paid within ten days of the
mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for nonpayment.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained for
longer than 30 days.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the village to discontinue sewer service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only after
all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on charge in
the sum of $75.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 52.040 LIEN-NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY.
   (A)   Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid for 105 days for bi-
monthly service after it has been rendered, the Village Clerk, or his or her
designee, shall file with the County Recorder of Deeds a notice of lien. This
notice shall contain a description of such real estate sufficient for the
identification thereof, the amount of the unpaid bill, and the date when such
amount became delinquent.
   (B)   Prior to filing the notice of lien, the village must send notice to
the taxpayer of record informing him or her that the charges or rates have
become delinquent and that unpaid charges or rates may create a lien on the
real estate.
   (C)   The failure of the village to record such lien or to mail such notice
or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right
to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as set forth in this chapter, All liens
shall run with the land.
   (D)   An administrative fee of $75 will be assessed for the filing of all
liens.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 4202, passed 9-23-2013; Ord. 4461, passed 7-
19-2021)
§ 52.041 SYSTEM OF ACCOUNTS; ANNUAL AUDIT.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system. At
regular annual intervals, he or she shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
   (B)   The IEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the
village system of user charges for the purpose of making audits, examinations,
excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance with the terms of the
special and general conditions to any state grant.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL DEVICES AND TESTING
§ 52.055 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
   (A)   To protect the village public water supply system from contamination
or pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the village
public water supply system;
   (B)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer’s potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety; and
   (C)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer’s potable water systems.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.056 APPLICATION.
   These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises served by the public
potable water supply system of the village.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.057 POLICY.
   The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for protection of the
public water supply system from contamination due to backflow or back siphonage
of contaminants through the customer’s water service connection. If, in the
judgment of the Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community
Development Director of the village or their authorized representative, an
approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public
water supply system, the Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community
Development Director of the village shall give notice to the consumer to
install such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to
the premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or
devices at his or her own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of
the consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or
devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation,
maintenance, testing and repair as required in this section for a period of at
least five years.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.058 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, American Water Association, American National Standards Institute
and certified by the National Sanitation Foundation.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the village public water supply system and includes the
water supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from
another purveyor’s public water supply system; or water from a source such as
wells, lakes or streams, or process fluids or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in the state must meet the standards of the State Plumbing
Code, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and the village.
   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to the village public water
system.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer’s
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer’s water
system.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
      (1)   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection formed when a potable
water system is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
      (2)   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection through which an
unknown substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a
safe potable water system.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE standard 1015. A DOUBLE CHECK VALVE
ASSEMBLY must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well
being of consumers. The word SEVERE as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the State Plumbing Code,
77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 900.
   NONPOTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 85 Ill. Adm. Code Part 604.
   PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including, without limitation, lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or
at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. PLUMBING includes all piping, from discharge of
pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. PLUMBING
includes all piping fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building drain
and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of
connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part
900 for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional or system hazard if introduced into the public
or a consumer’s potable water system. This includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
      (2)   Process waters;
      (3)   Used waters originating from the public water support system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      (4)   Cooling water;
      (5)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams or irrigation systems;
      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension; and
      (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial, or other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at
least 25 persons at least 50 days per year. A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY is either a
community water supply or a noncommunity water supply.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check
valves and approved under ASSE standard 1013. During normal flow and at the
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply
pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each
end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
   SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer’s piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the locations, type and most recent inspections and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within
that customer’s piping system. The SURVEY must be in written form, and should
not be an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer’s potable water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.059 WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system; and the consumer’s water system.
   (B)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the Public Works Director up to the
point where the consumer’s water system begins.
   (C)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   (D)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer’s water
system.
   (E)   The consumer’s water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.060 CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to ensure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   (B)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable portion
of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better bacteriological
and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis by the agency.
There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe substance may
enter a supply.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.061 SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
village’s approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection
of the presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer’s premises,
and testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within
the consumer’s premises.
   (B)   On request by the Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community
Development Director of the village or their authorized representative, the
consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or systems or
water use within the consumer’s premises. The consumer’s premises shall be open
at all reasonable times to the Public Works Director, Village Engineer or
Community Development Director of the village for the verification of
information submitted by the consumer to the public water supply custodian
regarding cross-connection inspection results.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his or her premises to determine
whether there are actual or potential cross-connections to his or her water
system through which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or her
or the public potable water system. All cross-connection control or other
plumbing inspections must be conducted in accordance with § 3(1) of the
Illinois Plumbing License Law (225 ILCS 320/3(1)).
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
      (1)   Prevention. All cross-connections are removed, or approved cross-
connection control devices are installed for control of backflow and back
siphonage;
      (2)   Installation. Cross-connection control devices shall be installed
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions; and
      (3)   Inspection. Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at
least annually or more often as required by a person approved by the village
and Agency as a cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI) pursuant to
the requirements of this chapter. The inspection of mechanical devices shall
include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.062 WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises, where in the
judgment of the Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community
Development Director of the village, actual or potential hazards to the public
water supply system exist.
   (B)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving premises where any of the
following conditions exist:
      (1)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Public Works Director of the
village and the source is approved by the State Environmental Protection
Agency;
      (2)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Public Works Director of the village;
      (3)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the judgment of
the Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community Development Director
of the village are not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which
make it impracticable to determine whether or not cross-connections exist;
      (4)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions it is impossible or impractical to make a complete
cross-connection survey; or
      (5)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
   (C)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer’s water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities unless the Public Works Director of the
village determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public water
supply system exists:
      (1)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes;
      (2)   Laboratories;
      (3)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
      (4)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or stormwater
pumping stations;
      (5)   Food or beverage processing plants;
      (6)   Chemical plants;
      (7)   Metal plating industries;
      (8)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
      (9)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors; and
      (10)   Car washes.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.063 TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The type of protection required under §
52.062(B)(1), (B)(2) and (B)(3) shall depend on the degree of hazard which
exists as follows.
      (1)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed,
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with the substances
that could cause a severe health hazard.
      (2)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      (3)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause a
pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
   (B)   The type of protection required under §
52.062(B)(4) shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device.
   (C)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventors shall be
installed on fire sprinkler systems connected to the public water supply when:
      (1)   The sprinkler system contains any substance other than potable
water;
      (2)   Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
      (3)   There is a connection whereby another source can be connected to
the sprinkler system.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.064 BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)    All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules
and regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water
Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering or American
National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation
to be in compliance with applicable industry specifications.
   (B)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with 35
Ill. Adm. Code Part 653.802, and only as specified by the Research Foundation
for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California or
applicable industry specifications. Maintenance as recommended by the
manufacturer of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer’s maintenance
manual shall be available on site.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.065 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer’s instructions.
      (1)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter.
      (2)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested for
tightness at time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and
required service performed within 15 days.
      (3)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
tested at least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer,
and required service performed within five days.
   (B)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
village as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   (C)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   (D)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      (1)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      (3)   Test results;
      (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
      (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
      (6)   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (E)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay. A follow up inspection and a certification of the
proper functioning of the device is required.
   (F)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific written authorization by
the Public Works Director and Village Engineer.
   (G)   Inspection test results: copies of all inspection test results shall
be forwarded to the Public Works Department’s authorized representative within
ten working days of the test.
   (H)   All test/maintenance reports must include the following information:
      (1)   Administrative information.
         (a)   Water customer or facility name;
         (b)   Contact name and telephone number;
         (c)   Complete service address (physical address);
         (d)   Complete mailing address;
         (e)   Physical location of backflow prevention assembly/device within
facility or on the property (room number, room name, landmarks);
         (f)   Type of assembly/device (RP, RPDA, DCVA, DCDA and the like);
         (g)   Assembly make, model, size and serial number;
         (h)   Test gauge make, model and serial number;
         (i)   CCCDI printed name, signature and CCCDI license number; and
         (j)   Date and time of test.
      (2)   Test information.
         (a)   Whether the valve passed or failed the test;
         (b)   Gauge readings of each component tested (check valves, relief
valve opening point, air inlet opening point and the like); and
         (c)   Repair information (any new or used parts, components cleaned
and replaced and the like).
      (3)   Other information.
         (a)   Notations of any unsafe conditions or safety issues; and
         (b)   Notations of any installation abnormalities or deficiencies.
   (I)   Fraudulent information: if it is determined that a CCCDI has
misrepresented the test results of any backflow prevention assembly, has
purposefully submitted fraudulent information, is not testing backflow
prevention assemblies in accordance with established methods approved by the
State EPA, or in any other way misrepresents or fraudulently submits
information to the village, that CCCDI will be removed form the list of
acceptable certified testers and all test reports submitted to the village will
be considered invalid. Additionally, the village will submit any and all
information regarding that tester to the State EPA for appropriate enforcement
action.
   (J)   Any backflow prevention assembly test report that is not properly
completed or is not submitted and fees paid in accordance with this chapter
will be considered invalid. Should a certified CCCDI continue to violate this
subchapter, that tester will be removed from the approved CCCDIs maintained by
the village.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.066 BOOSTER PUMPS.
   (A)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cutoff
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cutoff device in proper working order and to certify to the Public
Works Director of the village at least once a year that the device is operable.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.067 NOTICE TO INSTALL DEVICE.
   If in accordance with the State Plumbing Code, the Illinois Environmental
Protection Act, or in the judgment of the Public Works Director, Village
Engineer or Community Development Director of the village an approved backflow
prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply
system, the Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community Development
Director of the village will give written notice to the water customer to
install such an approved device within 15 days after receipt of notice. The
water customer shall, at his or her own expense, install such an approved
device at a location and in a manner in accordance with the State Plumbing Code
(77 Ill. Adm. Code Part 900) and all applicable village regulations, and shall
have inspections and tests made of such approved devices as required by the
State Plumbing Code and the village regulations.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.068 PROHIBITED CONNECTIONS.
   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established
or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply
of the village may enter the supply or distribution system of said
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
Public Works Director and the State Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.069 SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Public Works Director, Village Engineer or
Community Development Director of the village to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two years, or as
often as the Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community Development
Director of the village shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be
maintained and available for review for a period of at least five years.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.070 RIGHT OF ENTRY OF INSPECTOR.
   The approved cross-connection control device inspector of the village shall
have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the village for
the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connections and the
Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community Development Director of
the village or his or her authorized agent shall have the right to enter at any
reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply
or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying information
submitted by the customer regarding the required cross-connection control
inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so
served shall furnish to the Public Works Director, Village Engineer or
Community Development Director of the village any information which he or she
may request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such
property. The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the
discretion of the Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community
Development Director of the village, be deemed evidence of the presence of
improper connections as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.071 DISCONNECTION OF WATER SERVICE FOR VIOLATIONS.
   The Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community Development
Director of the village is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue, after
reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any property
wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this chapter is known
to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he or she may deem
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply
distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until
such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and until a reconnection fee of $100 is paid to the
village. Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community Development Director of
the village is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the
public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written
notification of the cause of disconnection.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.072 COST OF CLEANUP.
   The owner or consumer responsible for back siphoned material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.073 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A permit is required for the installation of the approved cross-connection
control device. This permit shall be issued by the Department of Community
Development. From time to time, the President and Board of Trustees shall
establish a fee for said permit as they deem appropriate.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 52.074 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Public Works Director, Village Engineer or Community Development
Director of the village shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to
the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow
prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested,
maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the Public Works Director,
Village Engineer or Community Development Director of the village, or if it is
found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if
an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure
cutoff required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working
order.
   (B)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director,
Village Engineer or Community Development Director of the village, and the
required reconnection fee is paid.
(Ord. 4169, passed 10-15-2012)
POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
§ 52.085 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Community Development Director or his or her designee and other duly
authorized employees of the village, the State Environmental Protection Agency
and MWRD, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
Community Development Director or his or her representative shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil
refining, ceramic, paper or other industries, beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers, waterways or
facilities for waste treatment.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 52.086 LIABILITY.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in
this chapter, the Director of Community Development or other duly authorized
employees of the village, the State Environmental Protection Agency, the United
States Environmental Protection Agency and MWRD shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be
held harmless for injury or death to the village employees. The village shall
indemnify the company against liability claims and demands for personal injury
or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of gauging and
sampling operations by village employees, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as required in this
chapter.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
§ 52.087 ENTRY ONTO PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   The Director of Community Development and other duly authorized employees of
the village bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all private properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to inspection, observation,
measurement, employing, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage
works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 4107, passed 6-20-2011)
CHAPTER 53: ELECTRIC UTILITIES
Section
Local Emergency Energy Plan
   
53.01   Definitions
   
53.02   Submittal of emergency energy plan
   
53.03   Review of plan
   
53.04   Implementation of emergency energy plan
   
53.05   Construction
 
   
53.99   Penalty
LOCAL EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN
§ 53.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTROL AREA. An electrical system bounded by interconnection (tie-line)
metering and telemetry. It controls generation directly to maintain its
interchange schedule with other control areas and contributes to frequency
regulation of the interconnection.
   CONTROL AREA EMERGENCY. Control area is at risk of having to shed firm load,
having taken or committed to take all feasible mitigating action short of
shedding firm load and firm sales.
   CONTROLLED ROTATING INTERRUPTIONS OF ELECTRICAL SERVICE. The implementation
of a plan to curtail electric service to firm load customers for a short period
of time and rotating this curtailment of electric service through different
areas within the electric utility’s service territory in a situation where the
demand has exceeded or is at significant risk of exceeding the supply of
electricity available to the electric utility. The action of an electric
utility to interrupt or curtail electric service to a customer participating in
or taking service under an interruptible or curtailable rate is not included in
this definition of a CONTROLLED ROTATING INTERRUPTION OF ELECTRIC SERVICE.
   ELECTRIC UTILITY COMPANY or ELECTRIC UTILITY. Any person or entity engaged
in the business of distributing, transmitting, or otherwise delivering
electricity regardless of its source, for use or consumption within the
village. This term shall not include any person or entity that delivers
electricity to fewer than 50 customers within the village.
   EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN.
      (1)   The portions of the emergency load conservation procedures, which
immediately precede and include the controlled rotating interruption of
electrical service to firm load customers within the village.
      (2)   The EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN shall include the following steps:
         (a)   A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;
         (b)   A declaration of a control area emergency;
         (c)   A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use;
and
         (d)   Implementation of the plan for controlled rotating interruptions
of electrical service.
   EMERGENCY LOAD CONSERVATION PROCEDURES. A planned course of action developed
by an electric utility company to be implemented in emergency situations when
the demand for electricity exceeds, or is at significant risk of exceeding, the
supply of electricity available to the electric utility.
(2000 Code, § 53.01) (Ord. 1737, passed 8-16-1999)
§ 53.02 SUBMITTAL OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN.
   (A)   Every electric utility company must have adopted an emergency energy
plan no later than 30 days after the effective date of this subchapter, or
within 30 days after becoming an electric utility company, whichever is later.
Every such electric utility company shall submit to the Village Administrator,
or his or her designee (designated village official), an emergency energy plan
adopted by the company no later than 30 days after the effective date of this
subchapter, or within 24 hours of the time the plan is adopted, whichever is
later. The electric utility company shall be required to examine and update as
needed its emergency energy plan at least annually. The electric utility
company shall notify the foregoing public official in writing of any material
revisions to its plan and the rationale for said revisions within five business
days of the time said revisions are made.
   (B)   The emergency energy plan shall include, at a minimum, information
detailing:
      (1)   Circumstances that would require the implementation of the
emergency energy plan;
      (2)   Stages of the emergency energy plan;
      (3)   The approximate geographic limits of each outage area provided for
in the emergency energy plan;
      (4)   The approximate number of customers within each outage area
provided for in the emergency energy plan;
      (5)   The police facilities, fire stations, hospitals, nursing homes,
schools, day care centers, senior citizen centers, community health centers,
dialysis centers, community mental health centers, correctional facilities,
stormwater and wastewater treatment or pumping facilities, and water-pumping
stations that have been identified by the village and persons on life-support
systems that are known to the company, and that could be affected by controlled
rotating interruptions of electric service under the emergency energy plan; and
      (6)   The anticipated sequence and duration of intentional interruptions
of electric service to each outage area under the emergency energy plan.
(2000 Code, § 53.02) (Ord. 1737, passed 8-16-1999) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.03 REVIEW OF PLAN.
   (A)   Upon submittal of the emergency energy plan to the village, the
village shall review the emergency energy plan in order to determine if the
emergency energy plan is complete and to assure appropriate coordination with
public health and safety agencies. The village may reject the emergency energy
plan if it does not contain all the information required under §
53.02(B), in which case the village shall notify the electric utility company
in writing of said rejection and the reasons therefor. The electric utility
company shall thereafter submit a complete emergency energy plan to the village
no later than 30 days after such notice is sent to the village.
   (B)   The village and the electric utility shall work cooperatively to:
      (1)   Identify customers and facilities for which a controlled rotating
interruption of electric service would require heightened response by village
public health and safety agencies;
      (2)   Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on public health and
safety; and
      (3)   Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on the duties of the
village’s public health and safety agencies.
(2000 Code, § 53.03) (Ord. 1737, passed 8-16-1999) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.04 IMPLEMENTATION OF EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN.
   (A)   Whenever an electric utility company determines that it may be
necessary to implement a controlled rotating interruption of electrical service
due to the demand for electricity exceeding, or being at significant risk of
exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric utility company,
the electric utility company shall do the following:
      (1)   Take appropriate action in preparation for implementing a
controlled rotating interruption of electric service and notify the appropriate
electric utility company personnel; and
      (2)   Notify the designated village official that the electric utility
company will be implementing its emergency energy plan. The notification shall
be made pursuant to a notification procedure approved by designated village
official after consultation with the designated village official. The
designated village official may waive the notice requirement to accommodate
exigent circumstances.
   (B)   Subsequent to providing the notice as required above, an electric
utility company shall reasonably and separately advise the designated village
official when it implements each of the steps of the emergency energy plan.
Such steps shall include the following:
      (1)   A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;
      (2)   A declaration of a control area emergency; and
      (3)   A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use.
   (C)   The electric company shall give a separate notice to the designated
village official immediately upon the determination that there will be a
controlled rotating interruption of electric service pursuant to the emergency
energy plan. The notification shall include the areas to be interrupted; the
sequence and estimated duration of the service outage for each area; and the
affected feeders and number of affected customers in each area. Whenever
practical, the notification shall be made at least two hours prior to the time
of the outages, and in no case shall the notification be made less than 30
minutes prior to the outages, if the company is aware that controlled rotating
interruptions may be required.
   (D)   Notification required by this section shall be in addition to any
notification requirements set forth in any applicable franchise agreement or
franchise ordinance, or as may be required by applicable federal or state law
or regulation.
(2000 Code, § 53.04) (Ord. 1737, passed 8-16-1999) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.05 CONSTRUCTION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to preclude or interfere with
the implementation by an electric utility company of measures necessary to
assure the provision of adequate, efficient, reliable and environmentally safe
service, as required by the Illinois Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et
seq.). Nothing set forth in this subchapter shall be deemed to modify the terms
of any existing franchise agreement or franchise ordinance otherwise applicable
to any electric utility company, or to excuse any performance required by such
agreement or ordinance, or to limit any authority that may be exercised
pursuant to such agreement or ordinance, or to limit any remedy that may be
available under such agreement or ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 53.06) (Ord. 1737, passed 8-16-1999)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any electric utility company that knowingly violates §§
53.01 through
53.05 or any rules promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a fine of not
less than $2,500 and not more than $10,000 for each offense. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   The village may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an
injunction or order to compel the other party to comply with the provisions of
§§
53.01 through
53.05.
(2000 Code, § 53.05) (Ord. 1737, passed 8-16-1999)
CHAPTER 54: STORMWATER UTILITY
Section
   
54.01   Establishment of a Stormwater Utility and Stormwater Fund
   
54.02   Definitions
   
54.03   Scope of responsibility for stormwater utility
   
54.04   Determination of service charges
   
54.05   Service charges
   
54.06   Service charges billed in common
   
54.07   Billing and collection procedures
   
54.08   Appeals
§ 54.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF A STORMWATER UTILITY AND STORMWATER FUND.
   (A)   The village hereby establishes a stormwater utility to provide for the
management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of the
stormwater systems and to facilities owned or operated by the village.
   (B)   The management and supervision of the stormwater utility shall be
under the direction of the Director of Public Works.
   (C)   The village hereby establishes a Stormwater Fund. All revenues of the
stormwater utility shall be deposited into the Stormwater Fund and used for
purposes of the stormwater utility as deemed appropriate by the Village Board.
(Ord. 4184, passed 3-4-2013)
§ 54.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA or IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Those areas that prevent or impede
the infiltration of stormwater into the soil. Common IMPERVIOUS AREAS include,
but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways,
parking lots, storage areas and awnings. Compacted aggregate areas shall be
counted as an IMPERVIOUS AREA but included at 50% of its area.
   IMPERVIOUS AREA UNIT (IAU). Used as the basis for determining the stormwater
service charge to a parcel. Four thousand square feet of impervious area shall
be one IAU. The number of IAUs attributed to a parcel will be determined by
dividing the total impervious area (square feet) of the parcel by 4,000 and
rounding the result up to the next integer.
   NPDES or NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM. The national
permitting program implemented under the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq..
   STORMWATER SYSTEM. A conveyance or system of conveyances and includes
sewers, storm drains, curbs, gutters, ditches, retention ponds or basins, dams,
waterway impoundments, human-made channels or storm drains and flood control
facilities and appurtenances thereof which is designed or used for the
collection, control, transportation, treatment or discharge of stormwater.
(Ord. 4184, passed 3-4-2013)
§ 54.03 SCOPE OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR STORMWATER UTILITY.
   The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance,
management and improvement of the stormwater system owned by the village
including all activities required by the NPDES stormwater permit.
(Ord. 4184, passed 3-4-2013)
§ 54.04 DETERMINATION OF SERVICE CHARGES.
   Stormwater service charges are established by this chapter and the revenue
generated by stormwater service charges together with any other sources of
revenue that may be made available to the stormwater utility will be sufficient
to meet the obligations of the stormwater utility.
(Ord. 4184, passed 3-4-2013)
§ 54.05 SERVICE CHARGES.
   (A)   Commencing on May 1, 2013 and continuing thereafter, stormwater
utility service charges are hereby imposed upon all parcels and shall be based
upon a monthly period or any portion thereof. The owner of the parcel and the
occupant thereof shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the charges
to such parcel.
   (B)   For residential parcels the service charge shall be as follows:
      (1)   For each single-family residential parcel: $7 per month; and
      (2)   For apartment buildings or other multi-family dwellings served by
one water meter, a service charge shall be charged per month for each apartment
unit or dwelling unit served by the water meter whether occupied or not.
   (C)   For all other parcels that are not residential, the amount of the
service charge shall be $0.80 per impervious area unit (IAU).
(Ord. 4184, passed 3-4-2013)
§ 54.06 SERVICE CHARGES BILLED IN COMMON.
   The stormwater charge shall be billed on a common statement and collected
along with water and sewer system charges. If payment is insufficient to pay
the total of all portions of the statement, the payment will be applied first
to the water service charges.
(Ord. 4184, passed 3-4-2013)
§ 54.07 BILLING AND COLLECTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Billings for stormwater sewer service charges shall be rendered by the
Finance Department on a monthly, quarterly or annual basis at the discretion of
the Finance Department.
   (B)   When stormwater service charges are not paid on or before the due date
stated on the bill, a penalty of 5% shall be added. Failure to receive a bill
does not entitle the owner or customer to a remission of penalty.
   (C)   Written notice must be given by the parcel owner or authorized agent
if it is desired that bills be forwarded to any other address than the parcel’s
water customer address.
   (D)   In the event that the village deems it necessary to refer past due
stormwater service charges to the Village Attorney or a collection agency for
collection, the village may additionally recover its actual expenses so
incurred, including court costs, collection agency fees and reasonable attorney
fees.
   (E)   A stormwater bill shall be considered delinquent if it remains unpaid
for 15 days after the billing date.
(Ord. 4184, passed 3-4-2013)
§ 54.08 APPEALS.
   Any customer who believes the provisions of this chapter have been applied
in error may appeal in the following manner.
   (A)   An appeal must be filed in writing with the Public Works Director. In
the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared
by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information
on the total property area, the impervious surface area and any stormwater
management features, such as detention ponds or conditions which influence the
hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events.
   (B)   Using the information provided by the appellant, the Director of
Public Works shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property
and respond to the appeal in writing within 60 days.
   (C)   In response to an appeal, the Director of Public Works may adjust the
stormwater service charge and any late payment penalties applicable to a
property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this chapter.
   (D)   A decision of the Director of Public Works that is adverse to an
appellant may be appealed to the Village Administrator within 30 days of
receipt of notice of the adverse decision. The appeal must be filed in writing
with the Village Administrator by the appellant and include a detailed
explanation of the grounds for the appeal. The Village Administrator shall
issue a written decision on the appeal within 60 days which shall be final.
(Ord. 4184, passed 3-4-2013)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   RULES OF OPERATION
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES
      
74.   PEDESTRIANS
      
75.   EQUIPMENT; LOADS
      
76.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
77.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.001   Definitions
   
70.002   State regulations adopted; citations
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
   
70.015   Obedience to police officers
   
70.016   Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions
   
70.017   Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn
vehicles
   
70.018   Fleeing or attempting to elude police officer
Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings
   
70.030   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
70.031   Traffic-control signal legend
   
70.032   Pedestrian-control signals
   
70.033   Lane-control signals
   
70.034   Flashing signals
   
70.035   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings or advertising signs
   
70.036   Interference with official traffic-control devices or railroad signs
or signals
   
70.037   Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances and structures
   
70.038   Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker
   
70.039   Zones of quiet
   
70.040   No-turning signs and turning markers
   
70.041   Stop and yield signs
Licensing
   
70.055   Definitions
   
70.056   License required
   
70.057   Application for license
   
70.058   License fee
   
70.059   Issuance; license year; prorating
   
70.060   Issuance of sticker; duty to affix to vehicle
   
70.061   Disposition of proceeds
Automated Traffic Law Enforcement System
   
70.075   Purpose
   
70.076   Detection
   
70.077   Signage
   
70.078   Notice of violation
   
70.079   Defenses
   
70.080   Administrative adjudication
   
70.081   Powers of Hearing Officer
   
70.082   Powers of Traffic Compliance Administrator
   
70.083   Establishment of hearing unit
   
70.084   Appointment of Traffic Compliance Administrator
   
70.085   Compensation for Hearing Officers
   
70.086   Service of violation notices
   
70.087   Adjudicative hearing
   
70.088   Collection of fines and penalties
   
70.089   Notice of impending driver’s license suspension
   
70.090   Procedures for nonresidents
Unscheduled Intercity Buses and Discharge of Passengers
   
70.100   Definitions
   
70.101   Applicability
   
70.102   Notice and application required
   
70.103   Processing and approval of application
   
70.104   Passenger loading and unloading day and hour restriction
   
70.105   Passenger loading and unloading location
   
70.106   Punctuality of passenger loading and unloading
   
70.107   Proof of approved application to load or unload a passenger
 
   
70.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of
lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
(625 ILCS 5/1-102)
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any U.S. or state numbered route, controlled-access highway
or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated by local
authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a major arterial
system of streets or highways.
(70 ILCS 1205/3-9)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by proper state,
county, or local authorities; police vehicles; vehicles of the fire department;
vehicles of a HazMat or technical rescue team authorized by a county board
under 55 ILCS 5/5-1127 of the Counties Code; ambulances; vehicles of the
Illinois Department of Corrections; vehicles of the Illinois Department of
Juvenile Justice; vehicles of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency;
vehicles of the Office of the Illinois State Fire Marshal; mine rescue and
explosives emergency response vehicles of the Department of Natural Resources;
vehicles of the Illinois Department of Public Health; vehicles of the Illinois
State Toll Highway Authority with a gross vehicle weight rating of 9,000 pounds
or more and those identified as Highway Emergency Lane Patrol; vehicles of the
Illinois Department of Transportation identified as Emergency Traffic Patrol;
and vehicles of a municipal or county emergency services and disaster agency,
as defined by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act.
(625 ILCS 5/1-105)
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels except scooters and similar devices.
(625 ILCS 5/1-106)
   BUS. Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for carrying
more than ten persons.
(625 ILCS 5/1-107)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within 600 feet along the highway there are buildings in use for business or
industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels, banks or office
buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side, or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-108)
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons
or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-
hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a
ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational
vehicle not being used commercially.
(625 ILCS 5/1-111.8)
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the highway, street or roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-112)
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   The part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of a
highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral
line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk,
with the extension forming a right angle to the centerline of the highway; and
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface,
placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the
Department of Transportation as authorized in 625 ILCS 5/11-301.
(625 ILCS 5/1-113)
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-116)
   ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. A self-balancing, two non-
tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person with an electric
propulsion system that limits the maximum speed of the device to 15 mph or
less.
(625 ILCS 5/1-117.7)
   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines and other implements of
husbandry, and every implement of husbandry which is self-propelled.
(625 ILCS 5/1-120)
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle, whether operated singly or in
combination, without load, plus the weight of load thereon.
(625 ILCS 5/1-125)
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or located on public school property.
(625 ILCS 5/1-126)
   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for
agricultural, horticultural or livestock raising operations, including farm
wagons, wagon trailers or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for
lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry, provided that no farm wagon,
wagon trailer or like vehicle having a gross weight of more than 36,000 pounds,
shall be included hereunder.
(625 ILCS 5/1-130)
   IMPROVED HIGHWAY. Any roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam and
crushed stone, or gravel.
(625 ILCS 5/1-131)
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 40 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (3)   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not
constitute an intersection.
(625 ILCS 5/1-132)
   LANE-CONTROL SIGNAL. An official traffic-control device consisting of an
electrically controlled and illuminated signal of a square or rectangular
design, and employing distinctive colors or symbols used to control the
direction of vehicular flow on the particular lane to which the indication
applies.
(625 ILCS 5/1-135)
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
(625 ILCS 5/1-136)
   LEASE. A written document vesting exclusive possession, use, control and
responsibility of the lessee during the periods the vehicle is operated by or
for the lessee for a specific period of time.
(625 ILCS 5/1-137)
   LICENSE TO DRIVE. Any driver’s license or any other license or permit to
operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of this state including:
      (1)   Any temporary license or instruction permit;
      (2)   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle, whether or
not the person holds a valid license or permit; or
      (3)   Any nonresident’s driving privilege as defined herein.
(625 ILCS 5/1-138)
   LIMOUSINE. Any privately owned First Division vehicle intended to be used
for the transportation of persons for-hire when the payment is not based on a
meter charge but is prearranged for a designated destination.
(625 ILCS 5/1-139.1)
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, village and other local board or body
having authority to enact laws relating to traffic under the Constitution and
laws of this state and each Road District Highway Commissioner having that
authority.
(625 ILCS 5/1-140)
   MAIL. To deposit in the United States mail properly addressed and with
postage prepaid.
(625 ILCS 5/1-141)
   MOPED.
   A moped is a motor-driven cycle, with or without optional power derived from
manually operated pedals, whose speed attainable in one mile is at least 20 mph
but not greater than 30 mph, and is equipped with a motor that produces two
brake horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine is used, the
displacement shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeter displacement and the power
drive system shall not require the operator to shift gears.
(625 ILCS 5/1-148.2)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which
is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails, except for vehicles moved solely by human power, motorized
wheelchairs, low-speed electric bicycles, and low-speed gas bicycles. For this
Act, motor vehicles are divided into two divisions:
      (1)   First Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten persons.
      (2)   Second Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for
carrying more than ten persons, those motor vehicles designed or used for
living quarters, those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or
carrying freight, cargo or implements of husbandry, and those motor vehicles of
the First Division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of the Second
Division.
(625 ILCS 5/1-146)
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than
150 cubic centimeter piston displacement, including motorized pedalcycles.
(625 ILCS 5/1-145.001)
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding an autocycle or tractor.
(625 ILCS 5/1-147)
   MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLE. A motor-driven cycle whose speed attainable in one
mile is 30 mph or less, which is equipped with a motor that produces two brake
horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine is used, the displacement
shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeter displacement and the power drive system
shall not require the operator to shift gears.
(625 ILCS 5/1-148.2)
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle, including a three-wheeled
vehicle, designed for and used by a person with disabilities, that is incapable
of a speed in excess of eight mph on level ground.
(625 ILCS 5/1-148.3)
   NONCOMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-151)
   NOT-FOR-HIRE. Operation of a commercial vehicle in furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise, but not-for-hire.
(625 ILCS 5/1-153)
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices
which conform with the state manual, and not inconsistent with this title,
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
(625 ILCS 5/1-154)
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the event a
motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession vested in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of the motor vehicle
is entitled to possession, then the conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this title.
(625 ILCS 5/1-155)
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
(625 ILCS 5/1-156)
   PASSENGER CAR. A motor vehicle of the First Division, including a
multipurpose passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than ten
persons.
(625 ILCS 5/1-157)
   PEACE OFFICER. Any person who by virtue of his or her public employment is
vested by law with a duty to maintain public order or to make arrests for
offenses, whether that duty extends to all offenses or is limited to specific
offenses.
(625 ILCS 5/1-157.5)
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot or wearing in-line speed skates or riding a
skateboard, including a person with a physical, hearing, or visual disability.
(625 ILCS 5/1-158)
   PEDESTRIAN HYBRID BEACON. A traffic-control device used to warn and control
traffic, at locations that are otherwise without a traffic-control signal, to
assist pedestrians in crossing a street or highway at a marked crosswalk.
(625 ILCS 5/1-158.2)
   PERSON WITH DISABILITIES.   A natural person who, as determined by a
licensed physician, by a licensed physician assistant, by a licensed advanced
practice registered nurse, or by a licensed physical therapist:
      (1)   Cannot walk without the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane,
crutch, another person, prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other assistive
device;
      (2)   Is restricted by lung disease to such an extent that his or her
forced (respiratory) expiratory volume for one second, when measured by
spirometry, is less than one liter, or the arterial oxygen tension is less than
60 mm/hg on room air at rest;
      (3)   Uses portable oxygen;
      (4)   Has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's functional
limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class IV, according to
standards set by the American Heart Association;
      (5)   Is severely limited in the person's ability to walk due to an
arthritic, neurological, oncological, or orthopedic condition;
      (6)   Cannot walk 200 feet without stopping to rest because of one of the
above five conditions; or
      (7)   Is missing a hand or arm or has permanently lost the use of a hand
or arm.
(625 ILCS 5/1-159.1)
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests and issue citations for violations of traffic regulations.
(625 ILCS 5/1-162)
   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place where any person transacts his or her
principal business, or where he or she makes up and approves his or her
payroll, maintains a central file of records, and maintains his or her
principal executive offices. In the event that not all of these functions are
performed in one place, then that place where a majority of these functions are
performed, or the place where the person does in fact principally transact and
control his or her business affairs shall be considered as the PRINCIPAL PLACE
OF BUSINESS.
(625 ILCS 5/1-162.5)
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership, and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(625 ILCS 5/1-163)
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
(625 ILCS 5/1-166)
   RAILROAD-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING. The intersection of stationary rails owned
or used in the operation of a railroad corporation across a highway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-166.1)
   RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device, other than an official
traffic control signal or device, erected in accordance with the laws governing
same and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the
approach of a railroad train or railroad track equipment.
(625 ILCS 5/1-167)
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
(625 ILCS 5/1-168)
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Every camping trailer, motor home, mini motor home,
travel trailer, truck camper or van camper used primarily for recreational
purposes, and not used commercially nor owned by a commercial business.
(625 ILCS 5/1-169)
   REGISTRATION. The registration certificate or certificates and registration
plates issued under the laws of this state pertaining to the registration of
vehicles.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171)
   REGISTRATION STICKER. A device to be attached to a registration plate that
will renew the registration and registration plate or plates for a
predetermined period, not to exceed one registration year.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171)
   REMOVE. Includes removing, defacing, covering or destroying.
   RESCUE SQUAD. A voluntary association of individuals or a fire department
dedicated to saving lives through the rescue of persons entrapped in wrecked
vehicles or other hazardous circumstances and associated with some unit of
government.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171.6)
   RESCUE VEHICLE. Any publicly or privately owned vehicle which is
specifically designed, configured and equipped for the performance of access
and extrication of persons from hazardous or life-endangering situations, as
well as for the emergency transportation of persons who are sick, injured,
wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
(625 ILCS 5/1-171.8)
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
      (1)   The territory contiguous to and including a highway not comprising
a business district when the property on such highway for a distance of 300
feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business.
      (2)   For purposes of establishing maximum speed limits, a RESIDENCE
DISTRICT shall be at least a quarter of a mile long with residences or
residences and buildings in use for businesses spaced no more than 500 feet
apart.
(625 ILCS 5/1-172)
   RETAIL SALE. The act or attempted act of selling vehicles or otherwise
disposing of a vehicle to a person for use as a consumer.
(625 ILCS 5/1-174)
   REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE. The termination by formal action of the
Secretary of a person’s license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the
public highways, which termination shall not be subject to renewal or
restoration, except that an application for a new license may be presented and
acted upon by the Secretary after the expiration of at least one year after the
date of revocation.
(625 ILCS 5/1-176)
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision, unless one grants precedence to the other.
(625 ILCS 5/1-177)
   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
(625 ILCS 5/1-178)
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways
collectively.
(625 ILCS 5/1-179)
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a SAFETY ZONE.
(625 ILCS 5/1-181)
   SCHOOL BUS.
      (1)   SCHOOL BUS means every motor vehicle, except as provided in
paragraph (b) of this Section, owned or operated by or for any of the following
entities for the transportation of persons regularly enrolled as students in
grade 12 or below in connection with any activity of such entity:
         (a)   Any public or private primary or secondary school;
         (b)   Any primary or secondary school operated by a religious
institution; or
         (c)   Any public, private or religious nursery school.
      (2)   This definition shall not include the following: A bus operated by
a public utility, municipal corporation or common carrier authorized to conduct
local or interurban transportation of passengers when such bus is not traveling
a specific school bus route but is:
         (a)   On a regularly scheduled route for the transportation of other
fare paying passengers;
         (b)   Furnishing charter service for the transportation of groups on
field trips or other special trips or in connection with other special events;
or
         (c)   Being used for shuttle service between attendance centers or
other educational facilities.
      (3)   A motor vehicle of the First Division.
      (4)   A multifunction school-activity bus.
(625 ILCS 5/1-182)
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle, and so constructed its weight and that of its load rests upon or is
carried by another vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-187)
   SHOULDER. The portion of the highway adjacent to the roadway for
accommodating stopped vehicles or for emergency use.
(625 ILCS 5/1-187.1)
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(625 ILCS 5/1-188)
   SPEED-CHANGE LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for
the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the through
traffic lanes.
(625 ILCS 5/1-193)
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
(625 ILCS 5/1-194)
   STATE. A state, territory or possession of the United States, the District
of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico or a province of the Dominion of
Canada.
(625 ILCS 5/1-195)
   STATE HIGHWAYS. Defined in the Illinois Highway Code as the same may from
time to time be amended.
(625 ILCS 5/1-196)
   STATE POLICE. The Illinois State Police.
(625 ILCS 5/1-197)
   STOP. The complete cessation from movement.
(625 ILCS 5/1-199)
   STOP or STOPPING. Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign
or signal.
(625 ILCS 5/1-200)
   STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
(625 ILCS 5/1-201)
   SUBURBAN DISTRICT. The portion of any city, village or incorporated town,
other than the business and residence districts.
(625 ILCS 5/1-203)
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic
is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way
to vehicles on the THROUGH HIGHWAY in obedience to either a stop sign or a
yield sign, when those signs are erected as provided in this title.
(625 ILCS 5/1-205)
   TOW TRUCK. Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to
push, tow, carry upon, or draw vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, towbar,
towline or auxiliary axle, or carried upon to render assistance to disabled
vehicles, except for any truck tractor temporarily converted to a tow truck by
means of a portable wrecker unit attached to the fifth wheel of the truck
tractor and used only by the owner to tow a disabled vehicle also owned by him
or her and never used for hire.
(625 ILCS 5/1-205.1)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
(625 ILCS 5/1-207)
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any official traffic-control device other than a
railroad sign or signal, whether manually, electrically or mechanically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to
proceed.
(625 ILCS 5/1-208)
   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. Any provision of this code or other regulatory
ordinance the purpose of which is to directly control or improve traffic and
safety of both vehicles and pedestrians.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/1-209)
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide living
quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, and of a size or weight not
requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway.
(625 ILCS 5/1-210.01)
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
(625 ILCS 5/1-211)
   TRUCK CAMPER. A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a portable
unit designed to be loaded onto the bed which is constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, travel or camping use.
(625 ILCS 5/1-211.01)
   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn, or a power unit that carries as
property motor vehicles when operating in combination with a semitrailer in
transporting motor vehicles or any other commodity, including cargo or general
freight, on a backhaul.
(625 ILCS 5/1-212)
   URBAN AREA. An urban area is any incorporated or unincorporated area
developed primarily for residential and/or business purposes.
(625 ILCS 5/1-214.8)
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses,
and situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of one-fourth
mile or more.
(625 ILCS 5/1-214)
   VEHICLE.
   (a)   Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway or requiring a certificate of title under
625 ILCS 5/3-101(d), except devices moved by human power, devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and snowmobiles as defined in the
Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act, 625 ILCS 540.
   (b)   For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise prescribed, a
device shall be considered to be a vehicle until such time it either comes
within the definition of a junk vehicle, as defined under the Illinois Vehicle
Code, or a junking certificate is issued for it.
   (c)   For the purposes of this chapter, vehicles are divided into two
divisions:
      1.   First Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten persons.
      2.   Second Division: Those vehicles which are designed for carrying more
than ten persons, those designed or used for living quarters and those vehicles
which are designed for pulling or carrying property, freight, or cargo and
those motor vehicles of the First Division remodeled for use and used as motor
vehicles of the Second Division.
(625 ILCS 5/1-217)
(2000 Code, § 70.01)
§ 70.002 STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED; CITATIONS.
   The Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.) is hereby adopted as if
fully restated in this section.
(2000 Code, § 70.02) (Ord. 4015, passed 9-21-2009)
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS
§ 70.015 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer, fireman, person authorized by a local
authority to direct traffic, or school crossing guard invested by law with
authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. Any person convicted of
violating this section is guilty of a petty offense and shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of $150.
(625 ILCS 5/11-203) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.016 PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC CODE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of
vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or
operated by the United States, the state or any county, city, town, district or
any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this
section, and subject to specific exceptions as set forth in this title with
reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (C)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be required and necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he or she does not
endanger life or property; and
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing the direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
   (D)   The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle,
other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is making use of
either an audible signal when in motion, or visual signals meeting the
requirements of 625 ILCS 5/12-215.
   (E)   The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of
all persons, nor do these provisions protect the driver from the consequences
of his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
   (F)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of 625 ILCS 5/11-
100 et seq., except those contained in 625 ILCS 5/11-204, 625 ILCS 5/11-401 et
seq. and 5/11-500 et seq., shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles and
equipment while actually engaged in work upon a highway but shall apply to such
persons and vehicles when traveling to or from such work.
(625 ILCS 5/11-205) (2000 Code, § 70.11) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.017 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN
VEHICLES.
   Every person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those
provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
(625 ILCS 5/11-206) (2000 Code, § 70.12) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.018 FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who,
having been given a visual or audible signal by a police officer directing the
driver or operator to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, willfully fails or
refuses to obey that direction, increases his or her speed, extinguishes his or
her lights, or otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer. The signal
given by the police officer may be by hand, voice, siren, or a red or blue
light. However, the officer giving the signal shall be in police uniform and,
if driving a vehicle, the vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official
police vehicle.
(2000 Code, § 70.13) Penalty, see §
70.999
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS
§ 70.030 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this traffic code.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across
private property to avoid an official traffic-control device.
   (C)   No provision of this traffic code, for which official traffic-control
devices are required, shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control
devices are required, the section shall be effective even though no devices are
erected or in place.
   (D)   Whenever any official traffic-control device is placed or held in
position approximately conforming to the requirements of this traffic code, the
device shall be presumed to have been so placed or held by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, and comply with the requirements of this traffic
code, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a traffic-control signal on which
no signal light facing the vehicle is illuminated shall stop before entering
the intersection, in accordance with rules applicable in making a stop at a
stop sign. This provision does not apply to the driver of a vehicle approaching
a pedestrian hybrid beacon.
   (F)   Any violation of division (A) that occurs within a designated highway
construction zone or maintenance zone shall result in a fine of no less than
$100 and no more than $1,000.
(625 ILCS 5/11-305) (2000 Code, § 70.30) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.031 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or color lighted arrows, successively one at a time or
in combination, only the colors green, red and yellow shall be used, except for
special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
   (A)   Green indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right of way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right of way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as
provided in §
70.032, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal
is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
   (B)   Steady yellow indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or
that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal,
unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in §
70.032, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the
roadway before a red indication is shown and no pedestrian shall then start to
cross the roadway.
   (C)   Flashing yellow arrow indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a flashing yellow arrow indication may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the
arrow and shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time the
signal is exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing a flashing yellow arrow indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in §
70.032, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk
that crosses the lane or lanes used to depart the intersection by traffic
controlled by the flashing yellow arrow indication. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
   (D)   Steady red indication.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (D)(3)(a) and (b) below, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such
crosswalk, then before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing
until an indication to proceed is shown.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (D)(3)(a) and (b) below, vehicular
traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not enter the intersection to
make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection
to make a movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such crosswalk, then
before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication
permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is shown.
      (3)   (a)   Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn and local
authorities by ordinance or state authorities by rule or regulation prohibit
any such turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously
enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street
into a one-way street, after stopping as required by division (D)(1) and (2)
above. After stopping, the driver shall yield the right of way to any vehicle
in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time such driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction or roadways. Such driver shall yield the
right of way to pedestrians within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk.
         (b)   In municipalities with less than 2,000,000 inhabitants, after
stopping as required by division (D)(1) and (2) above, the driver of a
motorcycle or bicycle, facing a steady red signal which fails to change to a
green signal within a reasonable period of time not less than 120 seconds
because of a signal malfunction or because the signal has failed to detect the
arrival of the motorcycle or bicycle due to the vehicle's size or weight, shall
have the right to proceed, after yielding the right of way to oncoming traffic
facing a green signal, subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign as required by §
70.041.
            (4)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided in §
70.032, pedestrians facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal alone
shall not enter the roadway.
   (D)   Application. In the event an official traffic control signal is
erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of
this section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made or, in the
absence of such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (E)   Motorman; streetcars. The motorman of any streetcar shall obey the
above signals as applicable to vehicles.
(625 ILCS 5/11-306) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.032 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or
“Don’t Walk” or the illuminated symbols of a walking person or an upraised palm
are in place, these signals shall indicate as follows.
   (A)   “Walk” or walking person symbol. Pedestrians facing this signal may
proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given
the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
   (B)   “Don’t Walk” or upraised palm signal. No pedestrian shall start to
cross the roadway in the direction of this signal, but any pedestrian who has
partly completed his or her crossing on the “Walk” signal or upraised palm
symbol shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the “Don’t Walk”
signal or upraised palm symbol is illuminated, steady or flashing.
(625 ILCS 5/11-307) (2000 Code, § 70.32) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.033 LANE-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever lane-control signals are used in conjunction with official signs,
they shall have the following meanings.
   (A)   Downward-pointing green arrow. A driver facing this indication is
permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal is located.
Otherwise, he or she shall obey all other traffic controls present and follow
normal safe driving practices.
   (B)   Red X symbol. A driver facing this indication shall not drive in the
lane over which the signal is located, and this indication shall modify
accordingly the meaning of all other traffic controls present. Otherwise he or
she shall obey all other traffic controls, and follow normal safe driving
practices.
   (C)   Yellow X (steady). A driver facing this indication should prepare to
vacate the lane over which the signal is located, in a safe manner to avoid, if
possible, occupying that lane when a steady red X is displayed.
   (D)   Flashing yellow arrow. A driver facing this indication may use the
lane only for the purpose of approaching and making a left turn.
(625 ILCS 5/11-308) (2000 Code, § 70.33) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.034 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in conjunction
with a traffic-control device, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic
as follows.
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past the signal only with caution.
   (C)   Railroad grade crossings. This section does not apply at railroad
grade crossings.
(625 ILCS 5/11-309) (2000 Code, § 70.34) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.035 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS OR ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be,
or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or the
effectiveness of an official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (C)   Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be
a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed without notice.
   (D)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any traffic-control device to
be used on any street or highway in this village which does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information,
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (F)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection of Illinois
Adopt-A-Highway signs by the village as provided in the Illinois Adopt-A-
Highway Act, 605 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
(625 ILCS 5/11-310) (2000 Code, § 70.35) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.036 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS
OR SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact
alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control
device, or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia
thereon, or any other part thereof.
   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalties which
may be imposed.
(625 ILCS 5/11-311) (2000 Code, § 70.36) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.037 UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure or damage any
public highway or street, or any bridge or culvert, or to willfully damage,
injure or remove any sign, signpost or structure upon or used or constructed in
connection with any public highway or street for the protection thereof, or for
the protection or regulation of traffic thereon, by any willfully unusual,
improper or unreasonable use thereof, or by willfully careless driving or use
of any vehicle thereon, or by willful mutilation, defacing, destruction, or
removal thereof.
   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalty which may
be imposed.
(625 ILCS 5/11-312) (2000 Code, § 70.37) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.038 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF HIGHWAY SIGN OR MARKER.
   The Village Street Department, with reference to traffic-control signs,
signals or markers owned by the village, is authorized to indicate the
ownership of the signs, signals or markers in letters not less than three-
eighths inch, or more than three-fourths inch in height, by use of a metal
stamp, etching or other permanent means. Except for employees of the Village
Street Department, police officers, contractors and their employees engaged in
a highway construction contract or work on the highway approved by the village,
it is unlawful for any person to possess a sign, signal or marker so
identified.
(625 ILCS 5/11-313) (2000 Code, § 70.38) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.039 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device except in an emergency.
(2000 Code, § 70.39)
§ 70.040 NO-TURNING SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-
turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the
sign. When authorized marks, buttons or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.
(2000 Code, § 70.40)
§ 70.041 STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
signs or yield signs as authorized in 625 ILCS 5/11-302.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a streetcar approaching
a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at the point nearest the intersection roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for
safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1204) (2000 Code, § 70.41) Penalty, see §
70.999
LICENSING
§ 70.055 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLASS A MOTOR VEHICLES. Those motor vehicles which are designed and used for
the carrying of not more than nine persons.
   CLASS B MOTOR VEHICLES. Those motor vehicles which are designed and used for
pulling or carrying freight and those designed and used for the carrying of
more than nine persons.
(2000 Code, § 70.55) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973)
§ 70.056 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person residing in the village or for any firm,
corporation or association having its principal office or place of business in
the village to own or use any motor vehicle in the transportation of persons or
property for the conveyance of loads upon the streets, avenues or alleys of the
village, unless such motor vehicle is licensed as provided in this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 70.56) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973; Ord. 1574, passed 10-17-1994)
Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.057 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring a license for any such motor
vehicle, motorcycle, motor-driven cycle, motor scooter or motor bicycle shall
file an application with the Village Clerk setting forth: the name and address
of the applicant; a description of the motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor-driven
cycle, motor scooter or motor bicycle for which the license is desired; the
place where such vehicle is usually kept when not in use; the number and kinds
of other motor vehicles, motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, motor scooters or
motor bicycles kept by the applicant at such place; and such other information
as may be prescribed. The application shall be transmitted to the President of
the village, and, on the payment by the applicant of the license fee
hereinafter provided to the Municipal Collector, the President of the Village
Board shall issue or cause to be issued a license, attested by the Village
Clerk, authorizing the use of such motor vehicle, motorcycle, motor-driven
cycle, motor scooter or motor bicycle within the municipality until the
expiration of such license.
(2000 Code, § 70.57) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.058 LICENSE FEE.
   License fees to be paid annually to the Municipal Treasurer shall be as
follows:
 Prior to April During April After April
                                                                               Prior During  After
                                                                               to    April   April
                                                                               April
Class A                                                                                     
   Motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, motor scooters, motor bicycles         $0    $0      $0
   Passenger cars                                                           $0    $0      $0
   Passenger cars licensed to driver and owner 65 years or older and/or any
person who is receiving Social Security disability benefits (one per           $0    $0      $0
household)
Class B                                                                                     
   Commercial                                                               $6.50 $13     $13
   Vehicles having a gross weight of 8,000 lbs. or less, including the weigh$65   $97.50  $130
of the vehicle and maximum load
   Vehicles having a gross weight of more than 8,000 lbs. including the weig$78   $110.50 $156
of the vehicle and maximum load
Transfers                                                                      $6.50 $13     $13
 
(2000 Code, § 70.58) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973; Ord. 1072, passed 8-18-1980;
Ord. 1350, passed 6-6-1988; Ord. 1624, passed 2-7-1996; Ord. 1905, passed 4-21-
2003; Ord. 1951, passed 1-20-2004; Ord. 1957, passed 2-2-2004; Ord. 2007,
passed 12-6-2004; Ord. 3009, passed 3-19-2007; Ord. 4180, passed 1-22-2013;
Ord. 4524, passed 8-15-2022)
§ 70.059 ISSUANCE; LICENSE YEAR; PRORATING.
   (A)   All vehicle licenses issued shall begin April 1 and expire March 31 of
the year following their issuance. When such license is issued for less than
one year, then such license fee shall be reduced 50%, if payable during the
second half of the 12-month period.
   (B)   New residents moving into this municipality with a Class B vehicle and
having a sticker indicating that they paid a license fee in some other
municipality shall, within 30 days of moving to this municipality, apply for
the replacement of their sticker. The fee for such replacement shall be $2. In
the case of new residents not having a sticker from any other community, they
shall pay the amounts as provided for in §
70.058 and this section.
(2000 Code, § 70.59) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973; Ord. 1350, passed 6-6-1988;
Ord. 1586, passed 3-6-1995; Ord. 4524, passed 8-15-2022) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.060 ISSUANCE OF STICKER; DUTY TO AFFIX TO VEHICLE.
   Upon the payment of the license for a Class B vehicle, the clerk shall
deliver to the applicant a vehicle tag or sticker. It shall be the duty of the
applicant to affix such tag or sticker in a conspicuous place upon said Class B
vehicle, where it can be readily seen.
(2000 Code, § 70.60) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973; Ord. 1072, passed 8-18-1980;
Ord. 1350, passed 6-6-1988; Ord. 4524, passed 8-15-2022) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.061 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   All revenues derived from such license fees shall be used for the purpose of
improving, paving, repairing or maintaining the streets and other public
roadways within the village, provided, that the actual cost of the collection
of such fees and the disbursement thereof may be deducted from the total amount
collected and in an amount not to exceed 35% of such fees may be used also for
payment of salaries and wages of police officers engaged in the duty of
regulating traffic.
(Ord. 4228, passed 4-21-2014)
AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM
§ 70.075 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This subchapter provides for an automated traffic law enforcement
system, which detects motor vehicles which fail to abide by traffic-control
signals at intersections under penalty of a fine, and a system of
administrative adjudication by which such detected infractions shall be
resolved.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this subchapter for anyone to operate a
vehicle in disregard of a traffic-control device or to turn right on a red
light where it is posted “No Turn on Red”.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.076 DETECTION.
   As used in the subchapter, AUTOMATED TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM means a
device within the village with one or more motor vehicle sensors working in
conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded images of motor
vehicles entering an intersection against a steady or flashing red signal
indication in violation of § 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/
11-306. The automated traffic law enforcement system shall not be used to
enforce speed limit regulations. The recorded images produced by the automated
traffic law enforcement system, which consist of either two or more
photographs, two or more electronic images of a video recording showing the
motor vehicle, shall capture and display images of the vehicle allegedly
violating traffic-control signals, together with the license plate on such
vehicle, and shall also show the time, date and location of the violation.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.077 SIGNAGE.
   Any intersection equipped with an automated traffic law enforcement system
must have a sign posted which is visible to approaching traffic indicating that
the intersection is being monitored by an automated traffic law enforcement
system.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.078 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   When the automated traffic law enforcement system records a motor
vehicle entering an intersection in spite of a steady or flashing red signal
indicating a violation of § 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-
306, this shall be deemed a non-criminal violation for which a civil penalty of
$100 shall be assessed and for which no points shall be assigned by the
Illinois Motor Vehicle Code point system for license suspension to the owner or
driver of the vehicle. The village shall issue a written notice of the
violation to the registered owner or lessee of the vehicle, which shall be
delivered by first class mail within 30 days after the Illinois Secretary of
State notifies the village of the identity of the registered owner or lessee of
the vehicle, and in no event later than 90 days following the violation. Each
notice of violation associated with an automated traffic law violation shall
require a review of the associated recorded image by an officer or other
employee or agent of the Village Police Department empowered under this
subchapter to determine whether a red light offense has occurred or whether one
of the defenses enumerated below in §
70.079 is visibly applicable upon inspection. Upon determination that the
recorded image captures a violation of one of the foregoing provisions and that
no defense applies, the notice of violation shall be served upon the registered
vehicle owner in the manner provided for below. The Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall retain a copy of all violation notices, recorded images and
other correspondence mailed to the alleged violator.
   (B)   Each notice of violation, which shall constitute evidence of the facts
contained in the notice and is admissible in any proceeding alleging a
violation of the above-noted statutory and local provisions and shall establish
prima facie evidence of a violation, subject to rebuttal on the basis of the
defenses established in §
70.079, shall include the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the registered owner or lessee of the
vehicle, as indicated by the records of the Secretary of State, or, if such
information is outdated or unattainable, then the last known address recorded
in a United States post office approved database;
      (2)   The registration number of the motor vehicle involved in the
violation;
      (3)   The violation charged, with specific reference to that section of
the village municipal code of ordinances allegedly violated;
      (4)   The location where the violation occurred;
      (5)   The date and time of the violation;
      (6)   A copy of the recorded images;
      (7)   The amount of the civil penalty imposed and the date by which the
civil penalty should be paid if liability for the violation is not going to be
contested;
      (8)   A statement that the recorded images are evidence of a violation of
a red light signal;
      (9)   A warning that failure to either pay the civil penalty or to
contest liability within 30 days of the mailing of the notice of violation in
writing or by attending the administrative hearing is an admission of liability
and may result in a suspension of the driving privileges of the registered
owner or lessee of the vehicle in addition to the specified penalties for
failing to appear at the hearing or pay the fine in advance of the hearing;
      (10)   The date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which
the charge may be contested on its merits, a date that shall be no less than 15
days from the mailing or other service of the first notice of violation;
      (11)   A statement that payment of the indicated fine and of any
applicable penalty for late payment shall constitute a final disposition of the
violation; and
      (12)   The signature of the party reviewing the recorded images and
confirming that a violation took place.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.079 DEFENSES.
   The following are the only defenses available for an alleged violator
contesting his or her liability for a violation, which shall be weighed by the
Hearing Officer and shall only rebut the prima facie case established by the
notice of liability insofar as one or more of the following defenses are
established by a preponderance of the evidence:
   (A)   The motor vehicle or registration plates were stolen before the
violation occurred and were not under the control of or in the possession of
the owner at the time of the violation, which may be demonstrated through the
submission of a certified copy of a report concerning the stolen motor vehicle
or registration plates was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely
manner;
   (B)   The driver of the vehicle passed through the intersection in spite of
a red light either to yield the right-of-way to an emergency vehicle or as part
of a funeral procession;
   (C)   The license plate number or other source of identification of the
vehicle cannot be determined;
   (D)   The operator of the vehicle received a uniform traffic citation from a
police officer at the time of the violation for the same incident as captured
by the automated traffic law enforcement system and either paid such citation
or successfully contested said citation; and
   (E)   The vehicle was leased to another and within 60 calendar days after
the citation was mailed to lessor, lessor submitted to the municipality the
correct name and address of the lessee of the vehicle identified in this notice
of violation at the time of the alleged violation, together with a copy of the
lease agreement, the lessee’s driver’s license number and any additional
information that may be needed.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.080 ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION.
   The village shall utilize its system of administrative adjudication for
vehicular standing and parking violations, violations regarding the display of
municipal stickers/licenses and automated traffic law violations. The
administrative adjudication system for all violations of the village code
subject to administrative adjudication shall be comprised of a Code Hearing
Unit which shall be comprised of a Hearing Officer and any other officials
deemed necessary, including a Traffic Compliance Administrator with respect to
all parking, standing, condition and use of vehicle equipment, display of
municipal stickers/licenses and automated traffic law regulations, as well as
those other ordinances identified by the ordinances of the village pertaining
to such administrative hearing body. Such officers shall be vested with the
power, authority and limitations as are hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.081 POWERS OF HEARING OFFICER.
   The Hearing Officer shall have all of the powers granted to Hearing Officers
under 65 ILCS 5/1-2.14, the provisions of which are incorporated herein by
reference, including the power to preside over all administrative hearings as
the adjudicator, administer oaths, hear testimony and accept evidence that is
relevant to the existence of the code violation.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.082 POWERS OF TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall have all of the powers granted by
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(1), the provisions which are incorporated herein by
reference.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.083 ESTABLISHMENT OF HEARING UNIT.
   The Village President is hereby authorized to appoint necessary officers to
establish the Code Hearing Unit and to otherwise comply with the terms herein.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.084 APPOINTMENT OF TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Village President, with the advice and consent of the Village Board of
Trustees, shall appoint a Traffic Compliance Administrator for a term not to
exceed that of the Village President’s current term of office, who is
authorized to adopt, distribute and process parking, compliance and automated
traffic law violation notices, collect money paid as fines and penalties for
the above noted violations, operate an administrative adjudication system and
make certified reports to the Secretary of State regarding a registered vehicle
owner’s failure to pay fines and penalties in accordance with state law. The
Village Administrator shall act as the Traffic Compliance Officer unless or
until such position is filled by the President and Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.085 COMPENSATION FOR HEARING OFFICERS.
   The Traffic Compliance Administrator and any other official deemed necessary
to implement the system of administrative adjudication, shall be compensated as
established annually by the Village President and Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.086 SERVICE OF VIOLATION NOTICES.
   Violation notices must be mailed to the address of the registered owner or
lessee of the cited vehicle as recorded with the Secretary of State within 30
days after the Secretary of State notifies the village of the identity of the
registered vehicle owner, but no later than 90 days after the date of the
violation. If the notice of violation is returned as undeliverable, then the
notice of violation shall be sent to the last known address recorded in a
United States post office approved database, which notice shall still be sent
within 90 days of the violation.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.087 ADJUDICATIVE HEARING.
   The hearing shall be tape recorded, and the Hearing Officer conducts the
hearing in accordance with his or her powers and duties, enumerated herein.
Alleged violators who appear at the administrative hearing to contest an
alleged violation may be represented by legal counsel at their own expense,
however, formal rules of evidence shall not apply to the administrative
hearing. The Hearing Officer shall enter either a default judgment or a
determination of liability or non-liability in accordance with consideration of
the facts and testimony, if any, and shall constitute a final determination of
liability from which an appeal may be taken.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.088 COLLECTION OF FINES AND PENALTIES.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prevent the village from pursuing
all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect fines and payment of
penalties owed to village.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.089 NOTICE OF IMPENDING DRIVER’S LICENSE SUSPENSION.
   (A)   This notice shall be sent via first-class United States mail, postage
prepaid, to the address recorded with the Secretary of State of any person
liable for any fine or penalty due and owing the village for five or more
unpaid automated traffic law violations. If such mailing is returned as
undeliverable, then the village shall send the notice to the last known address
recorded in a United States post office approved database. If village
subsequently makes a certified report to the Secretary of State, the subject
vehicle owner may challenge the accuracy of the certified report in writing.
   (B)   To do so, the vehicle owner must submit to the Administrator a written
statement under oath, together with supporting documentation, establishing one
of the following grounds for challenging the accuracy of the certified report:
      (1)   The person was not the owner or lessee of the subject vehicle or
vehicles receiving five or more automated traffic law violations on the date or
dates such violation notices were issued; or
      (2)   The person already paid the fines or penalties for the five or more
automated traffic law violations indicated on the certified report.
   (C)   Such statement and supporting documentation must be sent to the
Administrator by certified mail, return receipt requested, or hand delivered to
the Administrator within five days after the person receives notice from the
Secretary of State that the person’s driver’s license will be suspended at the
end of a specified period of time unless the Secretary is presented with a
notice from the village certifying that the fines or penalties due and owing
have been paid or that the inclusion of the person’s name on the certified
report was in error.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
§ 70.090 PROCEDURES FOR NONRESIDENTS.
   Where the registered owner or lessee of the cited vehicle is not a resident
of the village but seeks to contest the merits of the alleged violation, such
persons may contest the charges using the same available defenses as stated
above, and the same procedures; they may attend the administrative hearing or
they may submit any and all documentary evidence no later than the hearing date
referenced in the notice of liability, together with a written statement
reflecting that they are nonresidents of the village.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014)
UNSCHEDULED INTERCITY BUSES AND DISCHARGE OF PASSENGERS
§ 70.100 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The
singular or plural is included in any circumstances.
   APPLICATION. A form that the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police makes
available for receiving and reviewing proposed intercity bus operations.
   APPROVAL. Written notice that the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police
has received, reviewed, and determined that an application satisfies the
requirements of the village and this subchapter.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Village of Matteson Chief of Police, or designee.
   DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE. The Village of Matteson Deputy Chief of Police or
designee.
   REGULARLY SCHEDULED INTERCITY BUS. Any intercity bus that operates trips on
a predictable and recurring basis between two or more designated and authorized
locations or established routes, following a fixed schedule that is published
in advance and available to the general public, and provides transportation
service in exchange for payment of a fare.
   UNSCHEDULED INTERCITY BUS. Any intercity bus used for the transportation of
passengers originating from a location outside of the Chicago-Naperville-Joliet
area that is not a regularly scheduled intercity bus and operating pursuant to
written authorization of the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police
approving a specific schedule to pick-up or drop-off passengers at an approved
location in the village.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Matteson, Cook County, Illinois.
(Ord. 4589, passed 12-28-2023)
§ 70.101 APPLICABILITY.
   The application, review, and approval process pursuant to the limitations
and requirements of this subchapter for unscheduled intercity buses shall apply
to all operators seeking an unscheduled intercity bus service for a specified
date, time and location for the loading or unloading of passengers in
accordance with approved written authorization as herein required.
(Ord. 4589, passed 12-28-2023)
§ 70.102 NOTICE AND APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   The operator of any unscheduled intercity bus must make an application for
approval to arrive and load or unload passengers in the village on the
appropriate application form made available by the Chief of Police or Deputy
Chief of Police. All applications for unscheduled intercity bus service must be
received by the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police a minimum of five
full business days prior to the requested date of arrival identified in the
application. All applications shall include a proposed passenger list, and the
operator shall be required to perform background checks on each passenger over
the age of 18 and shall provide copies of the same to the Chief of Police or
Deputy Chief of Police as part of the application process. Each application for
an unscheduled intercity bus for the unloading of passengers must include an
order authorizing such unscheduled intercity bus for the unloading of
passengers executed by the head of the public body originating the transfer of
or loading of passengers.
(Ord. 4589, passed 12-28-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.103 PROCESSING AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATION.
   Applications for unscheduled intercity buses will be reviewed on a first-
come, first-serve basis. No more than one application, regardless of operator,
shall be approved by the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police for a
specific date or location.
(Ord. 4589, passed 12-28-2023)
§ 70.104 PASSENGER LOADING AND UNLOADING DAY AND HOUR RESTRICTION.
   Unscheduled intercity buses shall load or unload passengers within the
village only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday, and not at any time on a Saturday, Sunday, or designated federal, state
or village legal holiday.
(Ord. 4589, passed 12-28-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.105 PASSENGER LOADING AND UNLOADING LOCATION.
   Unscheduled intercity buses shall only load or unload passengers at a
location authorized by the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police, which
shall be listed on the approved application.
(Ord. 4589, passed 12-28-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.106 PUNCTUALITY OF PASSENGER LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   For any given written approval, unscheduled intercity buses must arrive no
sooner than 15 minutes before, and no later than 30 minutes after, the approved
arrival time, otherwise the application shall be considered invalid. Any
loading or unloading of passengers outside of the aforesaid schedule window
shall result in a $750 fine per passenger upon the intercity bus operator.
(Ord. 4589, passed 12-28-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.107 PROOF OF APPROVED APPLICATION TO LOAD OR UNLOAD A PASSENGER.
   Every operator of unscheduled intercity buses must carry a physical or
electronic copy of an approved application and present it for inspection at the
location of loading or unloading passengers at the request of any employee of
the village.
(Ord. 4589, passed 12-28-2023) Penalty, see §
70.999
§ 70.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   If the civil penalty of $100 referred to in §
70.078 is not timely paid or the notice of violation referred to in §
70.078 is not contested timely, a $100 penalty will be assessed in addition to
the original $100 fine by way of final determination of violation liability.
      (2)   The village, through its Treasurer, Clerk, Police Department, Law
Department, Administrative Adjudication Program and/or any other designated
agent of the village, may establish procedures for the collection of the civil
penalty imposed.
   (C)   Any operator of an unscheduled intercity bus that attempts to or does
in fact load or unload passengers without an approved application shall be
subject to a $750 fine per passenger.
(Ord. 4248, passed 12-15-2014; Ord. 4589, passed 12-28-2023)
CHAPTER 71: RULES OF OPERATION
Section
Controlled Substances
   
71.01   Persons under the influence of intoxicating liquor or narcotic drugs
   
71.02   Driving on streets designated as play streets
   
71.03   Driving on streets designated as zones of quiet
   
71.04   Speed restrictions generally
   
71.05   Prohibited motor vehicles
 
   
71.99   Penalty
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
§ 71.01 PERSONS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR NARCOTIC DRUGS.
   (A)   A person shall not drive or be in actual physical control of any
vehicle within this state while:
      (1)   The alcohol concentration in the person’s blood or breath is 0.08
or more based on the definition of blood and breath units in 625 ILCS 5/11-
501.2;
      (2)   Under the influence of alcohol;
      (3)   Under the influence of any intoxicating compound or combination of
intoxicating compounds to a degree that renders the person incapable of safely
driving;
      (4)   Under the influence of any other drug or combination of drugs to a
degree that renders the person incapable of safely driving;
      (5)   Under the combined influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, or
intoxicating compound or compounds to a degree that renders the person
incapable of safely driving; or
      (6)   There is any amount of a drug, substance or compound in the
person’s breath, blood or urine resulting from the unlawful use or consumption
of cannabis listed in the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.), a
controlled substance listed in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS
570/100 et seq.) or an intoxicating compound listed in the Use of Intoxicating
Compounds Act (720 ILCS 690/0.01 et seq.).
   (B)   The fact that any person charged with violating this section is or has
been legally entitled to use alcohol, other drug or drugs, or intoxicating
compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, shall not constitute a
defense against any charge of violating this section.
   (C)   Every person convicted of violating this section or a similar
provision of a local ordinance, shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and,
in addition to any other criminal or administrative action, for any second
conviction of violating this section or a similar provision of a law of another
state or local ordinance committed within five years of a previous violation of
this section or a similar provision of a local ordinance shall be mandatorily
sentenced to a minimum of 48 consecutive hours of imprisonment or assigned to a
minimum of 100 hours of community service as may be determined by the court.
Every person convicted of violating this section or a similar provision of a
local ordinance shall be subject to a mandatory minimum fine of $500 and a
mandatory five days of community service in a program benefitting children if
the person committed a violation of division (A) or a similar provision of a
local ordinance while transporting a person under age 16. Every person
convicted a second time for violating this section or a similar provision of a
local ordinance within five years of a previous violation of this section or a
similar provision of a law of another state or local ordinance shall be subject
to a mandatory minimum fine of $500 and ten days of mandatory community service
in a program benefitting children if the current offense was committed while
transporting a person under age 16. The imprisonment or assignment under this
division (C) shall not be subject to suspension nor shall the person be
eligible for probation in order to reduce the sentence or assignment.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section while driving or being
in actual physical control of any school bus, as defined under 625 ILCS 5/1-
182, and while the bus is occupied by school children shall be guilty of a
felony and shall be punished under appropriate state law.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section while involved in a
motor vehicle accident which results in great bodily harm, permanent disability
or disfigurement to another, when the violation is a proximate cause of such
injuries to another shall be guilty of a felony and shall be punished under
appropriate state law.
   (F)   After a finding of guilt and prior to any final sentencing for an
offense based upon an arrest for a violation of this section or a similar
provision of a local ordinance, individuals shall be required to undergo a
professional evaluation to determine if an alcohol or other drug abuse problem
exists and the extent of such a problem, and undergo the imposition of
treatment as appropriate. Programs conducting these evaluations shall be
licensed by the Department of Alcoholism and Substance Abuse. The cost of any
such professional evaluation shall be paid for by the individual required to
undergo the professional evaluation.
   (G)   The Secretary of State shall revoke the driving privileges of any
person convicted under this section or a similar provision of a local
ordinance.
   (H)   Pursuant to the provisions of 730 ILCS 5/5-5-3, in addition to any
other fine or penalty required or imposed by law, any individual convicted of a
violation of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-501, whose operation of a
motor vehicle while in violation of said § 11-501 proximately caused an
incident resulting in an appropriate emergency response by the village shall be
required to make restitution to the village for the costs of that emergency
response. Such restitution shall not exceed $500 for each such emergency
response, and the amount of such restitution shall be determined in accordance
with a resolution setting forth such costs approved by the village (as amended
from time to time). For purposes of this section, EMERGENCY RESPONSE shall mean
any incident requiring a response by a police officer, a firefighter carried on
the rolls of the regular Fire Department, and an ambulance.
   (I)   In addition to any other penalties and liabilities, a person who is
found guilty or pleads guilty of violating this section, including any person
placed on court supervision for violating this section, shall be fined $100,
payable to the Circuit Clerk, who shall distribute the money to the law
enforcement agency that made the arrest. If the person has been previously
convicted of violating this section or a similar provision of a local
ordinance, the fine shall be $200. In the event that more than one agency is
responsible for the arrest, the $100 or $200 shall be shared equally. Any
monies received by a law enforcement agency under this division (I) shall be
used to purchase law enforcement equipment that will assist in the prevention
of alcohol related criminal violence throughout the state. This shall include,
but is not limited to, in-car video cameras, radar and laser speed detection
devices, and alcohol breath testers.
(2000 Code, § 71.01) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973; Ord. 1456, passed 12-3-1990)
Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs,
intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof, see 625 ILCS 5/
11-501
§ 71.02 DRIVING ON STREETS DESIGNATED AS PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof
as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle on any such street or portion
thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are
within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the greatest
care in driving on such street or portion thereof.
(2000 Code, § 71.02) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.03 DRIVING ON STREETS DESIGNATED AS ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other
warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
(2000 Code, § 71.03) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.04 SPEED RESTRICTIONS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle on any public street in the
municipality at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper having regard to
the traffic and the use of the way or so as to endanger the life or limb or
injure the property of any person. Except where the speed limit is otherwise
posted, if the rate of speed of any motor vehicle operated on any public street
in the municipality exceeds 25 mph, such rate of speed shall be prima facie
evidence that the person operating such motor vehicle is running at a rate of
speed greater than is reasonable and proper, having regard to the traffic and
use of the way or so as to endanger the life or limb or injure the property of
any person.
   (B)   The maximum speed limit for a vehicle is as follows:
      (1)   Outside an urban district, the maximum is 55 mph;
      (2)   On 216th Street from Maple Street west to the municipal limits, the
maximum is 30 mph;
      (3)   On Main Street, the maximum is 30 mph; and
      (4)   On all other streets and ways within the municipal limits, the
maximum is 25 mph.
   (C)   The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the applicable
maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed
when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going
around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling on any narrow or
winding roadway or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or
other traffic by reason of weather or highway conditions; and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any legal requirements
and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(2000 Code, § 71.04) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of limits by local authorities, see 625 ILCS 5/11-604
§ 71.05 PROHIBITED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a MOTOR VEHICLE shall include every
vehicle which is self propelled, to include snowmobiles.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle at any time, on an
unimproved surface located on private property within the village without the
express written consent of the owner of that property.
   (C)   Excluded from this section is the operation on unimproved surfaces of
farm equipment and vehicles, utility vehicles and construction equipment and
vehicles; all which are in normal usage. In addition, this section shall not
apply to the operation of motor vehicles on unimproved surfaces which are
temporarily designated as detour routes from existing established highways.
(2000 Code, § 71.05) (Ord. 1377, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
71.05 of this chapter shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $750 for
each offense.
(2000 Code, § 71.99) (Ord. 1377, passed 2-21-1989)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Authority to post signs
   
72.02   Parking prohibitions
   
72.03   Parking after a snowstorm; failure to comply
   
72.04   Parallel and angle parking
   
72.05   Display of vehicle; peddling merchandise from vehicle
   
72.06   Damage to property
   
72.07   Parking prohibitions as to trucks and tow trucks in residential areas
   
72.08   Forty-eight-hour parking limit
   
72.09   Parking in an alley
   
72.10   Cabstands and bus loading zones
   
72.11   Recognition of township identification card
   
72.12   Parking zone restriction for persons with disabilities
   
72.13   Parking prohibitions as to trucks and tow trucks in commercial areas
Towing of Abandoned and Hazardous Vehicles
   
72.25   Definitions
   
72.26   Authorization for towing
   
72.27   Pre-tow notice for abandoned vehicles
   
72.28   Pre-tow hearing procedures
   
72.29   Post-tow notice for hazardous and unlawful vehicles
   
72.30   Post-tow hearing procedures
   
72.31   Form for post-tow notice and signs
   
72.32   Form for pre-tow notice
   
72.33   Form for post-tow hearing
   
72.34   Form for owner’s permission to tow stolen vehicles
Seizure and Impoundment of Motor Vehicles
   
72.45   Conduct prohibited
   
72.46   Exceptions
   
72.47   Conflict of law
   
72.48   Seizure and impoundment
   
72.49   Vehicle impoundment hearings
   
72.50   Administrative hearing
   
72.51   Vehicle possession
   
72.52   Immobilization/towing and impoundment
 
   
72.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 AUTHORITY TO POST SIGNS.
   Unless otherwise directed by the Board of Trustees, the Police Department is
authorized and directed to mark the area within which parking is prohibited
under this chapter, and to post signs in conspicuous places at such area
notifying the public that parking within the area is prohibited.
(2000 Code, § 72.01) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973)
§ 72.02 PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to stop, stand or
park such vehicle in any of the following places, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic sign or signal:
   (A)   In a crosswalk;
   (B)   Within 20 feet of a street corner, as indicated by yellow painted
curbs;
   (C)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (D)   At any place where the standing of any vehicle will block the use of
any driveway;
   (E)   On any sidewalk;
   (F)   At any place where official traffic signs have been erected
prohibiting stopping, standing or parking;
   (G)   On any bridge or viaduct, or any subway or tunnel or the approach
thereto;
   (H)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of a
point of the curb immediately opposite the end of a safety zone;
   (I)   Within 30 feet of a traffic signal, beacon or sign on the approaching
side; or
   (J)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any Fire Department station
and on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any such station within
75 feet of such entrance, when properly signposted.
(2000 Code, § 72.02) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 PARKING AFTER A SNOWSTORM; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park or leave a vehicle on any public street
in the municipality at any time within 12 hours after a snowfall of three
inches or more has occurred, unless the snow has been plowed off or to the side
of the street; however, a vehicle may park for a period of not more than ten
minutes to load or unload passengers or for not more than 30 minutes to load or
unload freight or property.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties heretofore provided for, the Chief of
Police shall cause to have removed or towed at the owner’s expense to the
nearest public garage any vehicle standing or parked contrary to the provisions
of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 72.03) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING.
   No vehicle shall be parked with the left side of such vehicle next to the
curb, except on one-way streets. It shall be unlawful to stand or park any
vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two right
wheels of the vehicle within 12 inches of the regularly established curb line,
except that on those streets that have been marked for angle parking, vehicles
shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks.
(2000 Code, § 72.04) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 DISPLAY OF VEHICLE; PEDDLING MERCHANDISE FROM VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street for the purpose of
displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle on any business street for the
purpose of peddling merchandise.
(2000 Code, § 72.05) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   No person shall intentionally, knowingly or recklessly, while operating or
causing to be operated, parking or causing to be parked, any motor vehicle in
any improper manner, cause damage or injury to any public building, sewer,
water pipe, hydrant or any tree, grass, shrub or walk in any public way or
public park, or any pavement, side or crosswalk, or any part thereof, or any
municipal property.
(2000 Code, § 72.06) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 PARKING PROHIBITIONS AS TO TRUCKS AND TOW TRUCKS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle, or part thereof, licensed as
being greater than a Class B, Second Division Vehicle, as defined by 625 ILCS
5/1-217 and any tow truck, as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-205.1 on any public
street, road, highway, parking lot or any private driveway, parking lot or
access way located within a residential zoning district within the boundaries
of the village. It shall not be a violation of this section to park such a
vehicle not in excess of two hours for the purposes of loading or unloading of
goods or freight or, concerning tow trucks, for the performing of emergency
services to, or the transporting of disabled motor vehicles. Additionally, it
shall not be a violation of this section to park any such vehicle for the
purpose of performing emergency repair or maintenance work on any public
utility facility, sewer mains and appurtenances thereto, or on any street, road
or public or private property requiring such emergency repair or maintenance
work, or for the purpose of saving life, limb or property, fighting fire, or in
conjunction with agricultural and farming operations.
(2000 Code, § 72.07) (Ord. 1488, passed 12-16-1991) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 FORTY-EIGHT-HOUR PARKING LIMIT.
   (A)   Unless otherwise permitted in this chapter, no vehicle of any kind
shall be parked at any one place in a street for more than 48 consecutive
hours.
   (B)   Unless otherwise permitted in this chapter, no vendor’s vehicle shall
be parked at any one time in a street for more than ten minutes.
(2000 Code, § 72.08) (Ord. 739, passed 9-1-1970; Ord. 4328, passed 2-21-2017)
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.09 PARKING IN AN ALLEY.
   No person shall park any vehicle within an alley; provided it shall not be a
violation of this section to park a vehicle within an alley for a period not in
excess of two consecutive hours for the purpose of loading or unloading goods
or freight or of performing emergency repairs or maintenance work on any public
utility facility, sewer mains and the appurtenances thereto, water mains and
the appurtenances thereto, or on any street, road or public property requiring
such emergency repair or maintenance work, or for the purpose of saving life,
limb or property, or fighting fire.
(2000 Code, § 72.09) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.10 CABSTANDS AND BUS LOADING ZONES.
   No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area
designated by ordinance as a cabstand, and no vehicle other than a bus shall be
parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone.
(2000 Code, § 72.11) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 RECOGNITION OF TOWNSHIP IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   Any language referencing 625 ILCS 5/3-609 or 625 ILCS 5/3-616, shall also
include “registration identification card issued by participating township
governments”.
(2000 Code, § 72.12) (Ord. 1001, passed 4-16-1979)
§ 72.12 PARKING ZONE RESTRICTION FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except a person with disabilities
or a person transporting a person with disabilities, to park a motor vehicle in
any public parking lot area posted “no parking except persons with
disabilities”, or bearing the international symbol indicating a parking
restriction for persons with disabilities.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to deposit upon private or public parking spaces
posted “no parking except persons with disabilities”, or bearing the
international symbol indicating a parking restriction for persons with
disabilities, any snow or ice which accumulated upon and is removed from
adjacent private or public property.
(2000 Code, § 72.13) (Ord. 1001, passed 4-16-1979; Ord. 1337, passed 10-5-1987)
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.13 PARKING PROHIBITIONS AS TO TRUCKS AND TOW TRUCKS IN COMMERCIAL AREAS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle, or part thereof,
licensed as being greater than a Class B, Second Division Vehicle, as defined
by 625 ILCS 5/1-217 and any tow truck, as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-205.1 on any
public street, road, highway, right-of-way, public or private parking lot,
driveway, access way or vacant property located within any commercial zoning
district within the boundaries of the village.
   (B)   It shall not be a violation of this section to park such a vehicle in
a commercial zoning district:
      (1)   If the vehicle is directly related to the business conducted on the
property;
      (2)   If the property owner, authorized agent of the property owner, or
person or entity in lawful possession of the property has given written
permission. Such written permission shall be displayed in or on the vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible;
      (3)   If the vehicle is parked in a commercial truck stop, travel plaza
or designated rest area;
      (4)   If not in excess of two hours, for the purposes of loading or
unloading of goods, freight or passengers;
      (5)   If not in excess of two hours, for the purposes of tow trucks
performing emergency services to or transporting disabled motor vehicles;
      (6)   For the purposes of performing emergency repair or maintenance work
on any public utility facility, sewer mains and appurtenances thereto, or on
any street, road or public or private property requiring such emergency repair
or maintenance work;
      (7)   For the purposes of saving life, limb or property, fighting fire;
      (8)   For the purposes of or in conjunction with agricultural and farming
operations;
      (9)   For not in excess of 24 hours, if the vehicle is disabled, broken
down or otherwise inoperative and immovable; and
      (10)   For the purposes of performing any other necessary work or service
to or on the property.
(Ord. 4328, passed 2-21-2017)
TOWING OF ABANDONED AND HAZARDOUS VEHICLES
§ 72.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any term
not defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to it in other ordinances of
this municipality, and if not defined in any other municipal ordinances, it
shall have the meaning ascribed in 625 ILCS 5.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle parked or otherwise located on a public way, in such a
state of disrepair that it is incapable of being driven; or that has been
unmoved for a period of at least 24 hours and from its condition, the period
during which it has not been moved, or some other circumstances appears to have
been, and will be presumed to have been, abandoned by its owner;
      (2)   Vehicles parked in a public parking lot or on private property
without the consent of the lot owner, proprietor or agent of the property,
which person has requested that the vehicle be towed; or
      (3)   A vehicle defined as abandoned, or capable of being towed, by any
other ordinances of the municipality, which does not fall into the categories
of hazardous or unlawful vehicles, and therefore is not subject to an immediate
tow.
   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that has been involved in an accident and is disabled or
cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of the vehicle;
      (2)   A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health or
welfare of the members of the public;
      (3)   A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street, way or alley
that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to
pedestrians and other operators of vehicles; or
      (4)   A vehicle that must be moved to allow for proper municipal snow
removal from a public street, way or alley.
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title to the vehicle, or the right of
possession of the vehicle.
   UNLAWFUL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that has been reported stolen or is the subject of a
search and seizure by the Police Department; or
      (2)   A vehicle parked in violation of state statutes or ordinances of
the municipality which prohibit parking at the location in question or for the
period of time for which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the
statute or the ordinance authorize the vehicle to be towed, and the signs
posted at the general location note that fact.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a street, highway or any public way, except devices
moved by human power, devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks,
and snowmobiles.
(2000 Code, § 72.25) (Ord. 1253, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 72.26 AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING.
   (A)   Generally. The towing of vehicles by the municipality, or by its
approved towing service operators on behalf of the municipality, shall be
authorized only by the Police Department and only under the circumstances
herein provided. Towed vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated by
the Police Department until lawfully claimed or disposed of pursuant to 625
ILCS 5.
   (B)   Towing without notice; immediate tows. Hazardous or unlawful vehicles
may be towed without prior notice; except that, when an unlawful vehicle is one
that has been reported as stolen and is not towable for some other specific
reason, the owner should be, when practicable, notified by telephone or other
means and given the opportunity to claim or move the vehicle, if he or she so
wishes, to avoid incurring the expenses of a police-ordered tow. However, the
vehicle may be towed if the owner permitted the tow to be made when the vehicle
was reported stolen or at any time thereafter, in the form provided in §
72.34. Within 24 hours after towing a vehicle pursuant to this chapter, a
notice shall be sent to or personally delivered to the owner of the vehicle
affording the opportunity for a hearing as provided in §§
72.29 and
72.30.
   (C)   Towing with prior notice; abandoned vehicles. Abandoned vehicles may
be towed after the mailing or delivery of prior notice and the affording of an
opportunity for a hearing as provided in §§
72.27 and
72.28.
(2000 Code, § 72.26) (Ord. 1253, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 72.27 PRE-TOW NOTICE FOR ABANDONED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Notice pursuant to this section shall be personally delivered to the
owner or shall be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, to the address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most
current registration list of the Secretary of State. The notice shall be in the
form provided in §
72.32. In the event that an out-of-state vehicle is proposed to be towed,
inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made of the Secretary of
State of the particular jurisdiction for the furnishing of the most current
registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice shall be
mailed as provided herein to the address furnished, though in no case will the
municipality be required to delay towing more than seven days after the date of
the mailing or personal delivery of the notice if no request for a hearing has
been received within that seven-day period.
   (B)   A notice of intent to tow sticker with the earliest date upon which
the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the Police
Department shall be placed on the vehicle.
(2000 Code, § 72.27) (Ord. 1253, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 72.28 PRE-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner or person entitled to possession of
a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned vehicle shall have seven days after the
date of mailing or personal delivery of the notice to request, in writing, a
pre-tow hearing. Subsequent to this seven-day period, the vehicle may be towed,
if the owner has not filed a written hearing request within the seven-day
period, and any hearing rights under the provisions of this subchapter will be
deemed waived.
   (B)   Scheduling of pre-tow hearings. The pre-tow hearing shall be scheduled
for a date within 14 days of the mailing or personal delivery of the pre-tow
notice. The municipality shall not be required to delay towing longer than the
14-day period.
   (C)   Request for pre-tow hearings. Requests for a pre-tow hearing are to be
made in person to the office indicated on the notice. Requests for hearing by
persons who reside more than 50 miles from the municipality may be made by
mail. Forms for such requests shall be made available at the Police Department.
At the time of making the request, the owner will be provided a hearing date
and time by mail or in person, as the circumstances require.
   (D)   Appointment of Hearing Officer. The municipality shall choose an
officer or employee of the municipality to serve as Hearing Officer. In no case
shall that Hearing Officer be an individual who was involved in the initial
decision to tow the vehicle. The Hearing Officer shall have the authority to
require the presence of the enforcement officer who initiated the proposed tow
or any other municipal personnel.
   (E)   Nature of hearing. The hearing shall be informal in nature, and the
rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing will not be determinative of, or
adjudicate, any citation relative to any vehicle. After receiving all relevant
evidence, the Hearing Officer shall make a written decision based upon a
preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of the vehicle is authorized
by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the municipality, with a specific
statutory or ordinance section cited in the decision. The owner shall be
provided a copy of the pre-tow hearing decision.
   (F)   Decision to tow and rates to be charged. If the preponderance of the
evidence supports towing and compliance with the provisions of this subchapter,
the Hearing Officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed, with any towing and
storage costs to then be imposed upon the owner. The fees to be charged for
towing and storage services shall be no more than the maximum rates set by the
Chief of Police pursuant to the provisions of §
72.29. The owner of the vehicle having had such a hearing may avoid the towing
by immediately removing the vehicle from the improper location to a proper,
lawful location and correcting any unlawful condition of the vehicle.
   (G)   Decision not to tow. If the preponderance of the evidence fails to
support towing of the vehicle, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the
vehicle shall not be towed. The municipality shall furnish a copy of the
decision to the owner, who may place it inside the vehicle in a location
plainly visible from the outside, such as the dashboard or rear window. No
vehicle about which such a decision has been rendered shall be towed by the
municipality unless the circumstances under which the decision was rendered
have changed. If at some subsequent time the municipality shall wish to tow the
vehicle from the same location, it shall follow the same procedures required
for the towing of any other similarly situated vehicle.
   (H)   Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions. Originals
or copies of all notices, pre-tow hearing decisions, towing reports and any
associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Police
Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or after
each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The municipality or the owner may
contest the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.
(2000 Code, § 72.28) (Ord. 1253, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 72.29 POST-TOW NOTICE FOR HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Notice. Notice pursuant to this section shall be forwarded by
certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the
owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current registration list of the
Secretary of State, unless the notice is personally delivered to the owner, in
which case, the date and time of the delivery and the name of the police
officer making the delivery shall be noted in the Police Department records or
reports. The notice shall be on the forms provided in §
72.31, and shall be mailed or delivered within 24 hours of the tow, as provided
in §
72.26(B). In the event that the municipality has towed an out-of-state
hazardous or unlawful vehicle, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall
be made of the Secretary of State of the particular jurisdiction for the
furnishing of the most current registered name and address of the owner of the
vehicle, and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address
furnished.
   (B)   Posting of signs showing hearing rights. All approved towing service
operators shall prominently post at least one sign, with dimensions of at least
12 inches by 18 inches, indicating the opportunity and procedures for a hearing
to contest the validity of a towed vehicle. The sign, the form for which is set
out in §
72.31(A), shall be placed in locations readily visible to the public
transacting business at any towing facility. If a towing service operator
performs services for more than one municipality, the information for
contacting the various appropriate municipal offices can be listed in one such
sign, the format for which shall be substantially similar to the form set out
in §
72.31(A).
   (C)   Requests for post-tow hearings. Requests for hearings may be made in
person at the office indicated on the notice within 15 days of the mailing or
personal delivery of the notification of tow, or release of the vehicle,
whichever occurs first; otherwise, the right to a hearing shall be deemed
waived. Requests for hearings by persons who reside more than 50 miles from the
municipality may be made in person or by mail received by the municipality
within the 15-day period.
   (D)   Release of motor vehicles. Before the owner or person entitled to
possession of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove the vehicle,
the owner or other person entitled to possession shall furnish evidence of his
or her identity, ownership of the vehicle, or his or her right to possession,
sign a receipt for the vehicle, and pay the amount currently owed for towing
and storage fees to the towing service operator. The Chief of Police is
authorized to promulgate regulations as to the documents or other proof
necessary to establish these facts.
   (E)   Establishment of maximum towing and storage rates. The owner shall pay
fees to the towing service operator for towing and storage on police-ordered
tows at rates that do not exceed maximum amounts to be administratively
established by the Chief of Police and which may be revised from time to time.
The basic rates for such fees shall be shown in the form and sign concerning
vehicle release requirements set forth in §
72.31(A). However, nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent a competitive
towing service operator from charging less than the established maximum rates
for police-ordered or any other tows. In arriving at the maximum rates for
various services, the Chief of Police shall consider such matters as the
prevalent market rates in the area for the different types of vehicles, the
types of storage and area requirements for categories such as large trucks and
commercial vehicles, and the relative difficulties and amount of work required
to perform various types of towing operations. For particularly difficult or
unusual towing jobs, such as large or serious accidents, the Chief of Police is
authorized to allow towing operators to charge rates above those established
for normal situations. All special charges must be based upon the cost of
services provided, taking into account such matters as the human-hours and
equipment time required for the job. A towing service operator must fully
itemize in writing the details of such a billing at special rates for a
particularly difficult or unusual tow, and supply a copy of the itemized bill
to the owner and to the Police Department. Any special rates charged must be
customary in the towing industry in the area for the nature and extent of the
services provided. Every towing service operator and the Police Department
shall have available a copy of the complete current rate schedule and any
special rate policy established by the Chief of Police, for vehicle owners to
view upon request.
(2000 Code, § 72.29) (Ord. 1253, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 72.30 POST-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner of a vehicle towed as an immediate
tow, by or pursuant to the authority of the Police Department as set forth
herein, shall be provided the opportunity for a post-tow hearing to determine
the validity of the tow and any towing or storage charges. The hearing will not
be determinative of, or adjudicate, any citation issued relative to any towed
vehicle.
   (B)   Nature of the hearing and Hearing Officer. The nature of the hearing
and the appointment of the Hearing Officer shall be the same as set forth above
in §
72.28.
   (C)   Scheduling of post-tow hearings. Hearings shall take place as follows.
      (1)   In those instances where the vehicle has been released upon the
deposit of the full payment currently owed for towing and storage charges, and
the owner has properly requested a hearing, the hearing shall take place within
15 days after the release of the vehicle, unless the owner requests a later
date convenient to all parties.
      (2)   In those instances where the vehicle remains impounded, the hearing
shall take place at the option of the owner:
         (a)   On the next day after an owner’s demand for a hearing, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; if the demand is made after 3:00 p.m., or if
the unavailability of a necessary witness or evidence creates a particular
difficulty in conducting the hearing on the next calendar day, then a hearing
shall be held on the second day following the request, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays; or
         (b)   If acceptable to the owner, within 15 days of the request on a
date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   Conduct of post-tow hearings. The Hearing Officer shall review all
evidence presented by the vehicle owner and the Police Department or other
municipal employees, and shall make a finding based upon the preponderance of
the evidence presented, as to the lawful authority for the towing and storage
of the vehicle. The municipality must establish such authority by a
preponderance of the evidence.
   (E)   Post-tow hearing decision. For each hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
complete a post-tow hearing decision and attach the decision to the Police
Department’s original vehicle towing report, and supply a copy of the decision
to the owner by personal delivery if the owner is present, otherwise by mail.
The decision and findings shall be substantially as stated in the form for the
post-tow hearing decision, set forth in §
72.33 of this chapter.
   (F)   Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions. All
originals or copies of the notice, post-tow hearing decisions, towing reports
and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Police
Department for a period of at least five years after each hearing, or after
each tow if no hearing was requested or held. The municipality or the owner may
contest the decision of the Hearing Officer in any manner provided by law.
   (G)   Towing services subject to ordinance. Notwithstanding any other
ordinance or statutory provisions to the contrary, any towing service operator
authorized to perform tows on behalf of the municipality must perform its
services subject to the provisions of this subchapter. However, the towing
company shall have the right to recover the reasonable value of its services
for police-ordered tows, which are not paid by the vehicle owner, from the
municipality. However, if a tow or the charge for a tow is found by a court to
be illegal and the towing service operator is required to return the charge for
the tow to the owner of the vehicle, the municipality shall not be liable to
reimburse the operator for the towing charges.
(2000 Code, § 72.30) (Ord. 1253, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 72.31 FORM FOR POST-TOW NOTICE AND SIGNS.
   (A)   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
72.29 and
72.30 of this chapter for posting in towing establishments and mailing or
delivering to owners:
   NOTICE OF VEHICLE RELEASE REQUIREMENTS AND HEARING RIGHTS
   Before the Owner or person entitled to possession of any impounded vehicle
shall be permitted to remove the same from custody of the Police Department or
towing service operator, he or she shall furnish evidence of his or her
identity and ownership of the vehicle and right of possession thereto, and
shall sign a receipt for the vehicle, and shall pay a fee not exceeding $    
for a passenger vehicle of not more than seven passengers, and $      for a
truck or commercial vehicle to cover the cost of towing or removal to a vehicle
pound or authorized garage, and in addition thereto, the cost of storage not
exceeding $     per day for a passenger vehicle of not more than 7 passengers,
and $     per day for a truck or commercial vehicle. However, higher fees may
necessarily be charged in particularly difficult or unusual towing or storage
circumstances, for which rate information is available upon a request at the
Police Department or towing business location. If the Owner or person entitled
to possession wishes to contest the validity of the tow, he or she may obtain a
hearing under the conditions of either paragraph (A) or (B) stated below:
   TO OBTAIN HEARING
   (A)   If the vehicle has been released, he or she may, within 15 days of the
release of the vehicle or the mailing or personal delivery to him or her of the
notification of the tow, whichever occurs first, request a hearing by
contacting in person the office of (Name of office, address and phone number).
Anyone residing more than 50 miles away from the municipality may make a
request for hearing by mail. The right to any hearing will be deemed waived
unless a written request for hearing is received by the above office within the
applicable 15-day period.
   (B)   If the vehicle is still impounded, he or she may contact the above
office and obtain a hearing within the next day after the request, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, unless the request is made after 3:00 p.m., or
unless there are particular difficulties in having the hearing on the next day,
in which case the hearing will take place on the second day thereafter,
excluding weekends and holidays.
   NATURE OF HEARING
   (A)   The hearing shall be conducted according to municipal ordinance
provisions, and shall determine the validity of the impounding of the vehicle
and the imposition or refund of any towing or storage charges, but the hearing
will not determine or adjudicate any citations issued. If the Hearing Officer
sustains the validity of the tow and storage, the Owner or person entitled to
possession will be required to pay all unpaid towing and storage fees before
obtaining the release of the vehicle.
   (B)   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
72.29 and
72.30 for the mailing or delivery of post-tow notice to owners, including the
form set forth in division (A) above:
                                       Post-Tow Incident Report
                                          No.                     
TO:   ( Name )
( Address )
Date of Certified or Registered Mailing:                         
               or
   Date and Time of and Name of Person Making Personal Delivery:
                        
   POST-TOW NOTICE
   You are listed as the Registered Owner or person entitled to possession of
the following-described vehicle: (make) (model/year) (other identifying
features) (license plate number and State) which is impounded at: (name and
address of towing service operator or municipal auto pound).
   The vehicle was towed from (location) on (date) by the authority of (the
municipality of name of municipality) , as an unlawful or hazardous vehicle, to
wit: (facts forming basis of tow) as defined in (ordinance or statutory
section) .
   The towing was authorized by (ordinance or statutory section) which provides
that:                                .
   You have the rights and payment obligations as set forth in the enclosed
Notice of Vehicle Release Requirements and Hearing Rights.
(2000 Code, § 72.31) (Ord. 1253, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 72.32 FORM FOR PRE-TOW NOTICE.
   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
72.27 and
72.28 for the mailing or delivery of pre-tow notices to owners:
                     Post-Tow Incident Report No.             
TO:    (Name)
(Address)
Date of Certified or Registered Mailing:                         
               or
   Date and Time of and Name of Person Making Personal Delivery:
                        
   PRE-TOW NOTICE
   You are listed as the registered Owner or person entitled to possession of
the following described vehicle:  (make) (model/year) (other identifying
features) (license plate number and State)  which is located at  (location)  in
an apparently abandoned or unusable condition, to wit:  (facts forming basis of
proposed tow)  as defined in  (ordinance or statutory section) .
   The municipality of  (name of municipality)  will tow the vehicle or cause
it to be towed after 7 days from the above date of mailing or personal delivery
unless you move the vehicle to a lawful location or request a hearing as set
forth below. Any such hearing will only concern the proposed towing, and will
not be determinative of or adjudicate any parking ticket or other citation
concerning the vehicle. If the vehicle is towed, you will be required to pay
all towing and storage charges before the vehicle is released.
   The towing is authorized by  (ordinance or statutory section)  which
provides that:                                        .
   If you wish to request a hearing on the legality of the present location and
condition of your vehicle, you must contact the office listed below and file in
person a request for such hearing within 7 days of the above date of mailing or
personal delivery, unless you live more than 50 miles from the municipality, in
which case you may mail a request for hearing that must be received by the
office listed below within 7 days from the mailing or personal delivery of this
Notice.
(name of office, address and phone number)
(2000 Code, § 72.32) (Ord. 1253, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 72.33 FORM FOR POST-TOW HEARING.
   The following form shall be utilized by the Hearing Officer for post-tow
hearing decisions as required in §
72.30:
                                 Post-Tow Incident Report No.       
   POST-TOW HEARING DECISION
   Following a hearing held after the towing of the vehicle as identified in
Post-Tow Notice bearing the same number as the Report Number stated above
concerning the vehicle owned by or under the control of  (name of Owner)
(“Owner”), the following findings and order are hereby entered, as checked in
the appropriate box and entered on the appropriate lines:
Amount Previously Paid by Owner for Towing and Storage: $    
   1.   Tow Authorized; Owner Responsible for All Charges. The towing and
storage of the vehicle was authorized by the following law of the State of
Illinois:             ; or Municipal Ordinance No.             , and the Owner
is liable for the full amount of towing and storage fees incurred to date, in
the amount of: $    
   2.   Tow Not Authorized. There was no authorization in law for the towing
and storage, or the municipal employee causing the vehicle to be towed did not
comply with the requirements of the applicable statute or ordinance, as
follows:
                                                                          
The Owner will not be charged for towing and storage and any amount previously
paid will be refunded by the municipality as shown here: $    
   3.   Tow Authorized: Storage Partially Reimbursable. The towing of the
vehicle was authorized by State Law:                    or Municipal Ordinance
No.                   but the Owner was caused to incur additional improper
storage charges because of improperly late notification of towing or other
reasons for which the municipality or towing company are responsible, as
follows:                                      
Storage Amount to be Excused or Reimbursed to Owner: $    
Towing and Storage Balance for Which Owner is Responsible: $    
   4.   Owner Failed to Appear; No Continuance Requested. This finding
constitutes a default against the Owner on the matters stated in the Post-Tow
Notice. The Owner is responsible for all towing and storage charges incurred to
date, in the amount of: $    
   After making the appropriate computations with the amounts stated above in
the right-hand column for any Amount Previously Paid by Owner, and adding or
subtracting the appropriate amounts listed under Paragraphs 1, 2, 3 or 4, the
final amount either owed by the Owner to date or to be refunded to the Owner IS
HEREBY ORDERED AS FOLLOWS:
Amount Currently Owed by Owner: $    
            or
Amount to be Refunded to Owner: $    
   IMPORTANT FURTHER INFORMATION
   If the vehicle is presently still impounded, an order for the release of the
vehicle is attached to this Decision. The owner must take possession of the
vehicle within 24 hours of the entry of this Decision, or he or she may be
responsible for further storage charges.
ENTERED:  (date and time)
SIGNATURE:                        
             Hearing Officer
                                        
            Star Number
(2000 Code, § 72.33) (Ord. 1253, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 72.34 FORM FOR OWNER’S PERMISSION TO TOW STOLEN VEHICLES.
   The following form shall be used by police officers when obtaining
permission from vehicle owners to tow stolen vehicles that are recovered:
   PERMISSION TO TOW STOLEN VEHICLE FORM
   I,  (Name of Owner)  am the owner of a motor vehicle which I have reported
to the                                Police Department as having been stolen.
The vehicle is described as follows:  (Description of the vehicle)  I
understand that the             Police Department may transmit notice of this
vehicle theft to other police agencies which may attempt to recover the
vehicle. I understand that if the vehicle is recovered, I have the option of
requesting that the vehicle be towed to a vehicle pound location or left at the
place where the vehicle has been found. While not requiring the law enforcement
agency which finds the vehicle to do so, I do hereby grant my permission to
have the vehicle towed, understand that if the vehicle is towed, I will be
required to pay reasonable towing and storage charges.
DATED:             , 20       
                                                                         
                                          Owner of Vehicle
(2000 Code, § 72.34) (Ord. 1253, passed 6-3-1985)
SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 72.45 CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Motor vehicle operated with permission, express or implied.
      (1)   A motor vehicle operated with the permission, express or implied,
of the owner of record, that is used in connection with any of the following
violations shall be subject to seizure and impoundment by the village. The
owner of record of said vehicle shall be liable to the village for an
administrative penalty of $500 in addition to any towing and storage fees, and
other fees deemed applicable.
      (2)   As used in this subchapter, the owner of record of a motor vehicle
means the record title holder:
         (a)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person driving while
his or her driver’s license, permit or privilege to operate a motor vehicle is
suspended or revoked in violation of 625 ILCS 5/6-303. For the purposes of this
division (A)(2)(a), the terms REVOKED or SUSPENDED, when used in the context of
driving privileges or driver licenses, shall have the same meaning as contained
in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-100 et seq.;
         (b)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person driving while
under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs, intoxicating compound or
compounds of any combination thereof, in violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-501(a); or
         (c)   Any motor vehicle which is operated by a person driving against
whom a warrant has been issued by a Circuit Court in the state for failing to
answer charges that the driver violated divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above.
   (B)   Driving while intoxicated; standard of evidence.
      (1)   A sworn report of a police officer, prepared in conformity with §
11-501.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-501.1, establishing that a
person has refused testing or has submitted to a test that discloses a blood
alcohol concentration of 0.08 or more, or any amount of a drug, substance or
intoxicating compound in the person’s breath, blood or urine resulting from the
unlawful use or consumption of cannabis listed in the Cannabis Control Act,
controlled substance listed in the Controlled Substances Act, or an
intoxicating compound listed in the Use of Intoxicating Compounds Act, shall
constitute prima facie evidence under this subchapter sufficient to establish a
finding of the vehicle owner’s liability under this subchapter. The presumption
may be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle that contains any controlled substance or
cannabis, as defined in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/
100 et seq., and the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., or
that is used in the purchase, attempt to purchase, sale or attempt to sell such
controlled substances or cannabis.
   (C)   Weapons. Any motor vehicle used in connection with the unlawful use of
weapons in violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq., (Deadly Weapons) of the
Illinois Criminal Code, or that contains a firearm or ammunition for which a
firearms owner’s identification card is required under the Illinois Owners
Identification Card Act, 430 ILCS 65/0.01 et seq.;
   (D)   Prostitution. Any motor vehicle that is used in the commission of
prostitution as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/11 et seq.,
solicitation of a prostitute or a sexual act as defined in said Code, or
pimping or juvenile pimping as defined in said Code;
   (E)   Person who does not hold a valid state driver’s license. Any motor
vehicle that is used by a person who does not hold a valid state driver’s
license or permit or a restricted driver’s permit issued under §§ 6-205, 6-206
or 6-113 of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-205, 625 ILCS 5/6-206
or 625 ILCS 5/6-113; and
   (F)   Aiding or abetting or commission of a misdemeanor, felony or forcible
felony. Any motor vehicle which is used by a person during the aiding or
abetting or commission of a misdemeanor, felony or forcible felony as those
terms are defined in the Illinois Criminal Code, 720 ILCS 5/2-7, 720 ILCS 5/2-
8 and 720 ILCS 5/2-31.
(Ord. 4014, passed 9-21-2009) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.46 EXCEPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to:
   (A)   A vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time of the
violation and the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities
within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been
discovered;
   (B)   If the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or
   (C)   With respect to §§
72.45(B)(1) or
72.45(C), the owner proves that the item found is not unlawful.
(Ord. 4014, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 72.47 CONFLICT OF LAW.
   This subchapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any existing federal
or state laws or village ordinances or codes pertaining to vehicle seizure and
impoundment.
(Ord. 4014, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 72.48 SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to §
72.45, the police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a
facility authorized by the village. At the time the vehicle is towed, the
police officer shall notify any person identifying himself or herself as the
owner, or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged violation, of the fact of the seizure and the vehicle owner’s
right to request a vehicle impoundment hearing as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 4014, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 72.49 VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT HEARINGS.
   (A)   Preliminary hearing. If the owner of record of the vehicle seized
pursuant to this subchapter desires to appeal the seizure, said owner must make
a request within 24 hours of the seizure for a vehicle impoundment hearing.
Said request shall be made in person and in writing and filed with the Chief of
Police or his or her designated agent. If the appeal is timely filed, a
preliminary hearing shall be conducted by a Hearing Officer appointed by the
Chief of Police with the consent of the Village President and the Village
Administrator, within 24 hours after receipt of the written request, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. All interested persons shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment
hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing, and
hearsay evidence shall be admissible only if it is the type commonly relied
upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. If, after
the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines there is probable cause to believe
that the vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this
subchapter, the Hearing Officer shall order the continued impoundment of the
vehicle, unless the owner of the vehicle posts a cash bond in the amount of
$500 with the village and pays the towing company any applicable towing and
storage fees. If the Hearing Officer determines that there is no such probable
cause, the vehicle will be returned to the owner of record of the vehicle
without penalty or other fees.
   (B)   Warning. A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located
within the municipality may be immobilized and subsequently towed and impounded
for failure to pay fines or penalties for three or more vehicular standing or
parking regulation violations.
(Ord. 4014, passed 9-21-2009; Ord. 4208, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 72.50 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   Within ten business days after a vehicle has been seized and impounded
pursuant to §§
72.45 and
72.48, the village shall notify by United States mail, the registered owner of
record of the date, time and location of the scheduled hearing which shall be
held pursuant to
Chapter 38 of this code of ordinances. The name and address of the person to
whom a vehicle is registered as shown on the records of the state in which the
vehicle is registered shall be conclusive evidence of the name and address of
the owner of record of the vehicle, unless the owner of record has given the
village actual written notice of a different name and/or address. The hearing
shall be scheduled and conducted in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 38 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 4014, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 72.51 VEHICLE POSSESSION.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder or
other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle
impounded under this chapter until the civil penalty and applicable fees under
this chapter have been paid. However, whenever a person with a lien of record
against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure proceedings, possession
of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she agrees in writing to
refund the village the amount of the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less
any amounts required to pay lienholders of record, not to exceed $500 plus the
applicable fees.
(Ord. 4014, passed 9-21-2009)
§ 72.52 IMMOBILIZATION/TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Three or more vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s),
for which the fines or penalties remain unpaid. Any motor vehicles whose
registered owner or lessee has been determined to be liable for three or more
vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s), for which the fines or
penalties assessed remain unpaid, may be immobilized and subsequently towed and
impounded if:
      (1)   The Parking Administrator has determined that a person has been
determined to be liable for three or more vehicular standing or parking
regulation violation(s), the fines or penalties for which remain unpaid;
      (2)   The person determined to be liable for three or more violations is
the registered owner of a motor vehicle located within the municipality’s
geographical boundaries;
      (3)   A pre-immobilization notice has been sent to the registered owner
of the motor vehicle which contains, but shall not be limited to, the
following:
         (a)   A final determination has been made on three or more vehicular
standing or parking regulation violation(s), the fines and penalties for which
remain unpaid;
         (b)   A listing of the violation(s) for which the person has been
determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation:
            1.   The vehicular standing or parking regulation violation notice
number;
            2.   Date of issuance; and
            3.   Total amount of fine and penalty assessed.
         (c)   The motor vehicles owned by the person and located within the
municipality are subject to immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the
fines and penalties are not paid within, but no later than, 14 days of the date
of the notice; and
         (d)   The registered owner may contest the validity of the notice by
fully completing and signing the request for hearing portion of one notice and
by filing the request for hearing with the Parking Administrator within, but
not later than, 14 days of the date of the notice. The request for hearing
shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the Parking Administrator.
      (4)   The motor vehicle(s) of the registered owner to whom notice is sent
has failed to make payment of the fines or penalties as specified in the notice
and no timely request for hearing has been filed with the Parking Administrator
to contest the validity of the notice; and
      (5)   Upon the receipt of the request for hearing to contest the validity
of the notice of impending immobilization or towing and impoundment, the
Parking Administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest the
validity of said notice on the next scheduled hearing date, but in no case
shall the hearing be scheduled later than 30 days after the request for hearing
is filed.
         (a)   The Parking Administrator shall serve notice of the hearing date
upon the registered owner.
         (b)   Notice shall be sent by first-class mail, postage prepaid to the
address as is set forth on the request for hearing.
         (c)   Service of the notice shall be completed on the date it is
placed in the United States mail.
   (B)   Notice.
      (1)   When, an eligible vehicle is immobilized, a notice shall be affixed
to the vehicle, advising the registered owner or lessee of the procedures and
requirements to have the immobilization device removed.
      (2)   Such notice shall include:
         (a)   A caution not to attempt to move the vehicle or remove the
immobilization device without village authorization and assistance;
         (b)   The date and time when the immobilization device was affixed to
the vehicle;
         (c)   The signature and identification number of the person who
affixed the immobilization device to the vehicle;
         (d)   The state registration number, if known, and make of the
vehicle;
         (e)   A statement that payment of the fines along with a removal
charge will be required for removal of the device and final disposition of the
matter;
         (f)   A statement that the opportunity to contest the grounds for the
immobilization is available but must be written and filed with the Village
Parking Administrator within 48 hours of the time at which the immobilization
device was affixed to the vehicle;
         (g)   The contact name, telephone number and daytime hours of the
village office where payment of the fines can made or information regarding the
procedures for filing a protest can be obtained;
         (h)   The contact name and telephone number of a village official/
employee responsible for after-hours assistance; and
         (i)   A warning that states that if the vehicle remains immobilized
for 48 hours, it will be subject to impoundment, and any and all fees/costs
associated with such towing/impoundment.
   (C)   Procedures following immobilization. The registered owner or lessee of
an immobilized vehicle may pursue one of three courses of action, the outcome
of any of which shall be considered a final determination of liability on the
case:
      (1)   Payment by the registered owner or lessee of the fines and removal
charge at any time before impoundment of the vehicle; (payment does not
preclude subsequent contesting of the violation(s) pursuant to divisions (C)(2)
or (C)(3) below);
      (2)   An informal notice of dispute filed with the municipal collector’s
office within 48 hours of the immobilization. An informal notice of dispute
under this section shall entail an affidavit, signed by the owner and made
subject to the penalties of perjury, wherein the owner denies there are three
or more unchallenged, unpaid parking violations outstanding against them at the
time of the immobilization. The immobilization device shall remain affixed to
the vehicle pending the outcome of the dispute and/or payment of the fines and
removal charge. Informal notices of dispute shall be evaluated by the Village
Parking Administrator or his or her designee on the basis of the affidavit and
established village policy; or
      (3)   A request for a hearing on the immobilization by Village Parking
Administrator, which shall be conducted according to the procedures for
challenges to parking violations set forth in this code The sole issue to be
determined by the Hearing Officer at a hearing under this section will be
whether there were three or more unchallenged and unpaid parking violations
issued to the registered owner of the vehicle at the time of the
immobilization. The immobilization device shall remain affixed to the vehicle
pending the outcome of the hearing and/or payment of the fines and removal
charge.
   (D)   Vehicle impoundment. After an immobilized vehicle has been impounded
under this section, a notice shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee
within 48 hours of the vehicle’s removal. The procedures for the towing and
disposition of an immobilized vehicle shall thereafter be the same as the
procedures for the towing of other vehicles pursuant to police order, as set
forth in §§
72.30 and
72.31.
   (E)   Unauthorized removal of vehicle or device prohibited.
      (1)   No person shall move or cause to be moved any vehicle that has an
immobilization device attached thereto, except as authorized by a police
officer or a Village Parking Enforcement Officer.
      (2)   No person shall remove or cause to have removed from any vehicle an
immobilization device placed thereon by a Village Parking Enforcement Officer
or police officer.
   (F)   The Parking Administrator shall appoint or retain the services of an
individual agency or company to tow and impound vehicles in accordance
herewith, provided:
      (1)   The individual, agency or company is fully licensed according to
local or state law;
      (2)   The individual, agency or company is fully insured; and
      (3)   The individual, agency or company has available a secured impound
area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the purpose of
this section, a SECURED AREA shall mean an area bounded by a fence, chain link
or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so as to minimize
or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles.
(Ord. 4208, passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 4232, passed 5-12-2014)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of
vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s) shall be as follows.
   (A)   For violation of any municipal ordinance regulating, restricting or
prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles along the streets, by-
ways, alleyways, regulated parking lots or such other locations as may be
controlled by off-street parking agreements, located within the geographical
boundaries of this municipality, other than for handicapped parking and fire
lane violations, the fine shall be:
      (1)   Thirty-five dollars if paid within ten days of the issue date of
the vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s) notice(s) (notice of
violation) served upon the registered owner, operator or lessee;
      (2)   Seventy dollars if paid on or after the eleventh day following the
issue date of the notice of violation, but prior to the hearing date as is
specified in the notice of violation and no request for hearing has been timely
filed;
      (3)   One hundred dollars if paid on or after the hearing date specified
in the notice of violation but prior to the expiration of 14 days after the
hearing date specified in the notice of violation, if no request for hearing
has been timely filed or a request for hearing has been timely but the person
filing the request for hearing failed to appear; and
      (4)   Two hundred fifty dollars if paid on or after the fifteenth day
following the hearing date specified in the notice of violation and no request
therefore had been timely filed or a request had been timely filed and the
person filing the request failed to appear at the hearing and no request for
hearing, as specified in the second notice, sent in accordance with the
provisions of §§
72.45 through
72.52, has been timely filed.
   (B)   For violation of any municipal ordinance regulating, restricting or
prohibiting the standing or parking of motor vehicles along the streets, by-
ways, alleyways, regulated parking lots or such other locations as may be
controlled by off-street parking agreements, located within the geographical
boundaries of this municipality for areas specifically designated for
handicapped parking and fire lanes violations, the fine shall be:
      (1)   One hundred dollars if paid within ten days of the issue date of
the vehicular standing or parking regulation violation(s) notice(s) (notice of
violation) served upon the registered owner, operator or lessee;
      (2)   One hundred fifty dollars if paid on or after the eleventh day
following the issue date of the notice of violation, but prior to the hearing
date as is specified in the notice of violation and no request for hearing has
been timely filed;
      (3)   One hundred seventy-five dollars if paid on or after the hearing
date specified in the notice of violation but prior to the expiration of 14
days after the hearing date specified in the notice of violation, if no request
for hearing has been timely filed or a request for hearing has been timely but
the person filing the request for hearing failed to appear; and
      (4)   Two hundred fifty dollars if paid on or after the fifteenth day
following the hearing date specified in the notice of violation and no request
for hearing had been timely filed or a request had been timely filed and the
person filing the request failed to appear at the hearing and no-request for
hearing, as specified in the second notice, sent in accordance with the
provisions of §§
72.45 through
72.52, has been timely filed.
(2000 Code, § 72.99) (Ord. 1527, passed 4-6-1993; Ord. 1608, passed 10-2-1998)
CHAPTER 73: MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES
Section
General Provisions
   
73.001   Definitions
   
73.002   Performance standards generally
   
73.003   Proficiency of operator
   
73.004   Age restrictions; consent of parents or guardian
   
73.005   Manner of riding on motorcycles
   
73.006   Riding side by side
   
73.007   Causing disturbances
   
73.008   Stunting and other dangerous maneuvers
   
73.009   Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles
   
73.010   Height of handlebars
   
73.011   Mufflers
Motorcycle Leasing and Renting
   
73.025   License required
   
73.026   Application for license; contents
   
73.027   License fee
   
73.028   Age restrictions
   
73.029   Location restrictions
   
73.030   Compliance with code and regulations
   
73.031   Hours of operation
   
73.032   Renting to minors
   
73.033   Licensee to inspect driver’s license
   
73.034   Vehicle condition and equipment
   
73.035   Number of vehicles restricted
   
73.036   Financial responsibility
   
73.037   Records to be kept
Bicycles
   
73.050   Bicycles subject to applicable traffic laws
   
73.051   Bicycle requirements
   
73.052   Lights required
   
73.053   Workable brakes required
   
73.054   Unlawful to ride on sidewalk
   
73.055   Warning device required
Skateboards, Rollerskates, Street Skates and Sleds
   
73.070   Definitions
   
73.071   Prohibited areas
Motorized Scooters
   
73.085   Definition
   
73.086   Operation of motor driven scooters restricted
   
73.087   Exemptions
   
73.088   Applicability
 
   
73.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AREA. The geographical boundaries within which an operating motorcycle or
operating motor-driven cycle can be heard.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. A motorcycle or motor-driven vehicle.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding a tractor.
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle including every motor-scooter propelled
by a motor which produces not more than five horsepower, and every bicycle with
a motor attached thereto.
   NONRESIDENT. Every person who is not a resident of the state.
   NONRESIDENT’S OPERATING PRIVILEGE. The privilege conferred on a nonresident
by the laws of the state pertaining to the operation by such person of a motor
vehicle, or the use of a vehicle owned by such person in the state.
   OPERATOR. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
motor vehicle on a street or who is exercising control of or is steering a
vehicle being towed by a motor vehicle.
   RACING OF MOTOR. The sudden acceleration or deceleration of the motor of a
motorcycle or motor-driven cycle.
   STUNTING. Operating a vehicle in a manner causing it to weave or suddenly
change course, or the loss of body contact with the seat by a driver or
passenger not for the purpose of safe operation of such vehicle.
   TOURING. Any repetitious driving in the same area which causes a disturbance
or is done with the intent of calling attention to an operator of a motorcycle
or motor-driven cycle.
(2000 Code, § 73.01) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973)
§ 73.002 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS GENERALLY.
   Every vehicle regulated by this chapter shall, at the time of operation, be
capable of performing in accordance with the standards then fixed by this code
and state law.
(2000 Code, § 73.02) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.003 PROFICIENCY OF OPERATOR.
   Before operating a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle on a public street, the
operator thereof shall have become sufficiently proficient in the operation
thereof to control the vehicle without unreasonable danger to others; and if
said vehicle is rented, leased or borrowed from another, the operator shall
have demonstrated to the lessor, renter or lender of such equipment that he or
she is sufficiently proficient to operate such vehicle on a public street
without unreasonable danger to others.
(2000 Code, § 73.03) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.004 AGE RESTRICTIONS; CONSENT OF PARENTS OR GUARDIAN.
   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase, rent, lease or borrow a
motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless he or she has first obtained written
consent from either of his or her parents or his or her legal guardian; and no
such person under 18 years of age shall take possession of and operate any
motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless on the occasion of such purchasing, or
on the first occasion of such renting, leasing or borrowing of such motorcycle
or motor-driven cycle, such person obtains and files with such seller, renter,
lessor or lender an acknowledgment in writing, signed by either parent of such
minor or such minor’s legal guardian, in the presence of and witnessed by such
lessor, renter or lender, or his or her duly authorized agent, to the effect
that permission is granted for such minor to purchase a vehicle, or to rent,
lease or borrow a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle from such renter, lessor or
lender, and that such parent or guardian consents to such sale, renting,
leasing or lending of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle to such minor, and
assumes full legal responsibility for the acts or actions of such minor in the
operation of any such motorcycle or motor-driven cycle then or thereafter sold,
rented, leased or lent to such minor. Such responsibility and commitment of
such parent or guardian shall continue until it is revoked in writing by either
parent or by the guardian by written instrument delivered to such seller,
lessor, renter or lender.
(2000 Code, § 73.04) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.005 MANNER OF RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.
   The operator of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall ride only astride
the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, and the operator
shall not permit more than one other person to ride thereon, nor shall such
other person ride on the motorcycle or motor-driven cycle unless it is designed
to carry two people, in which event the passenger shall also ride astride the
permanent and regular seat or saddle if it is designed for two persons, or
astride another seat or saddle which is firmly attached to the rear of the
operator. Any seat or saddle designed for a passenger must be equipped with
permanent handgrips and, in addition, the motorcycle must be equipped with
footrests adjusted to fit such passenger. A sidecar may be attached to a
motorcycle in which additional persons may ride.
(2000 Code, § 73.05) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.006 RIDING SIDE BY SIDE.
   Not more than two motorcycles or motor-driven cycles shall be operated side
by side in any one lane of traffic on any street.
(2000 Code, § 73.06) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.007 CAUSING DISTURBANCES.
   No motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall be operated in any manner so as to
cause a disturbance in any area in the municipality. Touring, stunting or
racing of motors are prohibited in any hospital, nursing home or residential
area.
(2000 Code, § 73.07) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.008 STUNTING AND OTHER DANGEROUS MANEUVERS.
   No operator of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle shall engage in maneuvers,
stunting or other operations dangerous to himself or herself or his or her
passenger or to the person or property of others. Except when done for the
better control of a vehicle, in emergencies, or to maneuver rough passages of a
street, an operator must at all times keep body contact with the saddle or seat
of such vehicle.
(2000 Code, § 73.08) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.009 SPECIAL EQUIPMENT FOR PERSONS RIDING MOTORCYCLES.
   The operator of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle and every passenger
thereon shall be protected by glasses, goggles or a transparent shield in
accordance with the standards of the State Department of Law Enforcement.
(2000 Code, § 73.09) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.010 HEIGHT OF HANDLEBARS.
   No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebar grips higher than the
height of the head of the operator when the operator is seated in the normal
driving position astride that portion of the seat or saddle occupied by the
operator.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1403) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.011 MUFFLERS.
   Every vehicle regulated by this chapter shall be equipped with an exhaust
system in good working order, sufficient to prevent excessive or unusual
noises; and no such vehicle shall be equipped with any muffler cutout,
removable exhaust pipe cover, or any bypass in a muffler from which the baffle
plates, screens or other original internal parts have been removed or altered,
nor shall any such vehicle be equipped with an exhaust system which has been
modified in a manner which will amplify or increase the noise emitted by the
motor of such vehicle above that emitted by the exhaust system originally
installed on the vehicle, nor shall such vehicle be equipped with an exhaust
system which has been modified or altered in any way from that furnished by the
vehicle manufacturer; provided that equipment equivalent to that originally
installed may be substituted when parts are replaced.
(2000 Code, § 73.11) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
MOTORCYCLE LEASING AND RENTING
§ 73.025 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of renting,
leasing or lending motorcycles or motor-driven cycles without obtaining a
license.
(2000 Code, § 73.20) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.026 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS.
   Application for a license required by this subchapter shall be made on forms
provided by the Village Clerk and shall contain the following:
   (A)   If an individual, the name and address of the individual;
   (B)   If a partnership, the name, residence and business address of each
partner;
   (C)   If a corporation:
      (1)   The name of the corporation and the date and state of
incorporation;
      (2)   The names and addresses of its principal officers, directors and
local representatives; and
      (3)   Whether authorized to do business in the state.
   (D)   The location where the business of renting motorcycles will be
conducted, and the number of motorcycles that will be maintained on the
premises for rental purposes.
(2000 Code, § 73.21) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.027 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee for a license required by this subchapter shall be
$25.
(2000 Code, § 73.22) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.028 AGE RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall engage in any business regulated by this subchapter or
manage the same who has not attained 21 years of age.
(2000 Code, § 73.23) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.029 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall engage in any business regulated by this subchapter within
any area of the municipality zoned as a residential district or within 200 feet
thereof.
(2000 Code, § 73.24) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.030 COMPLIANCE WITH CODE AND REGULATIONS.
   Every person licensed under this subchapter shall comply with all provisions
of this code and regulations of the municipality, including any reasonable
regulations set by the Chief of Police to effectuate the provisions of this
subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 73.25) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.031 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   No person licensed under this subchapter shall rent vehicles between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
   (B)   No vehicles shall be returned to such person between the hours of 12:
00 midnight and 8:00 a.m.
(2000 Code, § 73.26) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.032 RENTING TO MINORS.
   No person licensed under this subchapter shall rent any vehicle to a person
under 13 years of age until he or she has in his or her possession an
acknowledgment in writing, signed by either parent of the applicant or the
applicant’s legal guardian, in the presence of and witnessed by the licensee or
his or her duly authorized agent, to the effect that permission is granted for
such minor to rent, lease or borrow a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle from
such licensee, and that such parent or guardian consents to the renting,
leasing or lending of a motorcycle or motor-driven cycle to such minor, and
assumes full legal responsibility for the acts or actions of such minor in the
operation of any such motorcycle or motor-driven cycle then or thereafter
rented, leased or lent to such minor. The licensee may rely on such written
consent as compliance with this subchapter until it is revoked in writing by
either of such parents or by such guardian, and such written revocation is
delivered to such licensee.
(2000 Code, § 73.27) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.033 LICENSEE TO INSPECT DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   A person licensed under this subchapter shall rent vehicles only to persons
who have and can show a valid motor vehicle operator’s license.
(2000 Code, § 73.28) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.034 VEHICLE CONDITION AND EQUIPMENT.
   All persons licensed under this subchapter shall maintain all vehicles used
in connection with their business in a safe manner and provide each with all
equipment required by state law.
(2000 Code, § 73.29) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.035 NUMBER OF VEHICLES RESTRICTED.
   A person licensed under this subchapter shall have only the number of rental
vehicles on the licensed premises as was provided for in his or her application
for a license.
(2000 Code, § 73.30) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.036 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   Each person licensed under this subchapter shall provide proof of financial
responsibility by compliance with all pertinent provisions of state law.
(2000 Code, § 73.31) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.037 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   Every person licensed under this subchapter shall maintain precise records
of each vehicle rental indicating the name of the person to whom the rental was
made, his or her address, and the registered motor number of the vehicle rented
or leased, together with other identifying data. A record shall also be kept of
the parent’s or guardian’s written approval of a minor’s application and his or
her agreement to be responsible for the action of such minor in the use of the
vehicle. The date and hour of each rental and the time of its return to the
possession of the licensee shall also be recorded.
(2000 Code, § 73.32) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
BICYCLES
§ 73.050 BICYCLES SUBJECT TO APPLICABLE TRAFFIC LAWS.
   Bicycles and persons riding them shall be subject to all applicable traffic
laws of the municipality and the state, including particularly the following:
   (A)   Reasonable speed;
   (B)   Observing of stop signs;
   (C)   Obeying traffic signals, police officers and school patrols; and
   (D)   Not driving recklessly nor weaving in and out of traffic.
(2000 Code, § 73.45) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.051 BICYCLE REQUIREMENTS.
   Bicycles and persons riding them shall be subject to the following
requirements.
   (A)   No bicycle shall be ridden at any time in any place in such a manner
as to be dangerous to any person or property.
   (B)   No person riding on any bicycle shall attach himself or herself or his
or her bicycle in any manner to any moving vehicle.
   (C)   No bicycle shall carry more than one person for each permanent and
regular seat attached thereto.
   (D)   No person riding a bicycle shall carry any package or article which
prevents him or her from keeping at least one hand on the handlebar.
   (E)   Persons riding bicycles shall not ride other than single file except
on paths or parts of any street, road or public way set aside for the exclusive
use of bicycles.
(2000 Code, § 73.46) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.052 LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   No bicycle shall be driven on any street, road, sidewalk or public way in
the municipality from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before
sunrise without being equipped with a head lamp which shall emit a white light
visible for a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a rear red
reflector of not less than one and one-half inches in diameter visible for a
distance of not less than 200 feet to the rear.
(2000 Code, § 73.47) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.053 WORKABLE BRAKES REQUIRED.
   Every bicycle shall at all times, when ridden on any street, road, sidewalk
or public way in the municipality, be in safe mechanical condition and equipped
with workable and safe brakes.
(2000 Code, § 73.48) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.054 UNLAWFUL TO RIDE ON SIDEWALK.
   No person shall ride or propel any bicycle on or along any sidewalk in the
municipality.
(2000 Code, § 73.49) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.055 WARNING DEVICE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a bicycle that is not equipped with a bell or other
device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100 feet,
except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall any person use on a
bicycle any siren or whistle.
(2000 Code, § 73.50) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
73.999
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERSKATES, STREET SKATES AND SLEDS
§ 73.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ROLLER SKATES or STREET SKATES. To skate on any type of roller or street
skates with rollers attached to a person’s feet.
   SKATEBOARD. A board of any material to which roller skates or similar type
wheels are attached.
   SLED. A vehicle on runners or without runners, normally used to traverse ice
or snow.
(2000 Code, § 73.60) (Ord. 1426, passed 4-2-1990)
§ 73.071 PROHIBITED AREAS.
   No person shall use roller skates, street skates, skateboards or sleds on
any sidewalk or parking lots located on private property where the owner or
manager has posted signs prohibiting such activity.
(2000 Code, § 73.61) (Ord. 1426, passed 4-2-1990) Penalty, see §
73.999
MOTORIZED SCOOTERS
§ 73.085 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR DRIVEN SCOOTER. Any electric or gas driven wheeled scooter, motor
driven cycle or other similar motor driven vehicle for which the state does not
issue a title document, and does not issue license plates or registration
documents.
(2000 Code, § 73.65) (Ord. 2015, passed 2-22-2005)
§ 73.086 OPERATION OF MOTOR DRIVEN SCOOTERS RESTRICTED.
   No person shall operate a motor driven scooter upon any public street,
sidewalk, parking lot, bike path, park or on any other public property located
within the village limits of the village.
(2000 Code, § 73.66) (Ord. 2015, passed 2-22-2005) Penalty, see §
73.999
§ 73.087 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following shall be exempt from the prohibitions contained in this
subchapter:
   (A)   Any police vehicle, fire vehicle, municipal vehicle, special district
vehicle, county vehicle or forest preserve district vehicle operated by an
employee in the course of his or her duties;
   (B)   Motorized wheelchairs, for which purposes of this subchapter, a
MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR means any motorized vehicle designed for and used by a
person with disabilities; and
   (C)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices, as defined in § 5/1-
117.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.).
(2000 Code, § 73.67) (Ord. 2015, passed 2-22-2005)
§ 73.088 APPLICABILITY.
   Without limitation, this subchapter applies to all areas within the village
limits of the village and shall supersede any applicable ordinance adopted by
the county.
(2000 Code, § 73.68) (Ord. 2015, passed 2-22-2005)
§ 73.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which
another penalty is not otherwise provided herein, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
73.071 shall be fined a sum of not less than $50 nor more than $250 for each
offense.
   (C)   Any person 18 years of age or older who violates any of the provisions
of §§
73.085 through
73.088 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000
for each offense. An offense committed by a minor under the direct control or
with the consent of a parent or guardian may subject the parent or guardian to
the penalties provided in this division (C).
(2000 Code, § 73.99) (Ord. 1426, passed 4-2-1990; Ord. 2015, passed 2-22-2005)
CHAPTER 74: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
74.01   Pedestrian obedience to traffic-control devices and traffic regulations
   
74.02   Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks
   
74.03   Crossing at other than crosswalks
   
74.04   Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians
   
74.05   Pedestrian with disabilities; right-of-way
   
74.06   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks
   
74.07   Pedestrians soliciting rides or business
   
74.08   Pedestrians walking on highways
   
74.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks
   
74.10   Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles
   
74.11   Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs
   
74.12   Bridge and railroad signals
   
74.13   Motorized wheelchairs
 
   
74.99   Penalty
§ 74.01 PEDESTRIAN OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-
control device specifically applicable to him or her, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer.
   (B)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian-control signals
provided in §§
70.031 and
70.032 of this traffic code; but at all other places, pedestrians shall be
accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this
chapter.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1001) (2000 Code, § 74.01)
§ 74.02 PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping
if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety,
and walk or run into the path of a moving vehicle which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) above shall not apply under the condition stated in §
74.03(B).
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers
shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians as set forth in 625 ILCS 5/11-903.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1002) (2000 Code, § 74.02) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.03 CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to the crossing movements.
   (E)   Pedestrians with disabilities may cross a roadway at any point other
than within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk where the
intersection is physically inaccessible to them but they shall yield the right-
of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1003) (2000 Code, § 74.03) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.04 DRIVERS TO AVOID COLLIDING WITH PEDESTRIANS.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, or any person
operating a bicycle or other device propelled by human power and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated or
intoxicated person.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1003.1) (2000 Code, § 74.04) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.05 PEDESTRIAN WITH DISABILITIES; RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian with
clearly visible disabilities.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1004) (2000 Code, § 74.05) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.06 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1005) (2000 Code, § 74.06) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.07 PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle, unless expressly permitted by
this code. Solicitation on highways within this village shall be allowed only
at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop. Any
person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age or more and
shall be wearing a high visibility vest. The soliciting agency shall be:
      (1)   Registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization
as provided by “An Act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for
charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making an
appropriation therefor”, approved July 26, 1963, as amended;
      (2)   Engaged in a statewide fund raising activity; and
      (3)   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
   (D)   No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a roadway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or
about to be parked on a street or highway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1006) (2000 Code, § 74.07) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.08 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of a roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on the
left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1007) (2000 Code, § 74.08) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians on a
sidewalk.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1008) (2000 Code, § 74.09) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.10 PEDESTRIANS YIELD TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
an audible signal and visual signals meeting the requirements of 625 ILCS 5/12-
601, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible
signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the authorized
emergency vehicle.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1009) (2000 Code, § 74.10) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.11 PEDESTRIANS UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree
which renders himself or herself a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway,
except on a sidewalk.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1010) (2000 Code, § 74.11) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.12 BRIDGE AND RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   No pedestrian shall enter, remain upon or traverse over a railroad
grade crossing or pedestrian walkway crossing a railroad track when an audible
bell or clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device is operational
giving warning of the presence, approach, passage, or departure of a railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1011) (2000 Code, § 74.12) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.13 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair upon a sidewalk or roadway
shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties
applicable to a pedestrian.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1004.1) (2000 Code, § 74.13)
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   A violation of any part of §
74.12 is a petty offense for which a $250 fine shall be imposed for a first
violation, and a $500 fine shall be imposed for a second or subsequent
violation. The Court may impose 25 hours community service in place of the $250
fine for a first violation.
(625 ILCS 5/11-1011) (2000 Code, § 74.12)
CHAPTER 75: EQUIPMENT; LOADS
Section
General Provisions
   
75.01   Authority of Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements to
restrict right to use streets
   
75.02   Size and weight of vehicles generally
   
75.03   Limited weight on streets
   
75.04   Officers to weigh vehicles and require removal of excess loads
   
75.05   Permits for excessive size and weight
   
75.06   Projecting loads on passenger vehicles
   
75.07   Spilling loads on streets prohibited
   
75.08   Trailers and towed vehicles
   
75.09   Weight limits for trucks; exceptions
   
75.10   Trucks exceeding weight limit permitted to make pickups and deliveries
   
75.11   Exempt vehicles
   
75.12   Police to post signs
   
75.13   Requiring the use of seat safety belts
Weight Limits, Permits, Applications
   
75.25   Weight limits, dimensions, routes, permits and applications
 
   
75.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 75.01 AUTHORITY OF COMMISSIONER OF STREETS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS TO
RESTRICT RIGHT TO USE STREETS.
   The Commissioner of Streets and Public Improvements, with respect to all
streets or highways within the municipality except federal and state routes,
may prohibit the operation of vehicles on any such street or highway or impose
restrictions as to the weight of vehicles to be operated on any such street or
highway for a total period of not to exceed 90 days in any one calendar year
whenever any such street or highway, by reason of deterioration, rain, snow or
other climatic conditions, will be seriously damaged or destroyed unless the
use of vehicles thereon is prohibited or the permissible weights thereof
reduced. The Commissioner shall erect or cause to be erected and maintained
signs designating such prohibition or restriction at each end of that portion
of the street or highway affected thereby. The Commissioner, with respect to
all streets or highways within the municipality except federal and state
routes, may also prohibit the operation of trucks or other commercial vehicles,
or may impose limitations as to the weight thereof on designated streets or
highways, which prohibitions and limitations shall be designated by appropriate
signs placed on such streets or highways.
(625 ILCS 5/15-316) (2000 Code, § 75.01) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973)
§ 75.02 SIZE AND WEIGHT OF VEHICLES GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner to
cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any street in the
municipality any vehicle or vehicles of a size and weight exceeding the
limitations provided by state law, or otherwise in violation of state law,
unless under the terms of a special permit issued pursuant to this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 75.02) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.03 LIMITED WEIGHT ON STREETS.
   As provided under the authority of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/15-
101, 625 ILCS 5/15-111 and 625 ILCS 5/15-316, it shall be unlawful to operate
any vehicle upon any street where the operation of that vehicle is prohibited
by ordinance and where signs of such prohibition are posted, unless an
exception listed under this chapter is applicable to said vehicle. Vehicles
operating under the authority of the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/15-101,
625 ILCS 5/15-111 or 625 ILCS 5/15-316, while utilizing village streets shall
use the most direct route to and from points of loading, unloading or service
location.
(2000 Code, § 75.03) (Ord. 4329, passed 2-21-2017) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.04 OFFICERS TO WEIGH VEHICLES AND REQUIRE REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOADS.
   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and load is unlawful shall require the driver to stop and submit to a
weighing of the same either by means of portable or stationary scales. If such
scales are not available at the place where such vehicle is stopped, the police
officer shall require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest public scales.
   (B)   Whenever an officer, on weighing a vehicle and load, determines that
the weight is unlawful, the officer shall require the driver to stop the
vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load
is removed as may be necessary to reduce the gross weight of such vehicle to
such limit as permitted under this chapter, and shall arrest the driver. All
material so unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or operator of such
vehicle at the risk of such owner or operator.
   (C)   Any driver of a vehicle who fails or refuses to stop and submit the
vehicle and load to a weighing, or who fails or refuses when directed by an
officer on weighing of the vehicle to stop the vehicle and otherwise comply
with the provisions of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(2000 Code, § 75.04) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.05 PERMITS FOR EXCESSIVE SIZE AND WEIGHT.
   (A)   The Commissioner of Public Health and Safety may, within his or her
discretion, on application in writing, issue a special permit in writing
authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of
vehicles of a size and weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified by state law, or otherwise not in conformity with the provisions of
state law, on any street within the municipality. Where a permit is sought for
overweight, the application shall show that the load to be moved by such
vehicle or combination of vehicles cannot reasonably be dismantled or
disassembled.
   (B)   The application for any such permit shall specifically describe the
vehicle or vehicles and load to be operated or moved, and the particular
streets for which a permit to operate is requested.
   (C)   The Commissioner of Public Health and Safety is authorized to issue or
withhold such permit at his or her discretion; or, if such permit is issued, to
limit the number of trips; or to establish seasonal or other time limitations
within which the vehicles described may be operated on the streets indicated;
or otherwise to limit or prescribe conditions or operation of such vehicle or
vehicles when necessary to assure against undue damage to the road foundations,
surfaces or structures, and may require such undertaking or other security as
may be deemed necessary to compensate for any injury to any roadway or road
structure.
   (D)   Every such permit shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of
vehicles to which it refers, and shall be open to inspection by any police
officer or authorized agent of the Commissioner of Public Health and Safety,
and no person shall violate any of the terms or conditions of such special
permit.
   (E)   Whenever any vehicle is operated or movement made in violation of a
permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this section, the person to
whom such permit was granted, in addition to the driver of such vehicle, shall
be deemed guilty of such violation, and either or both such persons may be
prosecuted for such violation.
   (F)   The Commissioner of Public Health and Safety shall not issue permits
to any person convicted of three offenses during a period of one year after the
date of conviction for such third offense.
(2000 Code, § 75.05) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.06 PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES.
   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street within the
municipality with any load carried thereon extending beyond the line of the
fenders on the left side of such vehicle, nor extending more than six inches
beyond the line of the fenders on the right side thereof.
(625 ILCS 5/15-105) (2000 Code, § 75.06) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty,
see §
75.99
§ 75.07 SPILLING LOADS ON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street within the
municipality unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom,
except that sand may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction or water
or other substance may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining
such roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any street any vehicle with any load unless
such load and any covering thereon are securely fastened so as to prevent such
covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard to
other users of the street.
   (C)   The State Department of Transportation shall adopt such rules and
regulations it deems appropriate which require the securing of steel rolls and
other objects on flatbed trucks so as to prevent injury to users of highways
and damage to property. Any person who operates a flatbed truck on any highway
in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the Department under
this section shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
(625 ILCS 5/15-109) (2000 Code, § 75.07) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty,
see §
75.99
§ 75.08 TRAILERS AND TOWED VEHICLES.
   (A)   No trailer shall be operated on the streets of the municipality while
attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle or to a loading trailer or semi-
trailer, unless, in addition to the regular coupling device, it shall have
suitable and adequate safety chains or devices attached to the corners of the
trailer frame of sufficient strength to pull the trailer and its maximum load.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to drive, push, pull or operate any combination
of vehicles coupled together consisting of more than two vehicles on any street
or highway within the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 75.08) (Ord. 817, passed 3-5-1973) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.09 WEIGHT LIMITS FOR TRUCKS; EXCEPTIONS.
   No truck exceeding the gross weight, including the operator and cargo, of
10,000 pounds shall be driven on any street in the municipality with the
following exceptions:
   (A)   Streets and roads constituting part of the state highway system and
the Cook County highway system;
   (B)   Maple Street between 216th Street and the Elgin, Joliet and Eastern
Railroad Company right-of-way;
   (C)   216th Place - Main Street to Oak Street; and
   (D)   Oak Street between the Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railroad Company
right-of-way and 216th Street.
(2000 Code, § 75.09) (Ord. 754, passed 1-18-1971) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.10 TRUCKS EXCEEDING WEIGHT LIMIT PERMITTED TO MAKE PICKUPS AND DELIVERIES.
   Section
75.09 shall not prohibit any truck from making pickups and deliveries to houses
on streets on which trucks having a gross weight, including the operator and
cargo, of 10,000 pounds are otherwise prohibited to be driven pursuant to the
provisions of §
75.09.
(2000 Code, § 75.10) (Ord. 754, passed 1-18-1971) Penalty, see §
75.99
§ 75.11 EXEMPT VEHICLES.
   Section
75.11 shall not prohibit:
   (A)   The operation of emergency or governmental vehicles on any street;
   (B)   The operation of any truck on any officially established detour in any
case where such truck could lawfully have been on the street for which such
detour was established; or
   (C)   Vehicles engaged in the collection and removal of garbage or refuse.
(2000 Code, § 75.11) (Ord. 4329, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 75.12 POLICE TO POST SIGNS.
   The Police Department and/or the Director of Public Works as authorized by
the Police Department shall post or cause to be posted signs on streets
designated as restricted weight and/or dimension routes. Such signs indicating
the weight restrictions shall be posted at the entrances of said streets.
(2000 Code, § 75.12) (Ord. 4329, passed 2-21-2017)
§ 75.13 REQUIRING THE USE OF SEAT SAFETY BELTS.
   (A)   No person shall operate any 1965 or later model motor vehicle of the
First Division that is titled or licensed by the Secretary of State unless the
front seat of such motor vehicle is equipped with two sets of seat safety
belts.
   (B)   All occupants of a motor vehicle of the First Division, a motor
vehicle of the Second Division with a gross vehicle weight rating of 9,000
pounds or less, a recreational vehicle or the driver or front seat passenger of
a Second Division motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight exceeding 9,000
pounds, operated on a street or highway in this village shall wear a properly
adjusted and fastened seat safety belt; except that, a child less than six
years of age shall be protected as required pursuant to the Illinois Child
Passenger Protection Act (625 ILCS 25/1 et seq.). Each driver of a motor
vehicle transporting a child six years of age or more, but less than 18 years
of age, shall secure the child in a properly adjusted and fastened seat safety
belt.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the
following:
      (1)   The driver or passenger frequently stopping and leaving the vehicle
or delivering property from the vehicle, if the speed of the vehicle between
stops does not exceed 15 mph;
      (2)   A driver or passenger possessing a written statement from a
physician that such person is unable, for medical or physical reasons, to wear
a seat safety belt;
      (3)   A driver or passenger possessing an official certificate or license
endorsement issued by the appropriate agency in another state or country
indicating that the driver is unable for medical, physical or other valid
reasons to wear a seat safety belt;
      (4)   A driver operating a motor vehicle in reverse;
      (5)   A motor vehicle with a model year prior to 1965;
      (6)   A motorcycle; and
      (7)   A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with safety
seat belts under federal law.
   (D)   Any village police officer may stop any motor vehicle, or driver or
passenger of such vehicle solely on the basis of a violation or suspected
violation of this section while such motor vehicle is being operated on any
roadway within this jurisdiction.
(2000 Code, § 75.13) (Ord. 1717, passed 12-7-1998) Penalty, see §
75.99
WEIGHT LIMITS, PERMITS, APPLICATIONS
§ 75.25 WEIGHT LIMITS, DIMENSIONS, ROUTES, PERMITS AND APPLICATIONS
   (A)   Application for overweight and overdimension permits. Applications for
all overweight and overdimension permits shall be submitted in the method and
form required by the Chief of Police or his or her designee and shall include
at a minimum:
      (1)   The type of vehicle;
      (2)   The weights and dimensions of the vehicle(s);
      (3)   The description of the load;
      (4)   The requested route to be taken by the vehicle;
      (5)   The destination of the vehicle; and
      (6)   The name of the carrier, if different from the applicant.
   (B)   Issuance of overweight or overdimension permits. Upon receipt of a
completed application and proof of payment of the fee, the Chief of Police or
designee may issue an overweight or overdimension permit, subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   In consideration of seasonal or other time limitations, the Chief
of Police or desingee may restrict the number of time of daily trips authorized
by each permit, as is consistent with the public safety.
      (2)   In establishing the routes to be traveled, the Chief of Police or
designee may establish the route consistent with public safety, taking into
consideration existing traffic, the character of the road or roads and the
configuration of the terrain.
      (3)   All permits shall be nontransferable and shall be valid only for
the applicant or his or her agent or employee and the specific vehicle listed
on the application.
      (4)   Every permit shall be carried in the vehicle in paper or electronic
form to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer,
or agent of the village.
      (5)   No refunds of the permit fee shall be made to the applicant
following the issuance of a permit.
      (6)   The applicant shall comply with all township, village, county and
state statutes, ordinance, regulations, rules and requirements.
      (7)   Altering or falsifying a permit will revoke the applicant’s permit
privileges for 12 months.
      (8)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee is authorized to create
and amend reasonable provision for permits.
   (C)   Fee schedule for permits. Overweight permits for an overweight
vehicle, including load, may be applied for and may be granted per the fee
schedule as set forth in this section.
      (1)   Limited continuous operation (LCO) overweight permits.
         (a)   LCO permits are issued to a single power unit and may tow or
carry non-divisible, interchangeable loads for the duration of the permit. The
maximum gross weight for any LCO permit is 120,000 pounds.
         (b)   Permits for limited continuous operation shall be based on the
following fee schedule:
 
$50 daily    Expires at 11:59 the date of issue
$250 weekly  Valid for 7 days from the requested date and time of issuance
$500 monthly Valid for 30 days from the requested date and time of issuance
 
      (2)   Other loads. Permits for non-divisible overweight (includes any
overdimension) movements shall be based on the following fee schedule:
 
Weight (with load)    Single Trip* Round Trip**
Up to 100,000 lb      $75          $150
100,001 to 120,000 lb $100         $200
120,001 to 150,000 lb $125         $250
Over 150,000 lb       $150         $300
Notes:
* Single trip: One move from the point of origin to the point of destination.
Any additional stops between the pont of origin and the point of destination
are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are valid for five days from
the requested date and time.
** Round trip: Two trips over the same route in opposite directions. Any
additional stops between the point of origin and point of destination (and
reverse) are expressly prohibited. Round trip permits shall be valid for a
period of time not to exceed ten days from the date and time of issuance.
 
      (3)   Overdimension only permits. Overdimension only permits may be
applied for and may be granted in the amount of $50 for single trips and $100
for round trips.
(Ord. 4369, passed 7-16-2018) Penalty, see 75.99
§ 75.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The Police Department, individually or collectively, or any other
person as determined by the Board of Trustees of the village shall have the
authority to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the weight limitations set
forth in this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $750 for each offense. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
of the other provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not
less than $5 nor more than $250 for each offense. A separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each calendar day a violation occurs.
(2000 Code, § 75.99)
   (C)   A violation of §
75.13 shall be a petty offense and subject to a fine not to exceed $100.
(2000 Code, § 75.13)
(Ord. 1717, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 4329, passed 2-21-2017)
CHAPTER 76: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Stop intersections
SCHEDULE I. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
 
Stop Intersection       Ord. No. Date Passed
217th St. and Maple St. 407      5-19-1952
 
(2000 Code, Ch. 76, Sch. I) Penalty, see §
70.999
CHAPTER 77: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Parking restricted
   
II.   Parking in culs-de-sac
SCHEDULE I. PARKING RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Parking shall be restricted in the following locations:
Street Location Time Period Ord. No. Date Passed
Street                      Location                                                               Time    Ord. Date
                                                                                                   Period  No.  Passed
207th St.                   Either side, between Crawford Ave. and a point 375 ft. west of Kostner All     702  5-19-
                            Ave.                                                                                1969
211th Pl.                   South side, between Main St. and Maple St.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
                            South side, from the west side of the Illinois Central Railroad                     4-5-
211th St.                   viaduct, the east limits of the village to a point 662.26 ft. west of  All     761  1971
                            Central Ave., the west limits of the village
211th St.                   North side, between Crawford Ave. and a point 662.26 ft. west of       All     761  4-5-
                            Central Ave., the west limits of the village                                        1971
211th Pkwy.                 Either side, between Central Ave. and the municipal limits on the west All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
212th Pl.                   South side, between Main St. and Maple St.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
212th Pl.                   North side, between Tower Ave. and Governor’s Hwy.                   All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
213th Pl.                   South side, between Locust St. and Maple St.                           One     702  5-19-
                                                                                                   hour         1969
213th St.                   South side, between Tower Ave. and Butterfield Pkwy.                   All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
213th St.                   South side, between Maple St. and Jeffrey Dr.                          All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
213th St.                   North side, between Illinois Central R.R. and Maple St.                All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
213th St.                   South side, between Butterfield Pkwy. and Jeffrey Dr.                  All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
213th St.                   South side, between Maple St. and Main St.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
213th St.                   North side, between Main St. and 172 ft. east of Main St.              All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
214th Pl.                   North side, between Maple St. and Jeffrey Dr.                          All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
214th Pl.                   North side, from Maple St. to Jeffrey Dr.                              Certain 621  6-22-
                                                                                                   hours        1965
214th St.                   North side, between Illinois Central R.R. and Tower Ave.               All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
214th St.                   North side, between Jeffrey Dr. and Governor’s Hwy.                  All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
214th St.                   South side, from a point 255 ft. east of the east right-of-way of Main Certain 621  6-22-
                            St. to the I.C.R.R.                                                    hours        1965
214th St.                   North side, between Butterfield Pkwy. and Jeffrey Dr.                  All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
215th St.                   From Main St. west to the western boundary of Locust St. as extended   Certain 691  2-3-
                            northward across 215th St.                                             hours        1969
215th St.                   South side, between Maple St. and a point 638 ft. west of Maple St.    All     714  11-16-
                                                                                                                1970
215th St.                   North side, between Main St. and Maple St.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
216th St.                   North side, between Maple St. and a point 95 ft. east of Maple St.     15      702  5-19-
                                                                                                   minutes      1969
216th St.                   From Governor’s Hwy. to Main St.; Main St. from 216th St. to Lincoln Certain 1034 12-3-
                            Hwy.                                                                   hours        1979
216th St.                   North side of 216th St. and East Main St.                              All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
216th St.                   South side, between Maple St. and 250 ft. west of Maple St.            All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
216th St.                   South side, between Illinois Central R.R. and Richton Rd.              All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
216th St.                   North side, between Oak St. and Main St.                               All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
217th St.                   South side, between Illinois Central R.R. and Richton Rd.              All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
217th St.                   South side, from Maple St. to the I.C.R.R.                             Certain 621  6-22-
                                                                                                   hours        1965
218th St.                   South side, between Main St. and the east municipal limits             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
219th St.                   Either side, between Richton Rd. and Governor’s Hwy.                 All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
All culs-de-sac             Matteson Highlands Sub.                                                All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
                            North side, Central Ave. west to Huntingwood Rd. on the cul-de-sac on
Allemong Dr.                the south side of Allemong Dr. between Pheasant Rd. and Timberlane Rd. All     886  12-15-
                            and the cul-de-sac on the south side of Allemong Dr. between Central                1975
                            Ave. and Huntingwood Rd.
Amherst Way                 North side, between Central Ave. and the municipal limits on the west  All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Applewood Ln.               North side, between Rose Ln. and Kostner Ave.                          All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Beechwood Rd.               North side, Central Ave. west to Ridgeland Ave.                        All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Bradley Ave.                East side, Drake Ln. north to Yale Ln.                                 All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Briarwood Ct.               West of Central Ave.; no parking on the cul-de-sac of Briarwood Ct.    All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Butterfield Pkwy.           Either side, between 212th Pl. and 118 ft. west of Tower Ave.          All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Cambridge Ave.              West side, Drake Ln. north to Yale Ln.                                 All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Carnation Ln.               North side, between Violet Ln. and 207th St.                           All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Cedarwood Ln.               North side, between Rose Ln. and Kostner Ave.                          All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Central Ave.                West side, between 211th St. and Notre Dame Dr.                        All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Central Ave.                East side, between Colgate Ln. and Notre Dame Dr.                      All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Central Ave.                East side, between 211th St. and Georgetown Ln.                        All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Central Ave.                Either side, between 211th St. (Route 30, Lincoln Hwy.) and the Elgin, All     761  4-5-
                            Joliet and Eastern Railroad                                                         1971
Central Ave.                West side Vollmer Rd. on north to Lincoln Hwy. on the south; no        All     886  12-15-
                            parking east side Georgetown Dr. south to Lincoln Hwy.                              1975
Central Ave.                East side, between Georgetown Dr. and a distance 80 ft. north of       All     977  8-7-
                            Georgetown Dr.                                                                      1978
Charles St.                 Either side, 159 ft. north of 218th St.                                All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Cicero Ave.                 Either side, from 205th St. to 219th St.                               All     727  4-5-
                                                                                                                1970
Cloverleaf Rd.              West side, Woodgate Dr. south to Crestwood Dr.                         All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Colgate Ln.                 North side, between Central Ave. and the municipal limits on the west  All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Cornell Way                 North side, between Central and Dartmouth Ave.                         All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Cornell Way                 North side, between Dartmouth Ave. and Princeton Ave.                  All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Crawford Ave.               West side, between 207th St. and Route 30, Lincoln Hwy.                All     761  4-5-
                                                                                                                1971
Crestwood Ct.               East side, located to the south of Crestwood Rd. and north of Allemong All     886  12-15-
                            Dr.                                                                                 1975
Crestwood Rd.               West side, Allemong Dr. west to Huntingwood Rd.                        All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Dartmouth Ave.              West side, between Amherst Way and Colgate Ln.                         All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Deerpath Rd.                West side, Timberlane Rd. south to Crestwood Rd.                       All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Dettmering Dr.              East side, between 211th St. and 212th Pl.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Drake Ln.                   South side, Notre Dame Dr. east to Oxford Ave.                         All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Duke Dr.                    South side, Bradley Ave. east to Cambridge Ave.                        All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
East Main St.               Either side, between 216th St. and Main St.                            All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Georgetown Dr.              North side, Central Ave. east to Notre Dame Dr.; no parking in south   All     886  12-15-
                            side Central Ave. east to Butterfield Creek Ditch                                   1975
Governor’s Hwy. and 216th Within 400 ft. of the intersection on all its approaches               All     855  9-3-
St.                                                                                                             1974
Governor’s Hwy.           Either side, between 219th St. and 211th St.                           All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Harvard Ln.                 East side, Notre Dame Dr. south to Georgetown Dr.                      All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Homan Ave.                  West side, between Front St. and the municipal limits on the north     All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Huntingwood Rd.             East side, Allemong Dr. north to Timberlane Rd.                        All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Illinois Rte. 50            At Morning Glory Dr./Village Commons                                   All     4008 7-20-
                                                                                                                2009
Jean Ave.                   East side, between 214th Pl. and 214th St.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Jeffrey Dr.                 East side, between 214th Pl. and 212th Pl.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Keeler Ave.                 Either side, between Lindenwood Ln. and a point 114 ft. south of       All     702  5-19-
                            Lindenwood Ln.                                                                      1969
Kildare Ct.                 Either side                                                            All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Kildare Ave.                West side, between 211th St. and Hickory St.                           All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Kostner Ave.                East side, between Lincoln Hwy. (211th St.) and 207th St.              All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Lincoln Hwy. Improvement    Either side                                                            All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Lindenwood Ln.              South side, between Rose Ln. and Crawford Ave.                         All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Lindenwood Ln.              North side, between Rose Ln. and Kostner Ave.                          All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Locust St.                  West side, between 213th Pl. and 214th Pl.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Locust St.                  East side, between Elgin, Joliet and Eastern R.R. and 216th St.        All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Locust St.                  East side, within 15 ft. of premises known as 3634-216th St.           All     460  6-3-
                                                                                                                1957
Locust St.                  West side, between 211th St. and 212th Pl.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Main St.                    East side, between 211th St. and a point 607 ft. south of 211th St.    All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Main St.                    East side, between 213th Pl. and a distance of 40 ft. south of 213th   All     886  12-15-
                            Pl.                                                                                 1975
                            Between the southern boundary of the Michigan Central R.R. right-of-   Certain      2-3-
Main St.                    way and the southern boundary of 215th St. as extended eastward across hours   691  1969
                            Main St.
Main St.                    East side, between 214th St. and a distance of 44 ft. north of 214th   All     886  12-15-
                            St.                                                                                 1975
Main St.                    West side, between 211th St. and 211th Pl.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Main St.                    West side, between 214th St. and a distance of 55 ft. north of 214th   All     973  6-19-
                            St.                                                                                 1978
Main St.                    East side, between 216th St. and 216th St.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Maple St.                   East side, from 216th St. to the E.J.E.R.R.                            Certain 621  6-22-
                                                                                                   hours        1965
Maple St.                   East side, between 213th Pl. and Elgin, Joliet and Eastern R.R.        All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Maple St.                   East side, between 211th Pl. and cul-de-sac                            All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Maple St.                   Either side, between 213th St. and 213th Pl.                           All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Notre Dame Dr.              South side, commencing a distance of 300 ft. east of Central Ave. for  All     1068 8-18-
                            a distance of 600 ft. in an easterly direction                                      1980
Notre Dame Dr.              East side, north Georgetown Dr. to Central Ave. on the west            All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Notre Dame Dr.              East side, between Central and 591 ft. south of Central Ave.           All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Oak St.                     East side, between 216th St. and Elgin, Joliet and Eastern R.R.        All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Oak St.                     East side, between 211th St. and 212th Pl.                             All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Oakwood Ln.                 North side, between Rose Ln. and a point 941 ft. west of Kostner Ave.  All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Olympian Way                West side, between 211th St. and Dettmering Dr.                        All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Oxford Ave.                 West side, Drake Ln. north to Yale Ln.                                 All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Pinewood Ln.                North side, between Rose Ln. and Kostner Ave.                          All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Princeton Ave.              East side, between Amherst Way and Colgate Ln.                         All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Purdue Ln.                  West side, between Georgetown Dr. on the south to Harvard Ln. on the   All     886  12-15-
                            west                                                                                1975
Quail Run Rd.               West side, Streamwood Ln. north to Beechwood Rd.                       All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Quinn Ave.                  East side, between 214th Pl. and Butterfield Pkwy.                     All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Richton Rd.                 West side, between Elgin, Joliet and Eastern R.R. and 219th St.        All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Richton Rd.                 East side, between 216th St. and Elgin, Joliet and Eastern R.R.        All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Rose Ln.                    West side, between Lindenwood Ln. and 207th St.                        All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Streamwood Ln.              South side, west to Highland Rd.                                       All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Timberlane Rd.              South side, Allemong Dr. on the south to Cloverleaf Rd. on the east    All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Tower Ave.                  East side, between 214th St. and the Matteson Park                     All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
                            700 ft. east and west of the center of the intersection with Central
U.S. Rte. 30                Ave. and Central Ave. 90 ft. north and 326 ft. south of the center of  All     4159 7-31-
                            the intersection with U.S. Rte. 30 within the corporate limits of the               2012
                            village
Violet Ln.                  South side, between cul-de-sac and Carnation Ln.                       All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Violet Ln.                  West side, between Lindenwood Ln. and cul-de-sac                       All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Vollmer Rd.                 Either side, between Ridgeland Ave. and a distance 1,000 ft. east of   All     1202 12-19-
                            Cicero Ave.                                                                         1983
Vollmer Rd.                 Either side, starting at a point 66 ft. west of Central Ave. for a     All     761  4-5-
                            distance of 3,675.06 ft. west, the west limits of the village                       1971
Washington St.              Either side, between Keeler Ave. and Kostner Ave.                      All     702  5-19-
                                                                                                                1969
Woodgate Dr.                North side, between Cloverleaf Rd. and Central Ave.                    All     1068 8-18-
                                                                                                                1980
Woodgate Dr.                South side, Central Ave. west to Willow Rd.                            All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
Yale Ln.                    South side, from Central east to Bradley Ave.                          All     886  12-15-
                                                                                                                1975
 
   (B)   Parking shall be restricted in the following locations:
 
Street      Location                         Time Period Ord. No. Date Passed
Cicero Ave. A distance of 1,000 ft. from the All         1205     2-6-1984
            intersection with Vollmer Rd.
 
   (C)   (1)   Any violation of the provisions of division (A) above shall be
punishable by a fine of not more than $25 for each offense.
      (2)   Any person, firm or corporation violating division (B) above shall
be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense, and separate
offenses shall be deemed committed for each and every day during which a
violation continues or exists.
(2000 Code, Ch. 77, Sch. I) (Ord. 1205, passed 2-6-1984)
SCHEDULE II. PARKING IN CULS -DE-SAC.
   Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any
motor vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in any cul-de-sac located
within the limits of the village, except when necessary to avoid conflict with
other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
official traffic sign or signal. The following parking restrictions shall apply
to culs-de-sac located in the village:
Street Location Parking Restrictions Ord. No. Date Passed
Street           Location             Parking Restrictions Ord. No. Date Passed
                 North side of street
218th Pl.        and in painted fire  No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 hydrant area
                                      Parking permitted,
                                      except where curb is
Allemong Dr.     East                 painted because of   1541     11-1-1993
                                      hydrant location or
                                      limited space
                                      between driveways
Bradley Ave.     All                  No restrictions      1541     11-1-1993
                 East side of street
Briarwood Ct.    and in painted       No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 hydrant area
Carnation Ln.    All                  No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                                      Parking permitted,
                                      except where curb is
Central Ave.     All                  painted because of   1541     11-1-1993
                                      hydrant location or
                                      limited space
                                      between driveways
Charleston Rd.   All                  No restrictions      1541     11-1-1993
Academy
Columbine Ln.    All                  No restrictions      1541     11-1-1993
                 Between signs
Crestwood Ct.    marking area where   No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 driveways are too
                 close
                 East side and in
Crestwood Ct.    painted area of      No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 circle marking fire
                 hydrant area
Drake            At Oxford            No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 South side of street
Fernwood Ct.     and in painted curb  No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 area of driveways
Fox Run Ln.      At Wolf Rd.          No restrictions      1541     11-1-1993
Goldenrod Circle In circle area and   No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 west side of street
Kildare Ct.      In circle area and   No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 south side of street
Kostner Ave.     All                  No parking           1541     11-1-1993
Maple St.        At 212th Pl.         No restrictions      1541     11-1-1993
                 North end, between
Maple St.        signs at marking     No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 area where driveways
                 are too close
                 West side of street
Oakhurst Ct.     but circle area      No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 parking allowed
Old Creek        At Old Meadow        No restrictions      1541     11-1-1993
Old Farm Rd.     At Old Creek         No restrictions      1541     11-1-1993
Oxford           At Yale              No restrictions      1541     11-1-1993
                 North side of street
Phlox Circle     and painted hydrant  No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 area
Richmond Ct.     To corner marked on  No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 north side of street
                 To corner marked on
Sumter Dr.       west side of street  No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 and in painted
                 hydrant area
                 Between signs posted
Timberlane       on north side of     No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 street
Violet Ln.       All                  No restrictions      1541     11-1-1993
                 South side and
Wedgewood Ct.    circle area of       No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 street
                                      Parking permitted,
                                      except where curb is
Wedgewood Rd.    Middle               painted because of   1541     11-1-1993
                                      hydrant location or
                                      limited space
                                      between driveways
                                      Parking permitted,
                                      except where curb is
Wedgewood Rd.    South                painted because of   1541     11-1-1993
                                      hydrant location or
                                      limited space
                                      between driveways
                                      Parking permitted,
                                      except where curb is
Wedgewood Rd.    North                painted because of   1541     11-1-1993
                                      hydrant location or
                                      limited space
                                      between driveways
                                      Parking permitted,
                                      except where curb is
White Oaks Rd.   South                painted because of   1541     11-1-1993
                                      hydrant location or
                                      limited space
                                      between driveways
                                      Parking permitted,
                                      except where curb is
White Oaks Rd.   North                painted because of   1541     11-1-1993
                                      hydrant location or
                                      limited space
                                      between driveways
White Birch      At Old Farm Rd.      No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 North side and in
                 painted areas where
Willow Ct.       space is             No parking           1541     11-1-1993
                 insufficient between
                 driveways
Yale             At Bradley           No restrictions      1541     11-1-1993
 
(2000 Code, Ch. 77, Sch. II) Penalty, see §
72.99
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
      
91.   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
92.   ANIMALS
      
93.   CEMETERIES
      
94.   FAIR HOUSING
      
95.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
96.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
      
97.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
98.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
99.   TREES AND VEGETATION
      
100.   CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
      
101.   SPECIAL EVENTS
      
102.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   State regulations adopted
Abandoned, Wrecked Vehicles
   
90.15   Definitions
   
90.16   Storing, parking or leaving dismantled or other such motor vehicles;
prohibition; nuisance; exceptions
   
90.17   Notice to remove
   
90.18   Responsibility for removal
   
90.19   Notice; procedure; content
   
90.20   Hearings; request; procedure
   
90.21   Removal of vehicle from property
   
90.22   Notice of removal
   
90.23   Disposition of vehicles
   
90.24   Public sale; notice contents; selling
   
90.25   Redemption of impounded vehicles
   
90.26   Liability of owner or occupant
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 STATE REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/4-101, 625 ILCS 5/4-201 through 5/4-207,
625 ILCS 5/4-208(B), 625 ILCS 5/4-209 through 5/4-211, 625 ILCS 5/4-213 and 625
ILCS 5/4-214 regarding abandoned vehicles are hereby adopted by reference as if
set out in full herein.
(2000 Code, § 90.01) (Ord. 1550, passed 2-22-1994)
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
§ 90.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The word
“shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, as defined hereby, which does not
have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate or plates and the
condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative,
abandoned or discarded.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel
along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses,
motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts,
campers and trailers.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   PRIVATE PROPERTY. Any real property within the village which is privately
owned and which is not public property as defined in this section.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any street or highway which shall include the entire width
between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of
vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or
facility.
§ 90.16 STORING, PARKING OR LEAVING DISMANTLED OR OTHER SUCH MOTOR VEHICLES;
PROHIBITION; NUISANCE; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving
of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled condition whether attended
or not, upon any public or private property within the village for a period of
time in excess of 72 hours. The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled,
inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof,
on private or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be
abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this section. This section
shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property
or to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise, or to any
motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for
operation on drag strips or raceways, or any vehicle retained by the owner for
antique collection purposes.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.17 NOTICE TO REMOVE.
   Whenever it comes to the attention of the Chief of Police that any nuisance,
as defined in §
90.16 of this subchapter, exists in the village, a notice in writing shall be
served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists; or, in case
there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his or her
agent, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its
removal in the time specified in this subchapter.
§ 90.18 RESPONSIBILITY FOR REMOVAL.
   Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the
private property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be
responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the
village, the owner or occupant of the private property where same is located
shall be liable for the expenses incurred.
§ 90.19 NOTICE; PROCEDURE; CONTENT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police of the village shall give notice of removal to the
owner or occupant of the private property where it is located, at least ten
days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice when
a copy of same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on
which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail
to the owner or occupant of the private property at his or her last known
address.
   (B)   The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time
specified in this section, and the notice shall advise that upon failure to
comply with the notice to remove, the village or its designee shall undertake
such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner or
occupant of the property.
§ 90.20 HEARINGS; REQUEST; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized
agents, may file a written request for hearing before the Village Board within
the ten-day period of compliance prescribed herein for the purpose of defending
the charges by the village.
   (B)   The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of
the request and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised
of the time and place of said hearing at least three days in advance thereof.
At any such hearing, the village and the persons to whom the notices have been
directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems
necessary.
§ 90.21 REMOVAL OF VEHICLE FROM PROPERTY.
   If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the
ten-day period of compliance or, in the event that a notice requesting a
hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had and the existence of the violation is
affirmed by the Board of the village or its designee, the Chief of Police or
his or her designee shall have the right to take possession of the junked motor
vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with, hinder or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon
private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of
this subchapter.
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.22 NOTICE OF REMOVAL.
   Within 48 hours of the removal of such vehicle, the Chief of Police shall
give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the
owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed,
that said vehicle, or vehicles, has been impounded and stored for violation of
this subchapter. The notice shall give location of where the vehicle or
vehicles is or are stored, and the costs incurred by the village for removal.
§ 90.23 DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES.
   Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of §
90.21 of this subchapter, the village shall, after ten days, cause it to be
appraised. If the vehicle is appraised at $75 or less, the Chief of Police
shall execute an affidavit so attesting and describing the vehicle, including
the license plates, if any and stating the location and appraised value of the
vehicle. The Chief of Police, after complying with the above, may summarily
dispose of the vehicle and execute a certificate of sale. If the vehicle is
appraised at over $75, the Chief of Police shall give notice of public sale not
less than 30 days before the date of the proposed sale.
§ 90.24 PUBLIC SALE; NOTICE CONTENTS; SELLING.
   (A)   The notice of sale shall state:
      (1)   The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of the village;
      (2)   A description of the vehicle, including make, model, license number
and any other information which will accurately identify the vehicle;
      (3)   The terms of the sale; and
      (4)   The date, time and place of the sale.
   (B)   The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time
of payment of the purchase price, the Chief of Police shall execute a
certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which to be given to the
purchaser and the copy thereof to be filed with the Clerk of the village.
Should the sale for any reason be invalid, the village’s liability shall be
limited to the return of the purchase price.
§ 90.25 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLES.
   The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this subchapter may
redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal, but prior to the sale or
destruction thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to the Village Clerk of
such sum as the Chief of Police may determine and fix for the actual and
reasonable expense of removal, and any preliminary sale advertising expenses,
not to exceed $50, plus $10 per day for storage for each vehicle redeemed.
§ 90.26 LIABILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT.
   Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of property on which abandoned
vehicles have been removed by the village to pay the unrecovered expenses
incurred by the village in such removal, a lien shall be placed upon the
property for the amount of such expenses.
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter for
which no penalty is set forth shall be subject to §
10.99
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
90.15 to
90.26 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $750. Each act in violation of any of the provisions
hereof shall be deemed a separate offense.
CHAPTER 91: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Application for annual alarm systems authorization
   
91.03   False alarms
   
91.04   Notices
   
91.05   Failure to pay citations
   
91.06   Local alarm systems
   
91.07   Automatic protection devices; activation of public safety telephone
numbers
   
91.08   Disconnecting defective signaling device
   
91.09   Resetting fire alarm systems
   
91.10   Fire alarm system devices
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. A person or persons designated by the governing
authority to administer and review alarm applications and permits.
   ALARM AGENT. Any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include
the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling,
servicing, responding to or causing others to respond to an alarm device.
   ALARM SYSTEM. An assembly of equipment and devices or a single device, such
as a solid state unit arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring
urgent attention, and to which the Police or Fire Departments are expected to
respond.
   ALARM USER. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or
other organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or
facility where an alarm system is maintained or activated within the
municipality, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles. Also included are
those systems which employ an audible signal emitting sounds, or a flashing
light or beacon designed to alert or signal persons outside the premises of an
alarm activation.
   AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE. An electrically operated instrument composed of
sensory apparatus and related hardware which automatically sends over regular
telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice alarm
on receipt of a stimulus from the sensory apparatus that has detected a
physical force or condition inherently characteristic of a fire or unauthorized
intrusion. Also included are devices which are stimulated by direct action by
the alarm user or his or her employees.
   CENTRAL STATION ALARM. A facility whose purpose is to monitor incoming alarm
signals 24 hours a day and relay the signal information to the appropriate
authorities.
   CHIEF OF DEPARTMENT. The Chief of either the Police or Fire Department of
the municipality, or his or her authorized representative.
   FALSE ALARM. Any type of alarm signal necessitating a response by the Police
or Fire Department, or other municipal department, where an emergency does not
in fact exist.
   LOCAL ALARMS. A signaling system which, when activated, causes an audible or
visual signaling device to be activated in or on the premises within which the
system is installed.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, or society,
but such term does not include the village.
   PUBLIC TRUNKLINE. A telephone line leading into the communications center of
the Police Department, Fire Department or the Southcom Combined Dispatch Center
that is for the purpose of handling emergency and administrative calls on a
person-to-person basis.
(2000 Code, § 91.01) (Ord. 988, passed 12-4-1978; Ord. 1227, passed 8-20-1984;
Ord. 1904, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 4272, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 4475, passed 10-
18-2021)
§ 91.02 APPLICATION FOR ANNUAL ALARM SYSTEMS AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The alarm user applying for the authorization required shall state on
an application form, prepared by the Chief of Department and approved by the
Village Attorney, his or her name; the address of the residence or business or
businesses in or on which the alarm system has been or will be installed; his
or her telephone number; the type of alarm system (local, direct connect,
central station, fire or other); the alarm business or businesses selling,
installing, monitoring, inspecting, responding to or maintaining the alarm
system; and the name and telephone number of at least two other persons (in the
case of a corporate alarm user applicant, at least three persons) who can be
reached at any time, day or night, who are authorized to respond to an alarm
signal, and who can open the premises in which the system is installed.
      (1)   The registration fee for a residential alarm system permit shall be
$20 and will not be prorated.
      (2)   The residential alarm user shall obtain the registration permit on
or before May 1 of each year.
      (3)   The registration fee for a commercial alarm system permit shall be
$35 and will not be prorated.
      (4)   The commercial alarm user shall obtain the registration permit on
or before May 1 of each year.
      (5)   (a)   Any applicant for a residential or commercial alarm system
permit shall be required to pay any past arrearages for registration fees or
outstanding quasi-criminal judgments previously secured against the applicant
as a result of prior multiple false alarms as set forth in this chapter.
         (b)   Such payment shall be considered as an absolute precondition
before the approval of the annual registration permit.
   (B)   (1)   Every alarm user authorized under this chapter shall be required
to have his or her alarm system inspected and tested at least once a year by a
licensed alarm contractor or its agent.
      (2)   The person or persons performing this inspection and testing shall
provide the alarm user with written documentation of their findings and
testing. Furthermore, the test results shall be reported to Brycer, the
Compliance Engine no more than five business days after the testing.
   (C)   The information contained in an alarm user authorization permit
application required by this section and other information received by the
Chief of Department, or his or her designate, through correspondence or
communications with an alarm user shall be securely maintained and restricted
to inspection only by the Chief or certain officers or municipal employees
specifically assigned the responsibility for handling and processing alarm user
authorization permits in the course of official duties.
   (D)   Any alarm system user who operates an alarm system without obtaining
an authorization permit as required by this section, or who, after having an
authorization permit revoked, fails to disconnect his or her alarm system,
shall be in violation of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 91.02) (Ord. 988, passed 12-4-1978; Ord. 1227, passed 8-20-1984;
Ord. 1400, passed 5-15-1989; Ord. 1489, passed 3-2-1992; Ord. 1904, passed 4-
21-2003; Ord. 4272, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 4475, passed 10-18-2021) Penalty, see
91.99
§ 91.03 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   Within 45 days after each false alarm, the Chief of the Department or
his/her designee shall notify the alarm user by mailing a notice to the address
(or property owner/ manager office) from which the false alarm was received. An
alarm user shall be assessed a fee for each false alarm in excess of two during
any calendar year. The fees shall be assessed as hereinafter set forth. As a
condition of any alarm system registration or usage under the provisions of
this chapter, the registrant shall pay to the village, on issuance of a
citation for any false alarm generated by the alarm user's alarm system. The
fee shall be in accordance with §
91.99.
   (B)   There shall be no penalty assessed for a false alarm when, upon
investigation by the Chief of Department, it is determined that the false alarm
was caused by an uncontrollable extraordinary circumstance to include an act of
God.
   (C)   An alarm user may appeal to the Chief of Department, or his or her
designee, for reconsideration of a designated false alarm if that alarm user
presents written documentation to the Chief of Department, or his or her
designee, that he or she had undertaken reasonable action to discover and
eliminate the cause or causes of any false alarm. The appeal must be made
within seven days after the receipt of the citation. If however, the alarm
user, by reason of absence from the municipality or any other reasonable basis
requests an extension of time to file his or her written report, the Chief of
Department, or his or her designee, shall extend the seven-day period for a
reasonable period. If the alarm user fails to submit a written report within
seven days or within any extended period, or submits such a report and is
denied a reconsideration, the false alarm determination shall stand.
   (D)   Any person issued a citation for any false alarm generated by the
alarm user's alarm system by the village for any provision of this chapter may
request an administrative hearing in accordance with the municipal code of the
village.
(Ord. 4255, passed 3-2-2015; Ord. 4272, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 4475, passed 10-
18-2021; Ord. 4502, passed 5-16-2022) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 NOTICES.
   (A)   Notice or billing from the village to any registration holder shall be
deemed to have been given or rendered on the date such notice or billing is
deposited in the United States mail, first class postage, prepaid, addressed to
the registration holder at the address shown in the village's registration
records. A certificate signed by the person who mailed the notice shall be
prima facie evidence of the facts state therein with respect to such notice.
   (B)   Notices or payments to the village under this chapter shall be
effective when received at the appropriate village office.
(Ord. 4272, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 4475, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 91.05 FAILURE TO PAY CITATIONS.
   (A)   For all non-fire alarm systems, if the alarm user fails to pay the
false alarm citation, written notice shall be sent to the user by certified
mail. If payment is not made within ten days from the date of the mailing, then
the user's permit to maintain an alarm shall be revoked by the coordinator. The
system shall be removed from the protected premises within 15 days, unless a
decision by the coordinator allows for reinstatement of the alarm systems
registration.
   (B)   In the case of fire alarm system, for which the nuisance alarm
citation has not been paid, upon determination of the coordinator, or his or
her designee, registration may be revoked and the State Fire Marshal notified.
If such action is taken in a location required by state law to have an operable
fire alarm system, the premises may be closed until the alarm is brought into
compliance, and/or citation has been paid, or an approved fire watch must be
implemented.
(Ord. 4272, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 4475, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 91.06 LOCAL ALARM SYSTEMS.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall be allowed to have a local alarm
on or in any building, place or premises within the municipality without first
having obtained an alarm permit.
   (B)   Local alarms are those alarms that sound audibly on the premises of
the owner, renter or lessee. Local alarms may be in addition to a central
receiving station alarm. All local alarms shall be equipped with an automatic
shut-off device which will deactivate within 30 minutes of the initial alarm.
The person owning or operating an outside ringer shall have one year from the
date of the amendatory ordinance to provide such automatic shut-off.
   (C)   It shall be the sole responsibility of the persons owning or operating
a local alarm to maintain the system at the sole expense of the owner or
operator.
   (D)   In addition to all other remedies provided by ordinance, the Chief of
Department or his or her authorized representative, whenever he or she shall
have knowledge of the misuse or improper maintenance of a local alarm system,
may order the removal or deactivation of the system and the revocation of the
alarm permit.
   (E)   Alarms affixed to vehicles of any type are not classified as local
alarms and are exempt.
(Ord. 4272, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 4475, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 91.07 AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICES; ACTIVATION OF PUBLIC SAFETY TELEPHONE
NUMBERS.
   (A)   No person shall use or cause or permit to be used any telephone device
or telephone attachment that automatically selects a public trunk line of the
Police Department or Fire Department of the municipality and then reproduces
any prerecorded message to report any robbery, burglary, fire, or other
emergency.
   (B)   Within 90 days after the effective date of this chapter, all automatic
protection devices in the municipality that were keyed on that date to a public
trunk line shall be disconnected therefrom. The owner or lessee of any such
device shall be responsible for its disconnection and any related costs.
(Ord. 4272, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 4475, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 91.08 DISCONNECTING DEFECTIVE SIGNALING DEVICE.
   In the event that the municipality finds it necessary to disconnect a
defective signaling device, or in the event of a local alarm sounding an alarm
in excess of one-half hour, the municipality shall incur no liability by such
action.
(Ord. 4272, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 4475, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 91.09 RESETTING FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.
   Upon activation of a fire alarm system, the system shall not be reset
(restored to a secured or clear condition) by any person until Fire Department
personnel are on the scene and direct the system to be reset.
(2000 Code, § 91.07) (Ord. 1904, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 4272, passed 6-1-2015;
Ord. 4475, passed 10- 18-2021) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.10 FIRE ALARM SYSTEM DEVICES.
   At the change of occupant, where fire alarm systems provide audible alarm
coverage, alarms shall comply with the 2018 Illinois Accessibility Code,
Chapter 2; Section 215.215.2 Public and Common Use Areas. Alarms in public use
areas and common use areas shall comply with 702.215.3 Employee Work Areas.
Where employee work areas have audible alarm coverage, visible alarms complying
with 702 shall be provided.
(Ord. 4475, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, on
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $750 for each
offense.
   (B)   Fines assessed for violations under this chapter shall not be less
than $250 for each single violation.
   (C)   False alarm billing shall be based on a calendar year cycle. The first
two false alarms received in the calendar year may not have a fine assessed if
determined to have been transmitted in error by the Chief of Department or his
or her designee. All subsequent false alarms shall be billed at $300 with a
$100 escalator per each subsequent occurrence.
(Ord. 4272, passed 6-1-2015; Ord. 4475, passed 10-18-2021)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Unlawful treatment of animals
   
92.03   Procedures nonexclusive
   
92.04   Duty to register and license dogs
   
92.05   Registration requirements for dangerous dogs
   
92.06   Cats
   
92.07   License fee
   
92.08   Inoculation against rabies
   
92.09   Collar and tag
   
92.10   Unauthorized removal of tags
   
92.11   Prohibited conduct
   
92.12   Dangerous dogs
   
92.13   Quarantine of biting animals
   
92.14   Female dogs in heat
   
92.15   Rabid dogs
   
92.16   Redemption of impounded dogs or cats
   
92.17   Disposition of unclaimed dogs and cats
   
92.18   Animal fighting prohibited
   
92.19   Tethering
   
92.20   Problem pet owners
   
92.21   Hindering enforcement
   
92.22   Animals prohibited in certain places
   
92.23   Enforcement of provisions
   
92.24   Keeping animals
   
92.25   Damage to property
   
92.26   Kennels
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDON. To leave an animal without demonstrated or apparent intent to
recover or resume custody of the animal, to leave an animal for more than 12
hours without providing adequate food, water and shelter for the duration of
the absence, or to turn out or release an animal for the purpose of causing it
to be impounded, provided, however, that this definition shall not apply to
feral cats.
   ALTERED. An animal that has been permanently spayed or neutered.
   ANIMAL. Any nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile or amphibian.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The Chief of Police or such other persons as may be
designated by the Chief of Police or the Village Administrator that is charged
with the enforcement of this chapter.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. Any public or private organization, including the
organization’s officers, agents and representatives when acting in the name or
on behalf of the organization, that controls, rescues, shelters or cares for,
animals as all or part of the purpose of the organization.
   BITE. Any cutting, wounding or tearing with the teeth, including any
abrasion of the skin.
   CAT. Any animal that is classified as Felis catus.
   DANGEROUS DOG. A dog designated as a dangerous dog pursuant to this chapter.
   DOG. Any animal that is classified as Canis lupus familiaris.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. A dog, cat or other animal, the keeping of which is not
otherwise prohibited under the terms of this chapter that has been raised or
maintained in confinement or otherwise domesticated so as to live in a tame
condition.
   ENCLOSURE. A structure erected in conformance with the building code, that:
      (1)   Is designed to confine and prevent the escape of a dangerous dog
and prevent the entry of children or other animals;
      (2)   Locks securely, and includes a secure top, sides and bottom;
      (3)   Has sides that embed into the ground at a depth of at least one
foot and attach to the bottom of the enclosure so that the animal confined
within cannot escape by digging under the sides of the enclosure;
      (4)   Is adequately lighted, kept in a clean and sanitary condition; and
      (5)   Is labeled with a predominantly displayed warning sign at each
entrance that indicates that a dangerous animal is confined within.
   FERAL CAT. A cat that:
      (1)   Is born in the wild or is the offspring of a domestic animal or a
feral cat and is not socialized;
      (2)   Is a domestic animal that has been abandoned and is no longer
socialized; or
      (3)   Lives on a farm.
   FERAL CAT CARETAKER. A person participating in a program to trap, spay/
neuter, return or release feral cats in order to help control cat
overpopulation.
   HEARING OFFICER. The individual(s) appointed as Hearing Officer in the
village’s administrative hearing system pursuant to the code of ordinances of
the village.
   HUMANELY DESTROYED. The humane destruction of an animal pursuant to the
humane euthanasia and animal shelters act (510 ILCS 72/1 et seq.) as amended.
   IMPOUNDED. Taken into custody by the animal control officer, police officers
and such other persons as may be designated by the Chief of Police or the
Village Administrator as being authorized and directed to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
   LEASH. A cord, rope, strap or chain that is securely fastened to the collar
or harness of a dog and is sufficient to physically restrain and control the
dog.
   MICROCHIP. An identifying device consisting of a microchip or similar device
that is humanely and permanently installed in or injected under the skin of an
animal by a licensed veterinarian and is designed so that it provides, when
scanned by an electronic reader, readable information as determined by the
Chief of Police to allow, at a minimum, for the identification of the animal
and the name, address and telephone number of the owner.
   MUZZLE. A leather, wire or nylon restraint that fits over a dog’s nose and
jaws and prevents it from biting and which also includes straps extending and
connecting over and around the dog’s head and its neck to prevent the dog from
dislodging the muzzle with its paws or otherwise.
   NONRETRACTABLE LEASH. A leash that cannot be increased in length via any
mechanical device or any other means.
   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping, harboring, possessing, maintaining or
having the care or custody of an animal, except for a feral cat caretaker
temporarily harboring feral cats.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
   POLICE DOG. Any dog owned and used by the Village Police Department or by
the police department of a governmental entity in the course of its work.
   RUN LINE. A securely anchored system of tying and keeping an animal in place
with either a rope or chain sufficient to physically restrain and control the
animal.
   RUNNING AT LARGE. An animal is off the premises of its owner and not under
the control of the owner (or a person acting for the owner) by means of a leash
that is capable of physically restraining the movement of such animal.
   SECURE FENCING. Fencing that is at least six feet in height, locked
securely, has secure sides that prevent a dog from extending any portion of its
body through any part of the fence and is anchored to the ground so that a dog
cannot escape by digging under the fence.
   SECURE TEMPORARY ENCLOSURE. A secure enclosure used for the purposes of
transporting a dangerous dog and which includes a top and bottom permanently
attached to the sides except for a “door” for removal of the dog. Such
ENCLOSURE must be of such material, and such door closed and secured in such a
manner, that the dangerous dog cannot exit the enclosure on its own.
   SERVICE DOG. Any guide dog, signal dog or other dog trained to do work or
perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including,
without limitation, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting
individuals with impaired hearing to sounds, and pulling a wheelchair or
fetching dropped items for individuals with mobility impairments.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012)
§ 92.02 UNLAWFUL TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any act of cruelty to
any animal, or to knowingly cause or allow to be caused any act of cruelty to
any animal, including, without limitations:
      (1)   To willfully or maliciously shoot, poison, kill, injure, abuse,
overwork, torment or ill treat any animal;
      (2)   To fail, refuse or neglect to provide any animal in his or her
charge or custody as owner or otherwise with proper food, drink, shade, care or
shelter;
      (3)   To abandon any animal within the village limits;
      (4)   To confine an animal in a motor vehicle in such a manner that
places it in a life or health threatening situation by exposure to a prolonged
period of extreme heat or cold;
      (5)   To transport any living animal in the trunk of a vehicle;
      (6)   To transport any living animal in the open bed of a truck unless
the animal is restrained in a kennel or on a leash that will prevent the animal
from jumping or falling off the vehicle;
      (7)   To cause, instigate, stage or train any animal to fight or permit
any fight between any animal and another animal or human;
      (8)   To crop animal ears or dock animal tails, unless performed by a
licensed veterinarian;
      (9)   To give away any live domestic animal as a prize for, or as an
inducement to enter a place of amusement, or as an inducement to purchase any
product or enter into any business relationship or agreement; or
      (10)   To tether an animal, except in compliance with §
92.19.
   (B)   Any person who kills or injures a domestic animal while driving a
vehicle shall stop at the scene of the accident, and render such assistance as
practicable, and immediately report the incident to the Police Department.
   (C)   Any animal control officer, police officer or licensed veterinarian
may take into custody any animal, upon either private or public property, that
such officer reasonably determines has been the victim of cruelty, provided
that entry upon private property shall only be accomplished with the assistance
of a police officer and pursuant to a warrant. The officer or veterinarian may
inspect, care for or treat such animal or place the animal in the care of a
licensed humane society or licensed veterinarian for treatment, boarding or
other care or if a licensed veterinarian determines that the animal appears to
be diseased or disabled beyond recovery for any useful purpose, for humane
destruction.
   (D)   The owner of an animal destroyed pursuant to this section will not be
entitled to recover damages for the destruction of the animal unless the owner
proves that the destruction was unreasonable and unwarranted.
   (E)   Expenses incurred for the care, treatment or boarding of any animal
taken into custody pursuant to this section pending prosecution of the owner of
the animal shall be assessed to the owner as a cost of the case if the owner is
adjudicated liable.
   (F)   If a person is adjudicated liable for a violation of this section and
the Hearing Officer or the court having jurisdiction determines that such
animal would be subject to any cruelty in the future, such animal will not be
returned to or remain in the custody of such person, and the Hearing Officer or
the court having jurisdiction shall order the animal turned over to an animal
shelter or licensed veterinarian for adoption.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 PROCEDURES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the village from
concurrently or separately using other methods or proceedings to:
   (A)   Enforce and adjudicate this chapter or other ordinances of the
village; or
   (B)   Enforce and adjudicate any county, state or federal laws or
regulations pertaining to the regulation of animals and their owners,
including, without limitation, the institution of an action in the Circuit
Court having jurisdiction of the county, the United States District Court
having jurisdiction or an administrative proceeding before any other
administrative body.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012)
§ 92.04 DUTY TO REGISTER AND LICENSE DOGS.
   (A)   Dogs, except dangerous dogs.
      (1)   Every dog, except a dangerous dog, must be registered with, and
licensed by, the village pursuant to this chapter. Any dog purchased or
otherwise acquired after the effective date hereof must be registered with, and
licensed by, the village pursuant to this chapter not later than 30 days after
the dog is acquired. It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to keep,
harbor, possess, maintain or have the care or custody of any dog in the village
without having registered and licensed such dog pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   The application for registration and license for all dogs shall be
made to the Village Clerk, which application shall include, without limitation,
the following information:
         (a)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and of
the owner, if different from the applicant, and the address where the dog is to
be kept; and
         (b)   The breed, color, sex, name and date of rabies inoculation of
the dog to be registered.
      (3)   The Village Clerk shall register the dog in the dog register book
and issue a license certificate and metal license tag to the applicant or the
owner, if different from the applicant, upon the occurrence of all of the
following:
         (a)   Payment of the license fee required by this chapter;
         (b)   Presentation of a certificate of a licensed veterinarian that
the dog to be registered and licensed has been inoculated against rabies in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and
         (c)   Submission of a complete application pursuant to this section.
      (4)   The shape and color of the tag shall be changed every year and each
tag shall have stamped thereon the year which it will expire and a number
corresponding with the number of the license certificate. The replacement fee
for lost or destroyed license tags shall be in the amount of $1.
      (5)   Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be transferable upon
payment of a fee of $10.
      (6)   No license shall be issued pursuant to this section to any
applicant or owner who has been declared to be a problem pet owner pursuant to
this chapter.
      (7)   The license year shall begin on April 1 of each year and expire on
March 31 of the following year.
   (B)   Dangerous dogs. Every dog which has been adjudicated pursuant to
Chapter 38 of this code or by the Circuit Court of the county as a dangerous
dog must be registered with, and licensed by, the village pursuant to this
chapter and §
92.05. Any dangerous dog previously designated as such or purchased or
otherwise acquired after the effective date hereof must be registered with, and
licensed by, the village pursuant to this chapter not later than 30 days after
the dog is so designated or acquired. It shall be unlawful for any owner or
person to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the care or custody of any
dangerous dog in the village without having registered and licensed such a
dangerous dog pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   Number of dogs and/or cats. No person shall permit more than three
dogs and/or three cats to be kept in or about any single-family residence
within the village. This section shall apply only to dogs over three months of
age and cats over four months of age. When circumstances dictate removal of any
dogs or cats to assure compliance with this section, the animal control officer
or other village personnel shall apply to the Hearing Officer or to the Circuit
Court having jurisdiction seeking an order of removal.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS FOR DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   The application for registration and license for all dangerous dogs
shall be made to the Village Clerk, which application shall include, without
limitation, the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and of the
owner, if different from the applicant, and the address where the dog is to be
kept;
      (2)   The breed, color, sex, name and date of rabies inoculation of the
dog to be registered;
      (3)   Written evidence establishing that the dog has been altered;
      (4)   Written evidence establishing that the dog has been implanted with
a microchip with current information concerning the accurate name, address and
telephone number of the owner;
      (5)   A copy of the insurance policy or surety bond to establish that the
owner possesses and will continue to maintain the insurance coverage required
for dangerous dogs pursuant to this chapter;
      (6)   A certificate from the owner to be filed with the Village Clerk
affirming that the dangerous dog is or will be confined in compliance with this
chapter as applicable, and is in compliance with any and all other conditions
that may have been imposed with respect to the dangerous dog by the Hearing
Officer or the court having jurisdiction; and
      (7)   A written affidavit by the applicant, and by the owner, if
different from the applicant, stating that the applicant and the owner will
comply with all provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be the obligation of the applicant or the owner, if different
from the applicant, to notify the Village Clerk of any change to the
information required pursuant to this section at least 48 hours before the
change occurs.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall promptly review the application for
registration and license upon receipt of a completed application and upon
payment of the license fee by the applicant. The Village Clerk shall grant or
deny the license application within 30 days from the date the completed
application and license fee was filed with the Village Clerk.
   (D)   The Village Clerk shall register the dog in the dog register book and
issue a license certificate and metal license tag to the applicant or the
owner, if different from the applicant, upon the occurrence of all of the
following:
      (1)   Payment of the license fee required by this chapter;
      (2)   Presentation of a certificate of a licensed veterinarian that the
dog to be registered and licensed has been inoculated against rabies in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and
      (3)   Submission of a complete application pursuant to division (A)
above.
   (E)   The shape and color of the tag shall be changed every year and each
tag shall have stamped thereon the year which it will expire and a number
corresponding with the number of the license certificate. The village shall
issue tags of a different shape and color for licenses for dangerous dogs. The
replacement fee for lost or destroyed license tags shall be in the amount of
$1.
   (F)   Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall not be transferable.
   (G)   No license shall be issued pursuant to this section to any applicant
or owner who has been declared to be a problem pet owner pursuant to this
chapter.
   (H)   The license year shall begin on April 1 of each year and expire on
March 31 of the following year. The owner shall file with the Village Clerk
within 30 days prior to the issuance of the license a certificate of a licensed
veterinarian that the dog continues to have been inoculated against rabies in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and a copy of the insurance
policy or surety bond to establish that the owner continues to possess and will
continue to maintain the insurance coverage required for dangerous dogs
pursuant to this chapter, as applicable.
   (I)   Any license issued under this section may be revoked by the Hearing
Officer or the court having jurisdiction after notice and hearing for fraud,
misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for a
license, for violation of the provisions of this chapter, or for violation of
any other applicable requirements of law.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 CATS.
   (A)   Every cat, except a feral cat, that is more than four months of age
must be registered with, and licensed by, the village pursuant to this chapter.
Any cat purchased or otherwise acquired after the effective date hereof must be
registered with, and licensed by, the village pursuant to this chapter not
later than 30 days after the cat is acquired. It shall be unlawful for any
owner or person to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the care or custody
of any cat, except a feral cat, in the village without having registered and
licensed such cat pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   The application for registration and license shall be made to the
Village Clerk, which application shall include, without limitation, the
following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant and of the
owner, if different from the applicant, and the address where the cat is to be
kept; and
      (2)   The breed, color, sex, name and date of rabies inoculation of the
cat to be registered.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall register the cat in the cat register book and
issue a license certificate and metal license tag to the applicant or the
owner, if different from the applicant, upon the occurrence of all of the
following:
      (1)   Payment of the license fee required by this chapter;
      (2)   Presentation of a certificate of a licensed veterinarian that the
cat to be registered and licensed has been inoculated against rabies in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and
      (3)   Submission of a complete application pursuant to this section.
   (D)   The shape and color of the tag shall be changed every year and each
tag shall have stamped thereon the year which it will expire and a number
corresponding with the number of the license certificate. The replacement fee
for lost or destroyed license tags shall be in the amount of $1.
   (E)   Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be transferable upon
payment of a fee of $10.
   (F)   No license shall be issued pursuant to this section to any applicant
or owner who has been adjudicated to be a problem pet owner pursuant to this
chapter.
   (G)   The license year shall begin on April 1 of each year and expire on
March 31 of the following year.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012)
§ 92.07 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The license fee for a dog not a dangerous dog shall be in the amount
of $10 or when a dog is newly acquired after six months of the license year has
expired, the license fee shall be $5.
   (B)   The license fee for a dangerous dog shall be in the amount of $25.
   (C)   The license fee for a cat shall be in the amount of $10 or when a cat
is newly acquired after six months of the license year has expired, the license
fee shall be $5.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012)
§ 92.08 INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES.
   (A)   Every dog that is more than six months of age or cat that is more than
four months of age must be currently inoculated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian. The type and brand of the antirabic vaccine used and the method
of inoculation must be recognized and approved by the Department of Agriculture
of the state and the United States Department of Agriculture. The vaccine may
be administered annually, or, if the dog or cat is over 12 months of age at the
time of inoculation, the interval between inoculations may be extended for
three years.
   (B)   Any dog or cat that is found not to be currently inoculated against
rabies after the dog or cat has been found in violation of division (A) above
by the Hearing Officer or the court having jurisdiction, is declared hereby to
be a public nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded by any police officer
or the animal control officer.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 COLLAR AND TAG.
   The owner of each dog of more than six months of age and each cat of more
than four months of age that is housed within the corporate limits of the
village must provide such dog or cat with a sturdy collar to which the rabies
inoculation tag issued by the county and village license tag shall be securely
fastened. It shall be the owner’s duty to make certain that the collar and tags
are worn by the dog or cat at all times when off of the owner’s premises. The
owner of each dangerous dog that is housed within the corporate limits of the
village must provide such dog with a sturdy collar to which the rabies
inoculation tag issued by the county and to which the license tag issued by the
village shall be securely fastened. It shall be the owner’s duty to make
certain that the collar and tags are worn by the dangerous dog at all times.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012)
§ 92.10 UNAUTHORIZED REMOVAL OF TAGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than a police officer or the
animal control officer to remove a rabies inoculation tag or license tag from
any dog or cat without the permission of the owner of the dog or the owner’s
agent.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.11 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   Running at large.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or any person in control of any
dog or cat to permit, or cause to be permitted, his or her dog or cat to run at
large in the village at any time, or to fail to use reasonable care in
restraining any dog or cat that he or she keeps, harbors or otherwise
maintains, or that is under his or her control, from running at large.
      (2)   Any dog or cat found running at large is declared hereby to be a
public nuisance and may be apprehended and impounded by any police officer or
the animal control officer.
      (3)   A dog found by the Hearing Officer or the court having jurisdiction
to be in violation of division (A)(1) above must be microchipped at the owner’s
expense, if not already microchipped, within 30 days after being reclaimed.
      (4)   A dog found by the Hearing Officer or the court having jurisdiction
to be in violation of division (A)(1) above a second time must be altered at
the owner’s expense, if not already altered, within 30 days after being
reclaimed.
   (B)   Biting and attacking.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or any other person in control of
any domestic animal to allow the domestic animal to bite or attack any other
domestic animal or person in the village. If a person is bitten by a domestic
animal, the incident shall be reported to the Police Department immediately.
All reports of bites or attacks shall be investigated by the Police Department
in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   Any domestic animal that bites or attacks any other domestic animal
or person in the village after the domestic animal has been found in violation
of division (B)(1) above by the Hearing Officer or the court having
jurisdiction, is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and may be apprehended
and impounded at any time by a police officer or the animal control officer.
The impoundment may, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, continue through
any subsequent investigation by the Police Department and until any subsequent
determination of the Hearing Officer or the court having jurisdiction.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B)(1) above, service
dogs and police dogs shall not be declared public nuisances pursuant to
division (B)(2) above if the behavior that would provide the basis for a
declaration of public nuisance occurred while the dog was performing its duties
as expected.
   (C)   Disturbing peace or quiet.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess or harbor
any animal that, by habitual and continuous barking, howling, yelping, bawling
or other loud noise, annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
health, peace, repose and/or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensibilities within the corporate limits of the village.
      (2)   Any dog that subsequently disturbs the peace or quiet after the dog
has been found in violation of division (C)(1) above by the Hearing Officer or
the court having jurisdiction, is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and
may be apprehended and impounded at any time by a police officer or the animal
control officer.
      (3)   Upon finding a violation of division (C)(1) above, the Hearing
Officer or court having jurisdiction may, in addition to the payment of the
penalties provided under this chapter, order the person to take sufficient
action to immediately abate the nuisance.
   (D)   Dangerous behavior.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow a dog to behave in a
dangerous manner.
      (2)   For purposes of this chapter, a dog behaves in a dangerous manner
when the dog:
         (a)   Unprovoked bites or injures a person or a domestic animal on
public or private property;
         (b)   Unprovoked, chases or approaches a person or a domestic animal
upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or private property in a menacing
fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
         (c)   Otherwise behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious, unjustified and imminent threat of physical injury or
death to a person or a domestic animal.
      (3)   However, a dog shall not be considered to behave in a dangerous
manner when the behavior occurred because:
         (a)   The threatened or injured person was committing or attempting to
commit a violent crime against the owner or custodian of the dog or member of
its household;
         (b)   The threatened or injured person was committing or attempting to
commit a crime against the property of the owner or custodian of the dog,
including, without limitation, burglary, arson or criminal trespass;
         (c)   The threatened or injured person was tormenting, abusing,
assaulting or physically threatening the dog or its offspring;
         (d)   The threatened or injured domestic animal was attacking or
threatening to attack the dog or its offspring;
         (e)   The dog was responding to inflicted pain or injury;
         (f)   The dog was protecting itself or its offspring; or
         (g)   The dog is a service dog or a police dog and was performing its
duties as expected.
   (E)   Failure to remove excrement.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to have in his or her
immediate possession some means for the removal of animal excrement when
causing a dog or other animal to be on the public right-of-way, on any property
under the ownership or control of the village, or on any private property
without the express consent of the owner or lawful occupant of the property.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any reason to fail to remove any excrement
of a dog or other animal under that person’s control from the public right of
way, from any property under the ownership or control of the village, or from
any private property without the express consent of the owner or lawful
occupant of the property.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.12 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Designation of dangerous dogs. A dog shall be designated as a
dangerous dog when the Hearing Officer or a court having jurisdiction, at the
request of the Police Department, has conducted an evidentiary hearing, heard
and considered evidence pertaining to the temperament of the dog, and has
entered an order determining that the dog has behaved in the manner described
in §
92.11(D) and designating the dog as a dangerous dog. The Hearing Officer or the
court having jurisdiction, upon designating a dog as a dangerous dog, shall
enter a written order requiring that, in addition to the payment of the
penalties assessed, the owner shall comply with the registration and license
requirements in §
92.05 and shall comply with each and all of the restrictions set forth in
division (B) below.
   (B)   Restrictions on dangerous dogs. It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor,
possess, maintain or have the care or custody of a dangerous dog within the
village except upon compliance with each and all of the following restrictions
at the expense of the owner:
      (1)   Confinement. The dangerous dog must be confined as follows:
         (a)   A dangerous dog on private premises must be kept indoors or
outdoors either:
            1.   Within an enclosure;
            2.   Within a fully fenced yard enclosed on all sides by fencing
that is at least six feet in height and locks securely; or
            3.   The dangerous dog is tethered in compliance with the
requirements set forth in §
92.19 and the dangerous dog is supervised by an adult at least 18 years of age
and the dog is securely muzzled with a muzzle in a manner that will prevent it
from biting any person or animal, but that will not injure the dog or interfere
with its vision or respiration.
         (b)   1.   A dangerous dog on public premises must be directly
controlled and supervised by an adult at least 18 years of age.
            2.   Such control and supervision shall require, at a minimum that
the dog be:
               a.   Restrained on a nonretractable leash no longer than six
feet; and
               b.   Securely muzzled with a muzzle in a manner that will
prevent it from biting any person or animal, but that will not injure the dog
or interfere with its vision or respiration.
      (2)   Evaluation and training. The owner of a dangerous dog must
complete, no later than 180 days after the designation of the dog as a
dangerous dog, both:
         (a)   An evaluation of the dangerous dog by a certified applied
behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist or another recognized
expert in the field of dog behavior; and
         (b)   Obedience training or other training or treatment of the
dangerous dog as deemed appropriate by the behaviorist or expert.
      (3)   Altering and microchipping. A dangerous dog must be altered and
microchipped at the owner’s expense, if not already altered and microchipped,
within 14 days after the designation of the dog as a dangerous dog.
      (4)   Insurance coverage. Within 14 days after the designation of a dog
as a dangerous dog, the owner of the dangerous dog must obtain and maintain and
provide the village with satisfactory evidence of liability insurance coverage
in the amount of at least $100,000, which coverage includes, without
limitation, coverage for animal bites. In lieu of liability insurance, the
owner of a dangerous dog may obtain a surety bond in the value of at least
$100,000.
      (5)   Notice of designation. No owner shall sell, transfer or otherwise
place a dangerous dog in the permanent possession of any other person,
including, without limitation, any animal shelter, without first notifying that
person that the dog has been designated a dangerous dog pursuant to this
chapter and notifying the jurisdiction to which the dog will be transferred of
the dog’s designation as a dangerous dog pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   Failure to comply. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep,
harbor, possess, maintain or have the care or custody of a dangerous dog within
the corporate limits of the village unless the dog is kept and maintained in
compliance with this chapter and with the order entered by the Hearing Officer
or the court having jurisdiction. Upon finding that a dangerous dog has not
been so kept or maintained, the Hearing Officer or court having jurisdiction
may, in addition to requiring the payment of penalties as assessed, order that
the license issued for the dangerous dog pursuant to §
92.04 be revoked, that the dangerous dog be altered and microchipped at the
owner’s expense, if not already altered and microchipped, and be permanently
removed from the corporate limits of the village within 14 days, with the owner
of the dangerous dog being responsible for all fees and costs incurred or
charged by the village or the animal control facility utilized by the village
in caring for the dangerous dog and the altering and microchipping prior to its
removal from the corporate limits.
   (D)   Unlawful return of dangerous dog to the village. It shall be unlawful
for any person to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the care or custody
of a dangerous dog within the corporate limits of the village after such a
dangerous dog has been ordered permanently removed from the corporate limits of
the village. Upon finding that a dangerous dog has been kept, maintained or
returned to the corporate limits of the village after having been ordered
permanently removed from the corporate limits of the village, the Hearing
Officer or court having jurisdiction may, in addition to requiring the payment
of penalties provided in this chapter order that the dangerous dog be humanely
destroyed.
   (E)   Public nuisance. Any dangerous dog that is not kept and maintained in
accordance with the order entered by the Hearing Officer or the court having
jurisdiction is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and may be apprehended
and impounded upon the order of the animal control officer or Chief of Police.
The impoundment may, at the discretion of the Chief of Police, continue through
any subsequent investigation of the Police Department and any subsequent
determination of the Hearing Officer or the court having jurisdiction.
   (F)   Dogs designated as dangerous in other jurisdictions. Any person
desiring to bring a dog to live in the village that has been previously
declared within another jurisdiction to have behaved in a dangerous manner or a
similar manner, or has been designated within another jurisdiction as a
dangerous dog or any similar designation, must notify the Police Department
prior to moving the dog into the village of such declaration or designation.
Upon moving the dog into the village, the dog will be considered as a dangerous
dog pursuant to this chapter, and the owner shall comply with the registration
and license requirements in §
92.04 of this chapter and shall comply at all times with each and every other
requirement and restriction established in this chapter pertaining to dangerous
dogs, including, without limitation, the restrictions set forth in division (B)
above.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.13 QUARANTINE OF BITING ANIMALS.
   (A)   In the event the owner of any animal has notice that his or her animal
has bitten any person, it shall be unlawful for the owner to kill such animal,
sell or give the animal away, or permit or allow the animal to be taken beyond
the corporate limits of the village except to a licensed veterinary hospital.
It shall be the duty of the owner to immediately report the incident to the
Police Department and to immediately place the animal in a licensed veterinary
hospital where the animal shall be quarantined for a period of at least ten
days; or, upon the request of any police officer or the animal control officer,
to deliver the animal to him or her for such placement. The owner shall
immediately furnish to the Police Department the name and location of the
hospital and a certificate of a licensed veterinarian stating whether or not
the animal shows signs of rabies. At the expiration of the quarantine period
and prior to the release of the animal, the owner shall furnish the Police
Department with a certificate of a licensed veterinarian stating that the
animal does not have rabies. All costs of maintaining any such animal in a
veterinary hospital shall be the obligation and responsibility of its owner and
shall be paid by said owner.
   (B)   In the event any animal that has bitten any person is slain or dies
within ten days from the time of the bite, it shall be the duty of the person
slaying the animal, or having knowledge of its death, and of the owner of the
animal to notify the Police Department and immediately deliver or cause the
delivery of the intact animal to the Police Department.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above, the
owner of any animal that has bitten any person may, in lieu of the delivery and
the quarantine of the animal as provided in division (A) above:
      (1)   Present evidence to the animal control officer or the Chief of
Police that the animal has been inoculated against rabies more than 30 days but
less than one year prior to the biting, if a one year immunity vaccine has been
used, or more than 30 days but less than three years prior to the biting if a
three year vaccine has been used; and
      (2)   Have the animal examined by a rabies inspector or a licensed
veterinarian who shall make an examination of the animal to determine if the
animal exhibits any sign of rabies, and who shall thereafter:
         (a)   Take the animal into custody for a period of ten days if such
examination discloses any sign or symptoms of rabies and notify the Police
Department thereof;
         (b)   In the event such examination discloses that no sign or symptoms
of rabies are present, order the animal confined in the home of the owner, or
upon the owner’s premises, for a period of ten days in an enclosure adequate to
ensure, in the opinion of the animal control officer, that the animal will not
be in contact with other animals or persons; or
         (c)   Have such animal examined for rabies by a licensed veterinarian
on the first, fifth and tenth days of such confinement, which veterinarian
shall, within 24 hours of each such examination, report in writing the results
of the examination to the animal control officer or the Chief of Police. It
shall be the duty of the owner to ensure that the reports required by this
division (C)(2)(c) are made.
      (3)   No animal displaying any signs or symptoms of rabies, as determined
by the rabies inspector or licensed veterinarian who examines the animal
pursuant to division (C)(2) above, shall be released from any confinement
without the prior approval of the animal control officer or the Chief of
Police.
      (4)   In the event an examination of any animal discloses signs or
symptoms of rabies, the animal shall be delivered to a licensed veterinarian
for continued observation and/or testing.
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the owner to provide, upon request by the
examining veterinarian, animal control officer or a police officer, a dated
certificate or certificates of vaccination, signed by a licensed veterinarian.
The certificates shall include a description of the animal sufficient for
purposes of identification.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.14 FEMALE DOGS IN HEAT.
   Any female dog in heat must be confined either:
   (A)   If outdoors, in an enclosure or on a leash no more than six feet in
length that is under the direct control and supervision of the owner; or
   (B)   If indoors, in a kennel, veterinary hospital or in an enclosed
building on the owner’s property.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.15 RABID DOGS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog suffering from rabies to
place it immediately in a veterinary hospital, or, upon demand, to surrender
the dog to a police officer or the animal control officer. Any dog suffering
from rabies is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and, if the dog cannot
be safely apprehended and impounded, the dog may be slain by a police officer
or the animal control officer.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of any person who discovers that any dog is
suffering from rabies, or that any dog or other animal has been bitten by a dog
or other animal suffering with rabies, to report such fact immediately to the
animal control officer or the Chief of Police. The report shall include the
name, if known, and the place of residence of the owner of the dog or other
animal, the place where the animal can be found, and the license number of any
such dog, if known. Any such dog or other animal shall be immediately confined
in a veterinary hospital or impounded and securely kept until it can be
determined whether the dog or other animal is suffering from rabies.
   (C)   Whenever the Village President, by proclamation, shall declare that
danger from rabies is great, it shall be unlawful to permit or allow any dog
upon the public streets, alleys or other public place unless the dog is
securely muzzled with a muzzle.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.16 REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED DOGS OR CATS.
   (A)   When dogs or cats are apprehended and impounded they shall be scanned
for the presence of a microchip by the animal control facility used by the
village. The animal control facility utilized by the village shall make every
reasonable attempt to contact the owner as soon as possible. The animal control
facility shall give notice of not less than seven business days to the owner
prior to disposal of the animal. Such notice shall be mailed to the last known
address of the owner. Testimony of the personnel of the animal control facility
who mails such notice, or the animal control officer, shall be evidence of the
receipt of such notice by the owner of the animal.
   (B)   Except as provided in §§
92.11 and
92.12, in case the owner of any impounded dog or cat desires to make redemption
thereof, he or she may do so by doing the following:
      (1)   Presenting proof of current rabies inoculation and license
registration, if applicable;
      (2)   Paying for the rabies inoculation of the dog or cat and license
registration, if applicable;
      (3)   Paying the animal control facility for the board of the dog or cat
for the period it was impounded;
      (4)   Paying for microchipping if not already done; and
      (5)   Paying for altering if required by this chapter.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012)
§ 92.17 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED DOGS AND CATS.
   When not redeemed by the owner, agent or caretaker, a dog or cat must be
scanned for a microchip. If a microchip is present, the registered owner must
be notified. After contact has been made or attempted and the dog or cat has
not been redeemed, except as otherwise provided in this chapter with respect to
dangerous dogs, dogs or cats deemed adoptable by the animal control facility
utilized by the village shall be offered for adoption by the animal control
facility utilized by the village, or made available to a licensed humane
society or rescue group. If no placement is available, it shall be humanely
destroyed. The animal control facility utilized by the village shall not adopt
or release any dog or cat to anyone other than the owner unless the animal has
been altered and microchipped. The animal control facility utilized by the
village shall not release dogs or cats to an individual representing a rescue
group, unless the group has been licensed or has a foster care permit issued by
the Illinois Department of Agriculture or is a representative of a not for
profit out of state organization.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012)
§ 92.18 ANIMAL FIGHTING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall own, keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the care or
custody of any dog or other animal or be in any way connected with the
management or ownership of any place kept or used for the purpose of causing,
instigating or staging the fighting or baiting of any dogs or other animals, or
for the purpose of training dogs or other animals for such fighting or baiting,
or to permit such a place to be kept or used on premises owned or controlled by
such person.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.19 TETHERING.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, it shall be
unlawful for any person to tether any animal to a fixed object, except upon the
satisfaction of each of the following conditions:
   (A)   The chain, rope, leash, run line or other device used to tether the
animal shall be placed or attached so as to prevent the animal from becoming
entangled with a structure, tree, plant, shrubbery, another animal or any other
object;
   (B)   The chain, rope, leash, run line or other device used to tether the
animal shall be of sufficient length, in proportion to the size of the animal,
to allow the animal to obtain proper exercise, convenient access to food and
water and protection from direct sunlight or extreme weather conditions;
   (C)   The chain, rope, leash, run line or other device used to tether the
animal does not weigh more than one-eighth the amount of the animal’s weight
and is not made from a logging chain or a tow chain;
   (D)   The animal is not attached to the chain, rope, leash, run line or
other device by any collar or means of restraint that may injure the animal or
interfere with its vision or respiration, including, without limitation, any
type of “choke” collar that constricts around the animal’s neck when pulled;
   (E)   The chain, rope, leash, run line or other device, and the collar
attached thereto used to tether the animal shall be of such material and shall
be attached and affixed in such a manner sufficient to physically restrain and
control the animal to be tethered;
   (F)   If the animal to be tethered has been designated as a dangerous dog,
the dog also must be supervised by an adult at least 18 years of age and
securely muzzled with a muzzle at all times that it is tethered in a manner
that will prevent it from biting any person or animal, but that will not injure
the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration;
   (G)   The animal is not tethered in a manner that either:
      (1)   Permits the animal to trespass upon public property, or upon
private property without the consent of the property owner; or
      (2)   Threatens the health, safety or welfare of any person or animal.
   (H)   The animal is not tethered and unsupervised for more than one hour
during any 24-hour period;
   (I)   The animal is not tethered and unsupervised between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;
   (J)   The animal is not tethered and unsupervised within 500 feet of any
school at any time;
   (K)   The animal is not tethered on public property at any time;
   (L)   The animal is not tethered on private property without the prior
consent of the property owner; and
   (M)   The animal is not tethered and unsupervised during extreme
temperatures, including, without limitation, during heat advisories or when the
temperature is below 32°F.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.20 PROBLEM PET OWNERS.
   (A)   Problem pet ownership. For purposes of this section, a PROBLEM PET
OWNER is a person who has been determined by the Hearing Officer or the court
having jurisdiction to have committed:
      (1)   Two or more separate and unrelated violations of §§
92.02,
92.12(B),
92.18 or
92.19 in one 36-month period; or
      (2)   Two or more separate and unrelated violations of §§
92.02,
92.12(B) or
92.18 or
92.19 at any time after having a dog owned by him or her designated as a
dangerous dog.
   (B)   Designation of problem pet owner. A person shall be designated as a
problem pet owner when the Hearing Officer or the court having jurisdiction, at
the request of the Police Department, has conducted an evidentiary hearing,
heard and considered evidence pertaining to past violations of this chapter by
the person, and entered an order determining that the person has committed the
violations described in division (A) above and designating the person as a
problem pet owner.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. A person whom the Police Department requests be
designated as a problem pet owner shall be provided with written notice of a
hearing before the Hearing Officer or the court having jurisdiction, served by
certified and regular mail to the person’s last known address, containing the
following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the person who is the subject of the
hearing;
      (2)   The names, descriptions and license numbers of any animals owned by
or licensed to the person;
      (3)   Brief descriptions of the violations that form the basis of the
request;
      (4)   Notification of the date, time and location of the hearing before
the Hearing Officer or the court having jurisdiction; and
      (5)   A summary of the impact of designation as a problem pet owner, as
set forth in this section.
   (D)   Prehearing confinement of animals. Upon service of notice pursuant to
division (C) above, all of the animals owned by a person whom the Police
Department seeks to be declared to be a problem pet owner may be impounded if
the Chief of Police or his or her designee determines that impoundment is in
the interests of public safety or the health and welfare of the animals. Upon
such a determination by the Chief of Police or his or her designee, an animal
control officer or police officer may require that all of the animals be held
in an animal shelter or a secure veterinary hospital until a hearing is held.
If all of the animals are not impounded prior to the hearing, the owner shall
comply with any and all requirements imposed by the Chief of Police, the animal
control officer or their designee for the confinement and care of the animals
pending the hearing. Any failure to comply with such requirement is a violation
of this division (D), and each day of noncompliance will constitute a separate
violation.
   (E)   Bar on licensing or owning animals. If, after conducting a hearing,
the Hearing Officer or the court having jurisdiction determines that a person
should be declared a problem pet owner, all animal licenses held by that person
will be immediately revoked, and it shall be unlawful for that person to
license or own any animal in the village for a period of 24 months from the
date of the entry of that determination. Further, upon the determination by the
Hearing Officer or the court having jurisdiction that a person is a problem pet
owner, the problem pet owner must immediately surrender all animals in his or
her possession to the Chief of Police, the animal control officer or their
designee.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.21 HINDERING ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful to hinder or molest any police officer, the animal
control officer or any other designated enforcement official engaged in the
enforcement of this chapter. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person to
provide any false or misleading information with respect to the registration
and licensing of dangerous dogs. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person
to violate any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.22 ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   Animals shall not be permitted or allowed to enter upon any school premises,
public playground, public swimming pool, public hall or building, food service
establishment or any sidewalk or path extending through any of the above
described areas. The provisions of this section shall not apply to police dogs
or service dogs.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.23 ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS.
   The Chief of Police, police officers, the animal control officer and such
other persons as may be designated by the Chief of Police or the Village
Administrator are authorized and directed hereby to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012)
§ 92.24 KEEPING ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep or maintain any pen, stable
or place in which animals are housed, or kept in a condition that is
unreasonably offensive to persons residing in the vicinity of the same, due to
associated debris or odors, or to persons passing along any street or alley
near the same, or that constitutes a hazard to the health of persons residing
nearby.
   (B)   Any pen, stable or place in which animals are housed or kept that the
owner has been found in violation of division (A) above by the Hearing Officer
or the court having jurisdiction, is declared hereby to be a public nuisance.
   (C)   It is unlawful to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the care or
custody in the village any animal which is ferare naturae in the eyes of the
law. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter with respect
to dangerous dogs, it is unlawful to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have
the care or custody of any animal in the village which would be dangerous to
the public as a result of its propensity to injure persons. Any animal
prohibited to be kept, harbored, possessed or maintained in the village
pursuant to this section is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and may be
apprehended and impounded at any time by a police officer or the animal control
officer. The impoundment may, at the discretion of the Chief of Police,
continue through any subsequent investigation by the Police Department and
until any subsequent determination of the Hearing Officer or the court having
jurisdiction. In addition to the other penalties and remedies provided in this
chapter, any such animal shall be ordered permanently removed from the village
or humanely destroyed. The members of the Police Department, or any other
person in the village, are authorized to kill any dangerous animals of any kind
when it becomes necessary for the protection of any person or property.
   (D)   (1)   It is unlawful to keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the
care or custody in the village of:
         (a)   Any snake, reptile or lizard that is physically capable of
injuring any person, regardless of age, by bite, poison, constriction or other
means;
         (b)   Any lion, tiger, cougar, jaguar, panther, bobcat, mountain lion,
lynx, ocelot, leopard, any hybrid thereof or any other similar feline animal;
         (c)   Any wolf, coyote, jackal, fox, wild dog or hybrid thereof;
         (d)   Any bear or bison;
         (e)   Any rodent weighing more than one pound, with the exception of
guinea pigs;
         (f)   Any noncanine animal not native to the North American continent
which when full grown normally attains a weight in excess of 200 pounds; and
         (g)   Any monkey, gorilla, chimpanzee or other similar apelike
primate.
      (2)   Any animal, snake, reptile, rodent or other creature prohibited to
be kept, harbored, possessed or maintained in the village pursuant to this
section is declared hereby to be a public nuisance and may be apprehended and
impounded at any time by a police officer or the animal control officer. If
such animal cannot be relocated safely to an entity licensed to handle the
dangerous animal in the sole discretion of the Chief of Police, the Chief of
Police may order the humane destruction of such animal. This section shall not
apply to properly zoned and constructed zoos, federally licensed exhibits,
circuses, animal refuges or licensed scientific or research laboratories.
   (E)   It is unlawful to raise, keep, harbor, possess, maintain or have the
care or custody of in the village any animal commonly considered a farm animal
including, but not limited to, cows, horses, pigs or chickens.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.25 DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall without the consent of the owner of the property
concerned, permit or allow any dog or cat in his or her custody or control to
enter upon the premises of another within the village, or permit or allow any
dog or cat in his or her custody to injure or carry away any vegetable, plant,
fruit, refuse, shrub, tree, flower or any other thing which may be on said
premises or which may be planted there.
   (B)   The person having custody of such dog or cat shall be liable for
damage incurred.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.26 KENNELS.
   (A)   The owner of six or more dogs at least two months old, whether for
pleasure, profit, breeding or exhibiting, shall be deemed the operator of a dog
kennel.
   (B)   The application for a kennel license shall state the name and address
of the owner of the kennel, the location of the kennel, and the number of dogs
proposed to be kept. No kennel shall be established within 50 feet of any
dwelling house unless both the owner and lessee of such dwelling house consent
in advance in writing to the same.
   (C)   The owner of a dog kennel may, at his or her option, in lieu of an
individual license for each dog, procure a kennel license to expire on March 31
next from the Village Clerk on application and payment of a fee of $25. Such
kennel license shall obviate the necessity of procuring individual licenses for
said dogs, provided that any such dogs permitted off the owner’s premises must
be licensed individually, and provided further that the vaccination provisions
of this chapter shall also apply to kennel dogs.
   (D)   The kennel license is not transferable except on application by both
the old and the new owner, and payment of the sum of $2 as a transfer fee to
the Village Clerk.
   (E)   Each license shall be posted conspicuously on the premises where the
kennel is located.
   (F)   With each kennel license the Village Clerk shall issue an equal number
of tags or checks to the number of dogs authorized to be kept in the kennel,
such tags bearing the number of the kennel license. Each dog shall wear said
tag in lieu of an individual license tag.
   (G)   Dog kennels shall be kept at all times in a clean and sanitary
condition, and dogs shall be reasonably restrained from annoying the
neighborhood or the general public by loud, frequent or habitual barking,
yelping or howling.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with
any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of an
offense. Any person convicted of an offense for violating §§
92.02,
92.04(B),
92.05,
92.11(B),
92.12,
92.18 or
92.20, in addition to other legal and equitable remedies available to the
village, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $750.
Any person convicted of an offense for violations of other sections of this
chapter not listed above shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $750.
   (B)   Any person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day during any portion of which any violation or provision of this chapter is
committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and such person shall be
punished accordingly.
   (C)   Violation notices for violations of this chapter shall be issued,
served and resolved in accordance with the administrative adjudication of code
violations system established pursuant to this code, or if brought before a
court having jurisdiction of competent jurisdiction, pursuant to the Illinois
Code of Civil Procedure, Illinois Supreme Court having jurisdiction rules, and
such other rules that might apply to such court having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 4154, passed 4-30-2012)
CHAPTER 93: CEMETERIES
Section
   
93.01   Compliance with state law required
§ 93.01 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW REQUIRED.
   The establishment, operation or maintenance of cemeteries or places of
burial within the corporate limits of the municipality, or within one mile of
the municipality, shall be in accordance with applicable state law.
(2000 Code, § 93.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Cemetery Care Act, see 760 ILCS 100/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 94: FAIR HOUSING
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Declaration of policy
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Exemptions
   
94.04   Discrimination prohibited
   
94.05   Exceptions to report requirements
   
94.06   Application of affirmative marketing plans
   
94.07   Affirmative marketing plans
   
94.08   Commission approval
   
94.09   Duration of plan
   
94.10   Reports
   
94.11   Evaluation and amendment of plan
   
94.12   Limitations to plan
Administration and Enforcement
   
94.25   Commission on Housing and Human Relations
   
94.26   Commission to administer and adjudicate alleged violations
   
94.27   Fair Housing Administrator
   
94.28   Complaints
   
94.29   Notice
   
94.30   Investigation
   
94.31   Conciliation
   
94.32   Injunctive relief
   
94.33   Hearings by Commission
   
94.34   Hearing decisions
   
94.35   Remedial actions
   
94.36   Judicial review
   
94.37   Judicial relief
   
94.38   Additional remedies
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   It is declared to be the policy of the village to provide, within
constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the village, to assure
that all persons have full and equal opportunity to consider all available
housing, and to obtain fair and adequate housing for themselves and their
families, without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental status,
sexual orientation, source of income (with the exclusion of Section 8),
military discharge status, gender identity, retaliation, housing status,
aiding/abetting and willful interference, and to promote long-term racial
diversity and integration.
   (B)   It is further declared to be the policy of the village to take all
actions necessary and proper to achieve the policies expressed in division (A)
of this section; in the village’s policy statement on racial diversity, Res.
228; and the village’s resolution urging a unitary housing market and
affirmative marketing plan, Res. 256-11-80.
(2000 Code, § 94.01) (Ord. 4027, passed 12-7-2009)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The Commission of Housing and Human Relations established by
Ord. 983, as amended.
   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION. To treat any person in a particular manner
solely or in part because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
ancestry, age, marital status, disability, parental status, sexual orientation,
source of income (with the exclusion of Section 8), military discharge status,
gender identity, retaliation, housing status, aiding/abetting and willful
interference.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more persons,
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or rental and on which any
building, structure or portion thereof may be constructed or located.
   LENDING INSTITUTION. Any bank, savings and loan association, insurance
company or other organization or person regularly engaged in the business of
lending money, guaranteeing loans for profit, or otherwise providing financial
assistance or insurance in connection with the purchase, sale or rental of
dwellings.
   LESSOR. Any person who rents dwellings to other persons.
   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any building or structure, or group of
buildings or structures, which contain four or more dwellings under common
management or ownership.
   OWNER. Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in, a dwelling, or who holds legal or equitable title to,
or shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any organization or person
which owns a dwelling; and his or her agents.
   PERSON. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations,
labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock
companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers or fiduciaries.
   PURCHASE. To obtain a dwelling through a sale.
   RENT or RENTAL. To lease, sublease, assign, grant or obtain the right to
occupy a dwelling not owned by the occupant in return for consideration, or a
contract or option to do any of the foregoing.
   SALE or SELL. To convey, exchange, transfer or assign legal or equitable
title to, or a beneficial interest in, a dwelling in return for consideration,
or a contract or option to do any of the foregoing.
(2000 Code, § 94.02) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984; Ord. 1545, passed 12-20-1993;
Ord. 4027, passed 12-7-2009)
§ 94.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to:
   (A)   The rental of a room or rooms in an owner-occupied single-family
dwelling;
   (B)   A religious organization, or any non-profit organization operated,
supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization,
with respect to its limitation of the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings
which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the
same religion, or with respect to preference given to such persons, unless
membership in the religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex or
national origin; or
   (C)   A private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident
to its primary purpose provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other
than a commercial purpose, with respect to its limitation of the rental or
occupancy of the lodgings to its members and their guests, or with respect to
preference given to such persons.
(2000 Code, § 94.03) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.04 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   In order to effectuate the policies set forth in §
94.01, as far as legislatively possible, it is declared to be a discriminatory
act, an unfair housing practice, and unlawful for any lending institution or
other person to:
      (1)   Discriminate against any person in the price, terms, conditions or
privileges relating to the sale or rental of any dwelling, or in the provision
of facilities, repairs, improvements or services in connection with any
dwelling;
      (2)   Discriminate against any person by refusing to sell or rent, by
refusing to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or by withdrawing from the
market or otherwise making unavailable or denying, any dwelling;
      (3)   Discriminate against any person by making false representations, or
by withholding material information, constructively or otherwise, with respect
to the inspection, sale or rental of any dwelling, including, but not limited
to, representing to any person that any dwelling is not available for
inspection, sale or rental when the dwelling is in fact available;
      (4)   Make, publish, print, circulate, issue or display or cause to be
made, published, printed, circulated, issued or displayed, any communication,
notice, advertisement, sign, symbol, listing or other writing of any kind, in
connection with the sale or rental of any dwelling, or the financing thereof,
that indicates or expresses any preference, limitation, reliance or
discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex or national origin, or an
intention to make any preference, limitation, reliance or discrimination;
      (5)   Enter into any listing agreement which sanctions discrimination
against any person;
      (6)   Discriminate against any person by denying access to, membership or
participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate agents’ organization
or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling
or renting dwellings; or discriminate against any person in the terms or
conditions of such access, membership or participation;
      (7)   Steer any person. For the purpose of this section, STEERING shall
mean the use of any word, phrase or action in rendering real estate agent
services relating to the prospective sale or rental of a dwelling, which
influences or is intended to influence the choice of any person in favor of any
area because it is occupied, in whole or in part, by individuals of such
person’s own race or ethnic origin, or against any area because it is occupied,
in whole or in part, by individuals of a race or ethnic origin different from
such person;
      (8)   For profit, induce or attempt to induce the sale, rental or listing
for sale or rental of any dwelling by representations regarding the presence
in, proximity to, or entry or prospective entry into, the block, neighborhood
or area of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex or
national origin;
      (9)   Coerce, intimidate, threaten, cause retaliation against or
interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of or on account of his
or her having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his or her having aided or
encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted
or protected by this chapter;
      (10)   Aid, abet, compel, coerce or attempt the commission of any act
declared to be unlawful under this chapter; or obstruct or prevent enforcement
of, or compliance with, this chapter;
      (11)   Discriminate by engaging in any other action which makes
unavailable, or restricts consideration of, the inspection, purchase, sale or
rental of any dwelling;
      (12)   Discriminate against any person in connection with borrowing or
lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting a deed of trust or mortgage, or
otherwise obtaining or making available funds for the purchase, construction,
improvement, repair or maintenance of any dwelling; or discriminate by delaying
the processing of or denying any loan or other financial assistance; or
discriminate in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other
terms or conditions of any loan or other financial assistance; or discriminate
on the basis that a dwelling is located in a particular geographic area; or
      (13)   Discriminate against any person in appraising the value of any
dwelling in connection with the sale or rental of the dwelling.
   (B)   Nothing provided in this section shall be construed to prohibit
special outreach efforts conducted by or under the authority of units of
government (including agencies, departments and commissions thereof) or non-
profit fair housing agencies to ensure that persons of minority groups are
fully informed of available dwelling opportunities in areas of present or
prospective majority (white) group concentration, or to ensure that persons of
the majority (white) group are fully informed of available dwelling
opportunities in areas of present or prospective minority group concentration.
(2000 Code, § 94.04) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984; Ord. 1311, passed 1-5-1987)
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 EXCEPTIONS TO REPORT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any person who negotiates or attempts to negotiate the purchase, sale
or listing of dwellings located in the village, or any lessor who rents
dwellings located in the village, solely as an agent or contractor for a second
person is not required to provide sales data or rental data to the Commission
pursuant to this chapter if that second person provides the Commission all such
data required.
   (B)   Any person who negotiates or attempts to negotiate the purchase, sale
or listing of dwellings located in the village, or any lessor who rents
dwellings located in the village, solely through grants or contractors is not
required to provide sales data or rental data to the Commission pursuant to
this chapter if those agents or contractors provide the Commission all such
data required.
   (C)   Any natural individual who owns a dwelling, who either is domiciled in
the dwelling or is the last natural individual to be domiciled in the dwelling,
and who attempts to sell that particular dwelling without the assistance of an
agent acting for profit, is not required to provide sales data or rental data
to the Commission pursuant to this chapter.
   (D)   Any natural individual who owns a building containing four or less
dwellings and who occupies a dwelling in that building is not required to
provide rental data concerning that building to the Commission pursuant to this
chapter.
(2000 Code, § 94.05) (Ord. 1311, passed 1-5-1987)
§ 94.06 APPLICATION OF AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING PLANS.
   This chapter shall apply to:
   (A)   Residential subdivision developments containing four or more dwellings
for which plans have not received final municipal approval or for which all
necessary building permits have not been issued;
   (B)   Residential planned unit developments for which plans have not
received final municipal approval or for which building permits have not been
issued; and
   (C)   Multi-family residential developments, to be newly constructed or
substantially rehabilitated, for which building permits have not been issued.
(2000 Code, § 94.06) (Ord 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.07 AFFIRMATIVE MARKETING PLANS.
   (A)   The owner of each such development as described in §
94.06 shall prepare and file an affirmative marketing plan with the Commission
on a printed form made available by the Commission. Upon approval of the plan
by the Commission pursuant to §
94.08, the owner shall thereafter implement the plan. The plan shall be
designed to attract purchasers or renters of all minority and majority (white)
groups to such developments, and to provide for special outreach efforts to
ensure that persons of minority groups are fully informed of available dwelling
opportunities in areas of present or prospective majority (white) group
concentration, and to ensure that persons of the majority (white) group are
fully informed of available dwelling opportunities in areas of present or
prospective minority group concentration.
   (B)   The plan shall:
      (1)   Identify which groups are least likely without special outreach
efforts to apply for dwellings in the development;
      (2)   Describe in detail the methods to be used to attract persons to
dwellings in the development, especially persons in the groups identified
pursuant to division (B)(1) above. The methods may include, but need not be
limited to, advertising through commercial media, brochures and leaflets,
posting of signs, and appropriate contacts and arrangements with agencies of
the village and other governments, fair housing agencies, community groups and
employers;
      (3)   State the racial composition of the persons expected to reside in
the development as a result of implementation of the plan;
      (4)   Describe in detail the fair housing training that will be provided
to persons engaged in the sale or rental of dwellings in the development; and
      (5)   Provide for any other methods and information related to the
advertising, sale or rental of dwellings in the development as the Commission
determines are necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 94.07) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.08 COMMISSION APPROVAL.
   Within 30 days of the filing of an affirmative marketing plan, the
Commission shall either approve the plan, in writing, if it complies with the
provisions of this chapter and with such regulations as are adopted by the
Commission, or state, in writing, its reasons for failing to approve the plan
if it does not so comply. No advertising, sale or rental of dwellings in a
development subject to this chapter may be commenced, and no final municipal
approval or building permit may be issued for such a development, until the
Commission grants written approval.
(2000 Code, § 94.08) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.09 DURATION OF PLAN.
   An affirmative marketing plan shall expire one year after the date on which
the Commission grants written approval of the plan pursuant to §
94.08. Prior to such expiration, the owner shall prepare and file a revised
affirmative marketing plan with the Commission pursuant to §
94.07 and the Commission shall thereupon review the plan pursuant to §
94.08. No final municipal approval or building permit may be issued for a
development subject to this chapter unless there is an unexpired affirmative
marketing plan which the Commission has approved for the development pursuant
to §
94.08. No advertising, sale or rental of dwellings in such a development may be
commenced or continued except in accordance with an unexpired plan.
(2000 Code, § 94.09) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.10 REPORTS.
   The owner shall provide the Commission a report concerning implementation of
the approved affirmative marketing plan each month, or as frequently as the
Commission finds to be appropriate on a printed form made available by the
Commission. The reports shall state, with respect to the reporting period, the
race of the persons who inquired, at any time and place, as to the availability
of dwellings in the development and the source of information leading to each
such inquiry; the race of the persons who applied to purchase or rent the
dwellings and the source of information leading to each such application; the
race of the persons currently residing in dwellings in the development; and any
other information related to the advertising, sale or rental of dwellings as
the Commission may determine is necessary to review and evaluate the
effectiveness of the plan.
(2000 Code, § 94.10) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.11 EVALUATION AND AMENDMENT OF PLAN.
   The Commission and the owner shall evaluate the progress and effectiveness
of the affirmative marketing plan at such times as the Commission may deem
appropriate. Any approved affirmative marketing plan may be modified, amended
or terminated at any time by written agreement between the Commission and the
owner.
(2000 Code, § 94.11) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.12 LIMITATIONS TO PLAN.
   This chapter shall not be construed in any manner to limit any applicable
federal or state affirmative marketing requirements.
(2000 Code, § 94.12) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 94.25 COMMISSION ON HOUSING AND HUMAN RELATIONS.
   (A)   Term of office; qualifications for membership. There is hereby created
a Commission on Housing and Human Relations consisting of nine members, of
which two members shall be between the ages of 16 and 21 years of age, and said
nine members shall be either residents of, be employed in or have a business
located within the village; provided, however, a majority of the Commission
members shall be residents of the village. Each member shall be appointed by
the Village President with the consent of the Board of Trustees. The
Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson shall be designated annually by the Village
President. All members shall serve for a period of three years, or until a
successor has been approved and has qualified.
   (B)   Purpose of Commission. The purpose of the Commission shall be:
      (1)   To promote the long term racial diversity and stable integration of
the community through development of programs and recommendations designed to
ensure that there exists full and equal access to and demand for housing
opportunities throughout the community without regard to race, color, sex, age,
religion or national origin, and that the fair housing regulations of the
village are complied with;
      (2)   Recommend to the Village Board and other municipal officials means
to foster, encourage and stimulate the improvement of human relations among and
between all citizens of all races, colors, religions, sexes, national origins,
ancestries, ages, marital statuses, parental statuses, sexual orientations,
sources of income (with the exclusion of Section 8), military discharge
statuses, gender identities, retaliations, housing statuses, aiding/abetting
and willful interferences, to effectuate the policy set forth in §
94.01, as well as economic and educational levels so as to provide all
individuals with an equal opportunity to grow, participate and share to the
best of their ability in the social, civic, educational, political, economic
and judicial systems; and
      (3)   Administer the Fair Housing Ordinance responsibilities as defined
elsewhere in this chapter.
   (C)   Duties and functions. The primary function of the Commission is to
further its stated policies. Its duties shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Advise the President and Board of Trustees on human relations and
housing matters as may be assigned by the Village Board or initiated by the
Commission;
      (2)   Research and design program recommendations designed to stimulate
an interest in and demand for housing opportunities throughout the community by
all economically competitive segments of the home buying and renting market;
      (3)   Develop and administer in cooperation with housing developers and
real estate agents active within the community such affirmative marketing plans
as may be necessary to attract homeseekers who may not otherwise consider
housing opportunities in the community in general or particular neighborhoods
within the community;
      (4)   Maintain and analyze housing transaction statistics and real estate
information as may be necessary to evaluate the success of municipal housing
programs;
      (5)   Review and recommend ordinances, programs and practices which
prevent housing discrimination and enhance racial stability;
      (6)   Receive and investigate complaints alleging unlawful discriminatory
acts or unfair housing practices;
      (7)   Initiate complaints charging unlawful discriminatory acts and
unfair housing practices;
      (8)   Endeavor through conciliation to resolve such complaints;
      (9)   Conduct adjudicative hearings concerning such complaints, make
findings of fact, issue orders and recommend that the village seek judicial or
administrative relief with respect to such complaints and orders in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter;
      (10)   Subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, administer oaths,
take sworn testimony and in connection therewith, require the production for
examination of any documents relating to any matter under investigation or in
question before the Commission, and enforce such powers by proper petition in
any court of competent jurisdiction in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter;
      (11)   Gather and provide for the exchange of information related to the
provisions of this chapter among real estate agents, lending institutions,
developers, employers, municipal officials and employees, community
organizations, and other persons with an interest in effective enforcement of
this chapter;
      (12)   Serve as the educational arm of the municipality in the field of
human relations and housing to all persons, areas, groups and institutions in
the municipality; and
      (13)   Carry out such research and recommend actions in the field of
human relations to lessen prejudice and discrimination based on race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability,
parental status, sexual orientation, source of income (with the exclusion of
Section 8), military discharge status, gender identity, retaliation, housing
status, aiding/abetting and willful interference.
   (D)   Meetings; rules of procedure. The Commission shall meet regularly and
adopt its own rules of procedure, and all meetings shall be held in accordance
with said rules. The Commission shall submit to the municipality an annual
report and such special reports as it may from time to time deem advisable. The
Commission shall perform such further duties as may be assigned to it by the
President and Board of Trustees.
   (E)   Powers of Commission.
      (1)   When authorized by the President and Board of Trustees by
appropriate resolution, the Commission may require by subpoena the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence relating
to any matter under investigation and hearing. The Chairperson may sign a
subpoena which may be served by any police officer of the municipality or by
any person lawfully authorized to serve a subpoena under the laws of the state.
The attendance of witnesses or the production of documentary evidence may be
required at such designated place of the hearing within the municipality and
before the Commission as a whole, or before a duly constituted subcommittee of
the Commission. Witnesses summoned before the Commission, or a subcommittee of
the Commission, shall be paid the same fees and mileage that are paid witnesses
in the Circuit Court of this state.
      (2)   In case of disobedience by a person to the subpoena, the Commission
may petition the Circuit Court of the county for an order requiring the
attendance and testimony of witnesses, for the production of documentary
evidence, or both. The Chairperson of the Commission or the Commission member
conducting the hearing is authorized to administer oaths and is required to
provide for the preservation of all testimony taken.
(2000 Code, § 94.25) (Ord. 983, passed 9-18-1978; Ord. 1140, passed 4-19-1982;
Ord. 1264, passed 8-5-1985; Ord. 1545, passed 12-20-1993; Ord. 1894, passed 2-
18-2003; Ord. 4027, passed 12-7-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Human Relations Commission, see 775 ILCS 5/8-101 et seq.
§ 94.26 COMMISSION TO ADMINISTER AND ADJUDICATE ALLEGED VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Commission on Housing and Human Relations shall have the
responsibility to administer this chapter and to adjudicate complaints alleging
violations of this chapter.
   (B)   The Commission shall have and may exercise the following powers, in
addition to the duties and powers granted in its enabling ordinance, to
implement the purposes of this chapter:
      (1)   To receive and investigate complaints charging unlawful
discriminatory acts and unfair housing practices;
      (2)   To initiate complaints charging unlawful discriminatory acts and
unfair housing practices;
      (3)   To endeavor, by conciliation, to resolve any such complaints;
      (4)   To hold adjudicative hearings concerning such complaints, make
findings of fact, issue orders and to recommend that the village seek judicial
or administrative relief with respect to any such complaints and orders in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
      (5)   To subpoena witnesses, compel their attendance, administer oaths,
take sworn testimony, and in connection therewith, to require the production
for examination of any documents relating to any matter under investigation or
in question before the Commission, and enforce such powers by proper petition
any court of competent jurisdiction;
      (6)   To cooperate with the owners of developments subject to the
provisions of §§
94.06 through
94.12, in the preparation of affirmative marketing plans, and to approve,
disapprove, monitor, evaluate, modify, amend or terminate such plans;
      (7)   To recommend to the Village Board of Trustees educational and other
programs designed to promote the purposes of this chapter;
      (8)   To gather and provide for the exchange of information related to
the provisions of this chapter among real estate agents, lending institutions,
developers, employers, municipal officials, community organizations and other
persons with an interest in effective enforcement of this chapter;
      (9)   To render, at least once a year, to the Village Board of Trustees
written report of the Commission’s activities and recommendations with respect
to fair housing practices, which report shall be made public after submission
to the Board of Trustees;
      (10)   To prepare and submit annually to the Village Administrator a
budget for its operation and staffing;
      (11)   To adopt such rules and regulations as the Commission may deem
necessary or desirable to conduct its business and to carry out the purposes of
this chapter; and
      (12)   To do such other acts as are necessary and proper to perform those
duties with which the Commission is charged under this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 94.26) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984; Ord. 1545, passed 12-20-1993)
§ 94.27 FAIR HOUSING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Village President shall appoint a Fair Housing Administrator. The Fair
Housing Administrator shall have such duties, responsibilities and powers as
may be provided by the Commission or the Village Board of Trustees, including,
but not limited to, the initiation, receipt, conciliation and processing of
complaints on behalf of the Commission.
(2000 Code, § 94.27) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.28 COMPLAINTS.
   Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of this chapter may allege
that a violation has occurred, or that a violation will occur and cause
irrevocable injury, by filing with the Commission, within 180 days of the
alleged violation, a written verified complaint setting forth his or her
grievance. Any complaint initiated by the Commission shall be signed by its
Chairperson. The complaint shall state, on a printed form made available by the
Commission, the name and address of the complainant, the name and address (if
known) of the person alleged to have committed a violation of this chapter and
the particular facts thereof, and such other information as may be required by
the Commission. A complaint may be amended at any time.
(2000 Code, § 94.28) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.29 NOTICE.
   Within 15 calendar days after a complaint has been received or initiated by
the Commission, the Fair Housing Administrator shall serve, or cause to be
served, in person or by certified mail, a copy of the complaint on the person
alleged to have violated this chapter (hereinafter referred to as
“respondent”).
(2000 Code, § 94.29) (Ord 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.30 INVESTIGATION.
   Within 30 calendar days after a complaint has been received or initiated by
the Commission, the Fair Housing Administrator shall conduct an investigation
of the complaint and shall determine either that:
   (A)   There are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, in which case the Fair Housing Administrator shall then
initiate the conciliation process of §
94.31; or
   (B)   There are not reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, in which case the Fair Housing Administrator shall then
dismiss the complaint by preparing a written notice of dismissal, including the
reasons therefor, and notify the parties of the dismissal, within five days, by
serving a copy of the notice of dismissal by certified mail on the parties. The
notice of dismissal shall advise the complainant of his or her or her right of
appeal under this section. Within 14 days of receipt of the notice of
dismissal, the complainant may appeal by filing a written request with the
Commission for a review of the complaint. By a majority vote, the Commission
may overrule the dismissal and refer the complaint to the Fair Housing
Administrator for conciliation pursuant to §
94.31.
(2000 Code, § 94.30) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.31 CONCILIATION.
   (A)   If the Fair Housing Administrator has made a determination pursuant to
§
94.30(A) that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, the Commission shall:
      (1)   Notify the complainant and respondent of the time, place and date
of a conciliation conference at least ten days prior thereto, and both parties
shall appear at the conciliation conference in person or by attorney; and
      (2)   Attempt to resolve the complaint by methods of conference,
conciliation and persuasion with all interested parties and such
representatives as the parties may choose to assist them. Conciliation
conferences shall be informal and nothing said or done during the conferences
shall be made public unless the parties agree thereto in writing. The terms of
conciliation agreed to by the parties shall be reduced to writing and
incorporated into a consent agreement to be signed by the parties. Consent
agreements shall be signed on behalf of the Commission by its Chairperson.
   (B)   If the complaint has not been resolved by conciliation within 60
calendar days after it has been received or initiated by the Commission, the
Fair Housing Administrator shall refer the complaint to the Commission for an
adjudicative hearing.
(2000 Code, § 94.31) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.32 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   At any time after the Fair Housing Administrator has determined pursuant to
§
94.30(A) that there are reasonable grounds to believe that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, the Fair Housing Administrator, after first consulting
with the Village President, the Village Administrator or the Trustee liaison to
the Commission, may petition the appropriate court for temporary relief pending
final determination of the proceedings under this chapter, including an order
or decree restraining the respondent from doing or causing any act which would
render ineffectual any order or action by the Commission.
(2000 Code, § 94.32) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.33 HEARINGS BY COMMISSION.
   Within 40 calendar days after the Fair Housing Administrator refers a
complaint to the Commission pursuant to §
94.31, the Commission shall, upon due and reasonable notice to all parties,
conduct a hearing on the complaint. Parties to the hearing shall be the
complainant and respondent, and such other persons as the Commission may deem
appropriate. The hearing shall be open to the public. At least ten days before
the hearing, the Commission shall serve upon the respondent a statement of
charges and a summons requiring the attendance of named persons and the
production of relevant documents and records. The parties may apply to the
Commission to have subpoenas issued in the Commission’s name, which subpoenas
may be served by any police officer of the village or by any person authorized
to serve a subpoena under state law. Failure to comply with a summons or
subpoena shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The parties may file
such statements with the Commission as they deem necessary. No fewer than three
of the same members of the Commission must be present at all times during a
hearing. The parties may appear before the Commission in person or by duly
authorized representative, and may be represented by legal counsel. The parties
shall have the right to present witnesses and cross-examine witnesses, and all
testimony and evidence shall be given under oath or by affirmation.
(2000 Code, § 94.33) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.34 HEARING DECISIONS.
   Only those members of the Commission who have attended all hearings on the
complaint shall participate in the determination of the complaint. Within 15
days of the close of the hearing, the decision shall be rendered, at a meeting
open to the public, in the form of a written order which shall include findings
of fact, a statement of whether the respondent has violated this chapter, and
such remedial actions as the Commission may order or recommend pursuant to §
94.35. The order shall be served upon the parties by certified mail within 15
days of the public meeting. The order shall be available for public inspection,
and a copy shall be provided to any person upon request and payment of
reproduction costs.
(2000 Code, § 94.34) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.35 REMEDIAL ACTIONS.
   (A)   If the Commission finds upon the preponderance of the evidence that
the respondent has not violated this chapter, its order under §
94.34 shall dismiss the complaint.
   (B)   If the Commission finds upon the preponderance of the evidence that
the respondent has violated this chapter, its order under §
94.34 shall assess a fine pursuant to §
94.99 and shall provide for the taking of such further remedial action as it
deems appropriate, which may include, but need not be limited to:
      (1)   Directing the respondent to cease and desist from violations of
this chapter and to take such affirmative steps as necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this chapter;
      (2)   Recommending that the village initiate an appropriate court action
for the enforcement of this chapter, and for such other or further relief as
the court may deem appropriate, including but not limited to, injunctive
relief, compensatory damages, punitive damages and attorney fees and costs for
award to the complainant;
      (3)   Initiating proceedings for violation of federal or state law or
regulations;
      (4)   Initiating proceedings with any contracting agency, in the case of
any violation of this chapter by the respondent in the course of performing
under a contract or subcontract with the state or any political subdivision or
agency thereof, or with the United States of America or any agency or
instrumentality thereof, for the purpose of causing a termination of such
contract or any portion thereof, or obtaining other relief;
      (5)   Initiating proceedings with the Illinois Department of Registration
and Education or any other agency to revoke, suspend or refuse to renew the
license of any person found to have violated any provision of this chapter;
      (6)   Directing the respondent to reimburse the complainant for his or
her actual and reasonable expenses incurred and to be incurred as a result of
each violation found, including, but not limited to, expenses for moving and
temporary storage of household furnishings, additional expenses in connection
with the purchase or rental of a dwelling for alternative accommodations, and
reasonable attorney fees and costs, provided that no such reimbursement by any
respondent shall exceed the sum of $750 with respect to each violation found;
and
      (7)   Directing the respondent to comply with such other or further
relief as the Commission may deem appropriate for the enforcement of this
chapter.
(2000 Code, § 94.35) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.36 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Within 35 days following a decision by the village, any party may apply for
judicial review of the Commission’s decision before a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(2000 Code, § 94.36) (Ord. 1311, passed 1-5-1987)
§ 94.37 JUDICIAL RELIEF.
   The village or any person aggrieved by a violation of any provision of this
chapter may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate relief
from the violation, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Injunctive relief or an order otherwise compelling compliance with
this chapter;
   (B)   Compensatory and punitive damages;
   (C)   Reasonable attorney fees and costs; and
   (D)   Such other or further relief as is appropriate for the enforcement of
this chapter and the elimination of violations thereof.
(2000 Code, § 94.37) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.38 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   This chapter shall not prevent the village or any person from exercising any
right or seeking any remedy to which that person might otherwise be entitled,
or from filing any complaint with any other agency or court of law or equity.
(2000 Code, § 94.38) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $100 nor more than $750 for each violation. Every day a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate violation.
(2000 Code, § 94.99) (Ord. 1207, passed 4-2-1984)
CHAPTER 95: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
   
95.01   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code
   
95.02   Amendments, insertions, deletions and changes to the Fire Prevention
Code
   
95.03   Wood truss warning signs
   
95.04   Spiller pays
 
   
95.99   Penalty
§ 95.01 ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.
   This code shall be known as the Fire Prevention Code. This code adopts the
2018 edition of the International Fire Code in its entirety, including
Referenced Standards and Appendices, regulating and governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire, explosion, handling or use of
hazardous materials, the use and occupancy of buildings and premises in the
village and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees.
(Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4477, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 95.02 AMENDMENTS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES TO THE FIRE PREVENTION
CODE.
   For the purpose of the Fire Prevention Code, the following additions,
insertions, deletions and changes are hereby adopted as follows.
   (A)   Section 101.1 Title. Insert: Village of Matteson.
   (B)   Section 110.4 Violation Penalties. Insert: petty offense and $750
respectively.
   (C)   Section 112.4 Failure to Comply. Insert: $100 and $750 respectively.
   (D)   Section 316 Hazards to Firefighters. Is amended by adding the
following new section:
      Section 316.7 Door Markings. In all buildings 10,000 square feet or
larger, regardless of use classification, it shall be required to mark each
"Exit" door from the building as follows: each "Exit" door shall be marked with
a number painted on both sides of the door in the bottom corner on the latch
side. The painted number shall be of a contrasting color to the door, be six
inches in height with a one inch stroke and will be numbered sequentially in a
clockwise manner beginning immediately to the left of the main entrance door.
The number is not required on doors made entirely of glass.
   (E)   Section 901.6.3 Records. Is amended by adding the following new
section:
      Section 901.6.3.2 Record Submittals. Contractors who perform inspection,
testing and/or maintenance services on fire and life safety systems are
required to electronically submit all compliant and noncompliant records to the
Village Fire Department via a method approved by the Fire Chief (Brycer, The
Compliance Engine)
      Add the following language to 903.2. Where Required Retroactive In
Existing Buildings and Structures.
         All existing buildings covered herein shall comply with the provisions
of this section when:
         1.   Change in occupancy type.
         2.   Alterations or damages exceeding 50% of the physical value of the
structure.
         3.   The physical value shall be determined by an appraisal of the
structure exclusive of land and furnishings. If there is a dispute as to the
physical value of the structure, the matter will be remedied through the
appeals process outlined in this code.
   (F)   Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.11. Are hereby deleted and replaced
with 903.2.1:
      903.2.1 An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout any
occupancy use except accessory structures 1,000 square feet or less.
      Add the following to 903.3: In addition to the requirements set forth in
NFPA 13, the following requirements shall be met:
         (a)   A post indicator valve or wall indicator valve is required on
the supply side of the sprinkler system and must be protected by concrete
filled bollards or as otherwise approved.
         (b)   The Fire Department Connection (FDC) shall be located near the
main entrance to the occupancy or as directed by the Fire Code Official. This
connection shall be located at least 40 feet, but not more than 100 feet from a
fire hydrant. The FDC shall be protected by concrete filled bollards or as
otherwise approved.
         (c)   The entire system shall be supervised, zoned and annunciated in
accordance with NFPA 13,72 and the International Building Code in effect at the
time of this construction. Additionally, all flow switches shall be connected
to a strobe light so as to activate the strobe light when an alarm condition
exists. Location of the strobe light shall be on the front of the occupancy in
close proximity to the main entrance when possible.
         (d)   A Village of Matteson representative shall be present when the
underground main for the sprinkler system is flushed. This test requires 48-
hour notice to the Building Department prior to the time of the test.
Contractors or their official representative must be present at the time of the
test in order to sign off on the certification documents.
         (e)   Piping between the exterior Fire Department connection and the
check valve in the Fire Department inlet pipe shall be hydrostatically tested
in the same manner as the balance of the system. This test requires 48-hour
notice to the Fire Department prior to the time of the test. A Matteson Fire
Department representative and contractors or their official representative must
be present at the time of the test in order to sign off on the certification
documents.
         (f)   As-built drawings shall be submitted to the Matteson Fire
Department prior to the final inspection. These drawings shall be submitted in
PDF format or other approved digital method.
   (G)   Section 905 Standpipe Systems.
      Section 905.3.1 Height. Revise to read: Class III standpipe systems shall
be installed where any of the following conditions exist:
         1.   Three or more stories are above or below grade plane. Rest of
section to remain.
   (H)   Section 907. Add new subsection 907.1.4 Installation.
      Section 907.1.4 Installation
         (a)   The fire alarm panel or a remote annunciator with the means to
reset and silence the detection system shall be provided at a convenient
location near the front entrance to the occupancy.
         (b)   A strobe light shall be installed at the front of each
occupancy. This strobe light shall be visible from the street and connected to
the fire detection system so as to provide a visual identification of the
affected occupancy.
   (I)   Section 907.8 Inspection, Testing and Maintenance. Is hereby amended
by adding the following new section:
      Section 907.8.6 Resetting Fire Alarm Systems. Upon activation of a fire
alarm system, the system shall not be reset (restored to a secured or clear
condition) by any person. Only Fire Department personnel are authorized to
reset or direct the system to be reset. The penalty for resetting a fire alarm
shall be no less than $250 or more than $750 per occurrence.
   (J)   Section 1013.2. Rename section to "Low-level exit signs in Group R-
I and other occupancies."
   (K)   Section 1013.21.1. Add to end of section, the following after the
first sentence: "Exit and exit access doors leading from a space that has an
occupant load greater than fifty shall be marked with an additional low-level
exit sign. located on the latch side of the door with the bottom edge of the
sign no more than six inches from the floor."
   (L)   Section 1031. Maintenance of the Means of Egress. Is hereby amended by
adding a new section:
   Section 1030.11 Checkout Lanes. At no time shall checkout lanes be blocked
by stored carts, displays, chains or other fixed obstructions to free access.
(Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4288, passed 10-5-2015; Ord. 4477, passed 10-
18-2021)
§ 95.03 WOOD TRUSS WARNING SIGNS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PROPERTY OWNER. Any person, firm or corporation having a legal ownership
interest in the property.
      SIGN. A nine-inch (minimum) by three-inch (minimum) piece of aluminum or
stainless steel stock plate, one-eighth-inch thick (minimum), covered with red
3M diamond grade reflective film or equivalent. Located at the center of the
sign is a white 3M diamond grade or equivalent reflective letter "T" which is
three inches (minimum) in height.
      WOODEN TRUSS ROOF.
         (a)   A wooden roof structure consisting of a group of triangles
arranged in a single plane in such a manner that loads applied at the points of
the intersections of the structural members will cause only direct stresses,
tension, or compression, within the structural members.
         (b)   WOODEN TRUSS ROOF may include. but are not limited to, the
following general types of construction: bowstring, warren, sawtooth, k-truss,
scissors, cambered fink, hammerbeam, pratt, fink and inverted queen post.
   (B)   Required signage. The owner of any commercial or industrial structure
which has a wooden truss roof assembly shall be required to mount warning signs
meeting the following minimum requirements.
      (1)   Size and construction. Each sign required to be installed in
accordance with this chapter shall be of the size and construction defined
within division (A) above.
      (2)   Mounting locations and height from finished grade. A sign shall be
mounted directly to the right of each series of entrance doors (front, rear and
sides of the building or structure) at a height of five feet up from finished
grade. Additional signs may be required by the Fire Code official, when the
distance between entrance doors or the length of a series of entrance doors
would require additional warning signs for visibility by Fire Department
personnel.
   (C)   Property owner responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of each
property owner to mount, maintain and prevent obstruction of any warning signs
required to be mounted on the building or structure.
(Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4477, passed 10-18-2021) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 SPILLER PAYS.
   (A)   (1)   The Trustees of the village do hereby find that hazardous
materials and substances are widely used in commerce and by individuals in our
society, and that properly controlled and utilized, such substances and
materials can be beneficial to our overall well-being.
      (2)   However, the Village Trustees further find that large known
quantities and qualities of such materials and substances exist which may be
toxic, corrosive, irritating, sensitizing, flammable or combustible and which
may cause serious illness or harm to humans, animals and the environment. The
public has a right to expect regulation of these substances. The Department of
Transportation is responsible for regulating the transportation of hazardous
materials by air, water, highway, rail and pipelines.
   (B)   Despite these regulations, death, injuries and serious property
damages related directly to the transportation of hazardous materials have and
do occur. Risks present in the transport of dangerous goods cannot be totally
abated through regulations.
   (C)   State regulations entrust local communities with the responsibilities
of the mitigation of hazardous material incidents within their jurisdiction. In
responding to a hazardous substance discharge incident, the Village Fire
Department and/or the village will incur significant expenses including, but
not limited to: equipment, cleanup, equipment replacements and additional
staffing not normally reimbursed through state or federal agencies.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CORROSIVE. Any substance which when in contact with living tissue causes
destruction of tissue by chemical action; but does not refer to action on
inanimate surfaces.
      FLAMMABLE/COMBUSTIBLE. Any substance which has a flashpoint of above 20°
to and including 80°F as determined by the Tagliabue Open Cut Tester, and
EXTREMELY FLAMMABLE means any substance which has a flashpoint at or below 20°F
as determined by the Tagliabue Open Cut Tester, and COMBUSTIBLE means any
substance which has a flashpoint above 80°F to and including 150° as determined
by the Tagliabue Open Cut Tester; except that the flammability or
combustibility of solids and of the contents of self-pressurized containers
shall be determined by methods generally applicable to such materials or
containers, respectively.
      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance or mixture of substances which is
toxic, corrosive, irritant, strong sensitizer, flammable, combustible or which
generates pressure through decomposition, heat or other means, and which may
cause substantial personal injury or illness during or as a proximate result of
any customary or reasonably anticipated handling or use, including reasonably
foreseeable ingestion, and also means by radioactive substance.
      IRRITANT. Any substance not corrosive, which on immediate, prolonged or
repeated contact with normal living tissue will induce local inflammatory
reaction.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity.
      RADIOACTIVE SUBSTANCE. Any substance that emits ionizing radiation.
      STRONG SENSITIZER. Any substance which will cause, on normal living
tissue through an allergic or photo-dynamic process, a hypersensitivity which
becomes evident on reapplication of the same substance.
      TOXIC. Any substance (other than a radioactive substance) which has the
capacity to produce injury or illness to humans through ingestion, inhalation
or absorption through any body surface.
      UNRECOVERED COSTS. The total cost of operations maintenance, and
additional staffing necessitated by the incident, including, but not limited
to, replacement of specialized equipment or supplies required to mitigate the
emergency and may also include any extraordinary damage to equipment caused by
the incident, which costs are not otherwise recoverable through state or
federal agencies.
(Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4477, passed 10-18-2021) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a fine upon any person violating §
95.04 equivalent to the greater of $750 or the unrecovered costs incurred by
the Fire Department and/or village in responding to the hazardous substance
discharge incident.
   (B)   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750.
Each day said violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4477, passed 10-18-2021)
CHAPTER 96: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
Smoke Emission
   
96.01   Emission of dense smoke
   
96.02   Factories allowing materials to escape
Smoking Restrictions in Public and Other Places
   
96.15   Definitions
   
96.16   Smoking in public and other places prohibited
   
96.17   Posting of signs; removal of ashtrays
   
96.18   Smoking prohibited in student dormitories
   
96.19   Designated smoking areas; designation of other nonsmoking areas
   
96.20   Exemptions
   
96.21   Enforcement
   
96.22   Violations
   
96.23   Injunctions
   
96.24   Discrimination prohibited
   
96.25   Prohibited distances
 
   
96.99   Penalty
SMOKE EMISSION
§ 96.01 EMISSION OF DENSE SMOKE.
   The emission of dense smoke within the municipality from the smoke stack of
any locomotive, steam roller, steam derrick, tar kettle or any similar machine
or contrivance, or from the smoke stack or chimney of any building or premises,
is declared a nuisance and unlawful, and may be summarily abated by the Health
Commissioner or by any one whom he or she may duly authorize for such purpose.
Such abatement may be in addition to the fine hereinafter provided.
(2000 Code, § 96.01) (Ord. 358, passed 6-3-1946) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.02 FACTORIES ALLOWING MATERIALS TO ESCAPE.
   Any factory, warehouse, storehouse, grain elevator, building or structure of
any kind within the limits of the municipality, which shall be kept,
maintained, managed or operated in such a manner as to allow dust, sweepings,
chaff or dense or unusual smoke caused by the burning of grain clippings, chaff
or other substance or material to escape or issue therefrom onto any public
street, alley, lane or avenue or any private property so as to become offensive
or interfere with the health or comfort of any family or neighborhood, shall be
deemed and is declared a public nuisance and unlawful.
(2000 Code, § 96.02) (Ord. 202, passed 8-14-1923) Penalty, see §
96.99
SMOKING RESTRICTIONS IN PUBLIC AND OTHER PLACES
§ 96.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAR. An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages
for consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than 10% of
its gross revenue from the sale of goods consumed on the premises. BAR
includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, adult
entertainment facilities and cabarets.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Public Health.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for
direct or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or
her services for a non-profit entity.
   EMPLOYER. A person, business, partnership, association or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust or non-profit entity, that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
   ENCLOSED AREA. All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, or solid
walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that extend from
the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies and corridors.
   ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA. Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational or
other events.
   GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES. Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the
Illinois Gaming Board Rules of the Illinois Administrative Code, 11 Ill. Adm.
Code § 1800.110.
   GAMING FACILITY. An establishment utilized primarily for the purposes of
gaming and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purposes of
accruing business revenue.
   HEALTHCARE FACILITY. An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental or emotional, or other medical,
physiological or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists and all specialists
within these professions. HEALTHCARE FACILITY includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semi-private rooms and wards within healthcare
facilities.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any area under the control of a public or private
employer that employees are required to enter, leave or pass through during the
course of employment, including, but not limited to entrances and exits to
places of employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in §
96.25, of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation
intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited; offices and
work areas; restrooms; conference and classrooms; break rooms and cafeterias;
and other common areas. A private residence or home-based business, unless used
to provide licensed child care, foster care, adult care or other similar social
service care on the premises, is not a PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT.
   PRIVATE CLUB. A not-for-profit association that has been in active and
continuous existence for at least three years prior to the effective date of
this subchapter, whether incorporated or not; is the owner, lessee or occupant
of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all
times; is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic,
political, benevolent or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain; and,
only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. For purposes of
this definition, PRIVATE CLUB means an organization that is managed by a board
of directors, executive committee or similar body chosen by the members at an
annual meeting, has established by-laws, a constitution, or both to govern its
activities, and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal
income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. § 501.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE. The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a PRIVATE RESIDENCE.
   PUBLIC PLACE. The portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the
public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in
part by private persons or entities, the state, or any other public entity and
regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a minimum
distance, as set forth in §
96.25, of 15 feet from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation
intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A PUBLIC PLACE
does not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to
provide licensed child care, foster care or other similar social service care
on the premises. A PUBLIC PLACE includes, but is not limited to, hospitals,
restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators,
indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances,
educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially
enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention
facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government
owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased
or operated by the state or state subcontract, healthcare facilities or
clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial
institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities,
public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys,
skating rinks, reception areas and no less than 75% of the sleeping quarters
within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar
public accommodation that are rented to guests, but excludes private
residences.
   RESTAURANT. An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee
shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands and private and public school cafeterias,
that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, and a
kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for
serving elsewhere. RESTAURANT includes a bar area within the restaurant.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail establishment that derives more than 80% of
its gross revenue from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or herbs and cigars,
cigarettes, pipes and other smoking devises for burning tobacco and related
smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental. RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco department or
section of a larger commercial establishment or any establishment with any type
of liquor, food or restaurant license.
   SMOKE or SMOKING. The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling or exhaling of
any kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs or any other
lighted smoking equipment.
   STATE AGENCY. Has the meaning formerly ascribed to it in subsection (a) of §
3 of the Illinois Purchasing Act (now repealed).
   UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. Has the meaning ascribed to it in § 1 of Article
VII of the Illinois Constitution of 1970.
(2000 Code, § 96.10) (Ord. 2096, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 96.16 SMOKING IN PUBLIC AND OTHER PLACES PROHIBITED.
   Smoking in public places, places of employment and governmental vehicles is
prohibited. No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of
employment or within 15 feet of any entrance to a public place or place of
employment. No person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased or operated by the
state or a political subdivision of the state. Smoking is prohibited in indoor
public places and workplaces unless specifically exempted by §
96.20.
(2000 Code, § 96.11) (Ord. 2096, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008)
Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.17 POSTING OF SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS.
   (A)   “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking” symbol,
consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a
red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted
in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by
this subchapter by the owner, operator, manager or other person in control of
that place.
   (B)   Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
by this subchapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign
clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.
   (C)   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is
prohibited by this subchapter by the owner, operator, manager or other person
having control of the area.
(2000 Code, § 96.12) (Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 96.18 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN STUDENT DORMITORIES.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this subchapter, smoking is
prohibited in any portion of the living quarters, including, but not limited
to, sleeping rooms, dining areas, restrooms, laundry areas, lobbies and
hallways, of a building used in whole or in part as a student dormitory that is
owned and operated or otherwise utilized by a public or private institution of
higher education.
(2000 Code, § 96.13) (Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.19 DESIGNATED SMOKING AREAS; DESIGNATION OF OTHER NONSMOKING AREAS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, any employer, owner,
occupant, lessee, operator, manager or other person in control of any public
place or place of employment may designate a non-enclosed area of a public
place or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking
is also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall
conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in §
96.17(A) and (B).
(2000 Code, § 96.14) (Ord. 2096, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 96.20 EXEMPTIONS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, smoking is allowed
in the following areas:
   (A)   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a child
care, adult day care or healthcare facility or any other home-based business
open to the public;
   (B)   Retail tobacco stores as defined in §
96.15 in operation prior to the effective date of this subchapter. The retail
tobacco store shall annually file with the Department by January 31 an
affidavit stating the percentage of its gross income during the prior calendar
year that was derived from the sale of loose tobacco, plants or herbs and
cigars, cigarettes, pipes or other smoking devices for smoking tobacco and
related smoking accessories. Any retail tobacco store that begins operation
after the effective date of this subchapter may only qualify for an exemption
if located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the business and
smoke from the business does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited;
   (C)   Private and semi-private rooms in nursing homes and long-term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking
is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home; and
   (D)   (1)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited.
      (2)   Not more than 25% of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel
may be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed.
      (3)   The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed,
except to permanently add additional nonsmoking rooms.
(2000 Code, § 96.15) (Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 96.21 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Department, state-certified local public health departments and
local law enforcement agencies shall enforce the provisions of this subchapter
and may assess fines pursuant to §
96.22.
   (B)   Any person may register a complaint with the Department, a state-
certified local public health department or a local law enforcement agency for
a violation of this subchapter. The Department shall establish a telephone
number that a person may call to register a complaint under this division (B).
(2000 Code, § 96.16) (Ord. 2096, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 96.22 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who
violates §
96.16 shall be fined. Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation.
   (B)   A fine imposed under this section shall be allocated as follows:
      (1)   One-half of the fine shall be distributed to the Department; and
      (2)   One-half of the fine shall be distributed to the enforcing agency.
(2000 Code, § 96.17) (Ord. 2096, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008)
Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.23 INJUNCTIONS.
   The Department, a state-certified local public health department, local law
enforcement agency or any individual personally affected by repeated violations
may institute, in a Circuit Court, an action to enjoin violations of this
subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 96.18) (Ord. 2096, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 96.24 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   No individual may be discriminated against in any amount because of the
exercise of any rights afforded by this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 96.19) (Ord. 2096, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 96.25 PROHIBITED DISTANCES.
   Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of 15 feet from entrances,
exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area
where smoking is prohibited under this subchapter so as to ensure that tobacco
smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open windows or other
means.
(2000 Code, § 96.20) (Ord. 2096, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under §
96.16 shall be fined in an amount that is not less than $100 and not more than
$250. A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or
place of employment that violates §
96.16, shall be fined not less than $250 for the first violation, not less than
$500 for the second violation within one year after the first violation, and
not less than $2,500 for each additional violation within one year after the
first violation.
(2000 Code, § 96.17) (Ord. 2096, passed 2-20-2007; Ord. 3037, passed 1-22-2008)
CHAPTER 97: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
97.01   Director of Recreational Programs office created; duties
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   Use of facilities
   
97.04   Vehicles
   
97.05   Sale of articles
   
97.06   Restricted areas
   
97.07   Improper speech or conduct
   
97.08   Hours
   
97.09   Fires
   
97.10   Drunkenness; sale of intoxicating liquors
   
97.11   Littering
   
97.12   Advertisements
   
97.13   Damage to park property
   
97.14   Breach of peace; disorderly conduct
   
97.15   Animals
   
97.16   Firearms and fireworks
   
97.17   Throwing stones
   
97.18   Hindering municipal employees
   
97.19   Public or private meetings
   
97.20   Begging
   
97.21   Use of playground equipment by adults prohibited
   
97.22   Obstructing travel
   
97.23   Fortune telling; gambling
   
97.24   Protection of birds and animals
   
97.25   Bringing plants, shrubs or trees prohibited
   
97.26   Resisting or interfering with officials
   
97.27   Glass containers prohibited
   
97.28   Radio controlled aircraft
   
97.29   Golf prohibited
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 DIRECTOR OF RECREATIONAL PROGRAMS OFFICE CREATED; DUTIES.
   (A)   There shall be established within the municipality the office of
Director of Recreational Programs, which position shall be filled by an
appointee of the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees.
   (B)   The Director of Recreational Programs shall have the general
management of all recreational programs of the municipal park system.
(2000 Code, § 97.00) (Ord. 3099, passed 5-11-2009)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Recreational Programs of the municipality.
   PARK SYSTEM. The park and recreation areas of the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 97.01) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989; Ord. 3099, passed 5-11-2009)
§ 97.03 USE OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   Park recreation facilities may be utilized only for the purpose for
which they are designed unless special permission is granted by the Director of
Parks and Recreation.
   (B)   Park facilities may be reserved or use by groups or organizations upon
approval of a park permit issued by the Parks and Recreation Department. The
party to which a park permit has been granted shall have priority use of the
reserved facility.
(2000 Code, § 97.02) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989)
§ 97.04 VEHICLES.
   No person shall bring or use any motorized vehicles on any portion of the
park system where such vehicles are prohibited from being brought or used by
notification of the Director. Bicycles, tricycles, skateboards or wagons are
permitted in the parks, except where prohibited by appropriate sign or
notification. When permitted, said items must be used in a safe and
conscientious manner.
(2000 Code, § 97.03) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.05 SALE OF ARTICLES.
   No person shall offer or exchange for sale any article or thing, or do any
hawking, peddling or soliciting, or buy or offer to buy any article or thing,
or take up any collection or solicit or receive contributions of money or
anything of value in the park system, except when authorized to do so by a
permit from or a contract with the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 97.04) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.06 RESTRICTED AREAS.
   No person shall enter on any portion of the park system where persons are
prohibited from going by direction of the Director as indicated by sign or
notice.
(2000 Code, § 97.05) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.07 IMPROPER SPEECH OR CONDUCT.
   No person shall use any abusive, threatening, insulting, indecent, profane
or obscene language, or language calculated to occasion a breach of the peace,
nor be guilty of any indecent act or behavior in the park system.
(2000 Code, § 97.06) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.08 HOURS.
   No person shall be in the park system between dusk and dawn, excluding
lighted areas, unless authorized in writing by the Director.
(2000 Code, § 97.07) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.09 FIRES.
   No person shall light or make use of any fire in the park system, except
such portions thereof as may be designated by the Director for such purpose,
and then only under such regulations as are prescribed.
(2000 Code, § 97.08) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.10 DRUNKENNESS; SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
   No intoxicated person shall enter, be or remain in the park system. No
person shall sell any intoxicating liquors in the park system, except upon
prior written approval of a special permit, issued by the Village Board of
Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 97.09) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.11 LITTERING.
   No person shall deposit, dump, throw or place any coal, ashes, dust, manure
or rubbish in or on any part of the park system. Paper, garbage or refuse
matter shall not be so deposited except in receptacles provided for that
purpose.
(2000 Code, § 97.10) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.12 ADVERTISEMENTS.
   No person shall display any placard or advertisement of any kind in the park
system, nor shall any person distribute, cast, throw or place any handbill,
pamphlet, circular, advertisement or notice of any kind, nor post, stencil or
otherwise affix any notice, bill, advertisement or other papers on any
structure or thing in or about the park premises, except upon prior written
approval of a special permit, issued by the Village Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 97.11) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.13 DAMAGE TO PARK PROPERTY.
   No person shall cut, break, climb on or in any way injure or deface any
tree, shrub, plant or turf, or any of the buildings, fences, lamps, posts or
other structures or property within the park system.
(2000 Code, § 97.12) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.14 BREACH OF PEACE; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall make, countenance or assist in making any improper noise,
riot, disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to a breach of the
peace, in the park system, or be guilty of any disorderly conduct therein, or
collect with other persons, in bodies or crowds, for unlawful purposes, or for
any purpose to the annoyance or obstruction or disturbance of other persons.
(2000 Code, § 97.13) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.15 ANIMALS.
   Dogs, while on the park premises, shall be led by a chain or leash, not
exceeding six feet in length, and every dog owner or keeper shall take whatever
means are necessary so as to prevent such dog from running at large or biting
any person or other animal. Every dog owner or keeper shall be responsible for
the prompt removal and sanitary disposition of any dog waste deposited by his
or her dog anywhere in the park system, and he or she further shall have on his
or her person suitable means for the prompt removal of such waste.
(2000 Code, § 97.14) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.16 FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS.
   No person shall carry or discharge firearms, or discharge or set off any
rocket, cracker, torpedo, squib or other fireworks or things containing any
substance of an explosive nature in the park system.
(2000 Code, § 97.15) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.17 THROWING STONES.
   No person shall throw or cast any stones or other missiles within the park
system.
(2000 Code, § 97.16) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.18 HINDERING MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall interfere with or in any manner hinder any employee of the
municipality while engaged in constructing, repairing or caring for any park
property, nor while engaging in a park and recreation activity.
(2000 Code, § 97.17) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.19 PUBLIC OR PRIVATE MEETINGS.
   (A)   No person shall call or hold any public or private meetings in any of
the park buildings without the express written consent of the Director.
   (B)   Special events such as festivals, or village-wide events, concerts or
other public entertainment shall not be permitted in any of the parks without
the express written consent of the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 97.18) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.20 BEGGING.
   No person shall beg or solicit alms in the park system.
(2000 Code, § 97.19) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.21 USE OF PLAYGROUND EQUIPMENT BY ADULTS PROHIBITED.
   No adult persons shall in any manner use any of the playground apparatus or
devices meant exclusively for the use of children.
(2000 Code, § 97.20) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.22 OBSTRUCTING TRAVEL.
   No person shall set or place or cause to be set or placed any goods, wares,
merchandise or property of any kind so as to obstruct travel in the park
system, without the written permission of the Park Director.
(2000 Code, § 97.21) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.23 FORTUNE TELLING; GAMBLING.
   No person shall tell fortunes, play at games of chance, or use any gambling
device in the park system without written permission of the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 97.22) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.24 PROTECTION OF BIRDS AND ANIMALS.
   No person shall trap, catch, wound or kill, or treat cruelly, or attempt to
trap, catch, wound or kill any bird or animal, or molest or rob any nest of any
bird or animal in the park system.
(2000 Code, § 97.23) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.25 BRINGING PLANTS, SHRUBS OR TREES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall bring into or on the park system any tree, shrub or plant,
or any newly plucked branch or portion of a tree, shrub or plant without the
written permission of the Director of Parks and Recreation.
(2000 Code, § 97.24) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.26 RESISTING OR INTERFERING WITH OFFICIALS.
   No person shall resist any park system official or police officer in the
discharge of his or her duty, or fail or refuse to obey any lawful command of
any such park system official or police officer, or in any way interfere with,
hinder or prevent any such park system official or police officer from
discharging his or her duty.
(2000 Code, § 97.25) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.27 GLASS CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
   No glass containers shall be allowed in the park system.
(2000 Code, § 97.26) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.28 RADIO CONTROLLED AIRCRAFT.
   No radio controlled aircraft shall be allowed in the park system.
(2000 Code, § 97.27) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.29 GOLF PROHIBITED.
   The playing of golf is not allowed anywhere in the park system.
(2000 Code, § 97.28) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined, upon
conviction, not less than $5 nor more than $750 for each offense. In addition,
if appropriate, restitution and the cost of replacement shall also be assessed
against any guilty person.
(2000 Code, § 97.99) (Ord. 1381, passed 2-21-1989)
CHAPTER 98: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Construction
   
98.01   Permit required
   
98.02   Application for permit
   
98.03   Fees
   
98.04   Definitions
   
98.05   Construction of sidewalks to conform
   
98.06   Sidewalks built 12 inches from property line
   
98.07   Adoption of Illinois Department of Transportation Sidewalk
Specifications
   
98.08   Portland cement concrete sidewalk
   
98.09   Portland cement concrete sidewalk construction requirements
   
98.10   Concrete mixture requirements
   
98.11   Minimum thickness of concrete sidewalk
   
98.12   Requirement of all sidewalks to be placed on a two-inch cushion
Maintenance
   
98.25   Owner’s responsibility
   
98.26   Private drives
Additional Regulations
   
98.40   Unlawful for vehicle, five tons or over, to cross gutters
   
98.41   Parking between curb or gutter and the sidewalk
   
98.42   Burning rubbish on sidewalks, gutters prohibited
   
98.43   Obstructing flow in gutters prohibited
   
98.44   Obstructions prohibited
House Numbering
   
98.55   Lots and houses running north and south
   
98.56   Lots and houses running east and west
   
98.57   Even numbers
   
98.58   Map to show numbering
   
98.59   Houses to be numbered as required and to be posted
   
98.60   Clerk to furnish numbering information on request
 
   
98.99   Penalty
CONSTRUCTION
§ 98.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   The construction of concrete curbs or sidewalks on municipal property by
persons or groups other than the municipality shall be expressly prohibited
except with the specific written consent of the Board of Trustees, on
conformity with the Board’s requirements. The Board may require a performance
bond equal to the estimated cost of construction.
(2000 Code, § 98.01) (Ord. 308, passed 8-5-1940; Ord. 427, passed 10-4-1954)
Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.02 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct a sidewalk within the
municipality shall make a written application which shall be filed with the
Director of Community Development, and shall contain the following information:
   (A)   Name and address of applicant;
   (B)   The legal description of the real estate adjacent to the proposed
sidewalk; and
   (C)   Such other information as the Clerk or the President and Board of
Trustees shall require.
(2000 Code, § 98.02) (Ord. 308, passed 8-5-1940; Ord. 1147, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 98.03 FEES.
   A permit issued by the Director of Community Development shall be required
before any person, firm or corporation may construct a sidewalk. Before any
work is begun on the construction of the sidewalk, the Village Engineer shall
set stakes fixing the location and grades of the sidewalk. All costs are to be
paid by the applicant.
(2000 Code, § 98.03) (Ord. 308, passed 8-5-1940; Ord. 1147, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 98.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRACTOR. The party or parties contracting to do any work described in
this chapter, or authorized representative of such party or parties.
   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer or other person appointed by the municipality
to oversee construction.
(2000 Code, § 98.04) (Ord. 308, passed 8-5-1940)
§ 98.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS TO CONFORM.
   All sidewalks constructed within the municipality shall conform to the
regulations of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 98.05) (Ord. 308, passed 8-5-1940) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.06 SIDEWALKS BUILT 12 INCHES FROM PROPERTY LINE.
   The side of the sidewalk adjacent to the street line of the private property
shall be placed 12 inches distant therefrom and parallel to the street line as
measured toward the centerline of said street.
(2000 Code, § 98.06) (Ord. 308, passed 8-5-1940) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.07 ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION SIDEWALK
SPECIFICATIONS.
   The village adopts the IDOT April 1, 2016 and its amendments (or latest
version) regulations.
§ 98.08 PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE SIDEWALK.
   (A)   Description. This work shall consist of portland cement concrete
sidewalk and sidewalk aprons constructed in one course on a prepared subgrade.
This item shall apply to sidewalk and sidewalk aprons placed on earth or other
subgrade, but shall not apply to sidewalk that is integrally a part of a
structure.
   (B)   Materials. Materials shall meet the requirements of the following
articles of § 700 - Materials.
 
Item                             Article
Coarse aggregate                 704.02
Concrete admixtures              718.01
Fine aggregate                   703.02
Portland cement                  701.01 - 701.05
Preformed expansion joint filler 715.01 - 715.10
Water                            702.01, 702.02
 
   (C)   Equipment. Equipment shall meet the requirements of the following
articles of § 800 - Equipment.
 
Item                            Article
Batching and weighing equipment 803.02, 803.03
Concrete mixers                 803.01
Membrane curing equipment       801.09(b)
 
(2000 Code, § 98.08) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.09 PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General. The sidewalk and sidewalk aprons shall be constructed of
Class X concrete mixed in accordance with the requirements of the applicable
paragraphs of § 504.
   (B)   Subgrade preparation. The subgrade shall be tamped or rolled until
thoroughly compacted. At locations where sidewalk is constructed at entrances,
the sidewalk shall be thickened to the thickness of the adjacent entrance or
driveway pavement. This work shall be considered as incidental, and no
additional compensation will be allowed.
   (C)   Forms. Side forms shall be of lumber of not less than two-inch nominal
thickness or of steel of equal rigidity. They shall be held securely in place
by stakes or braces, with the top edges true to line and grade. Forms for the
sidewalk aprons shall be set so that the slab will have a uniform fall between
the sidewalk proper and the curb grade.
   (D)   Placing and finishing.
      (1)   The subgrade shall be moistened just before the concrete is placed.
The concrete shall be placed in successive batches for the entire width of the
slab, struck off, mechanically vibrated and finished to a true and even surface
with floats and trowels. The final troweling shall be done with a steel trowel,
leaving a smooth, even surface. After the water sheen has disappeared, the
surface shall be given a final finish by brushing with a whitewash brush. The
brush shall be drawn across the sidewalk at right angles to the edges of the
walk, with adjacent strokes slightly overlapping, producing a uniform, slightly
roughened surface with parallel brush marks.
      (2)   The surface shall be divided by grooves constructed at right angles
to the centerline of the sidewalk. These grooves shall extend to one-fourth the
depth of the sidewalk, shall be not less than one-eighth inch and not more than
one-fourth inch in width, and shall be edged with an edging tool having a one-
fourth inch radius. No slab shall be longer than five feet nor less than four
feet on any one side, unless otherwise ordered by the Engineer. The edges of
the slabs shall be edged as described above.
   (E)   (1)   Expansion joints. Expansion joints of the thickness specified
below shall consist of preformed joint filler. The top of the joint shall be
placed one-fourth inch below the surface of the sidewalk.
      (2)   Three-fourths inch thick expansion joints. Expansion joints three-
fourths inch thick shall be placed between the sidewalk and all structures,
such as light standards, traffic light standards, traffic poles and subway
columns which extend through the sidewalk, and shall be placed at intervals of
not more than 50 feet in the sidewalk. Where the sidewalk is constructed
adjacent to pavement or curb having expansion joints, the expansion joints in
the sidewalk shall be placed opposite the existing expansion joints as nearly
as practicable. Expansion joints shall also be placed where the sidewalk abuts
existing sidewalks, between driveway pavement and sidewalk, and between
sidewalk and curbs where the sidewalk abuts a curb.
   (F)   Curing and protection. Curing and protection shall be in accordance
with Article 625.01.
   (G)   Backfill. After the concrete has been cured, the spaces along the
edges of the sidewalk shall be backfilled to the required elevation with
approved material. The material shall then be compacted until firm, and the
surface neatly graded.
   (H)   Disposal of surplus material. Surplus or waste material resulting from
the sidewalk construction operations shall be disposed of by the contractor, at
his or her own expense.
   (I)   Method of measurement. Portland cement concrete sidewalk shall be
measured in place, and the area shall be computed in square feet.
(2000 Code, § 98.09) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.10 CONCRETE MIXTURE REQUIREMENTS.
   All concrete used in sidewalk shall be ready mix, which is known as six bag
mix, and shall be air-entrained.
(2000 Code, § 98.10) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.11 MINIMUM THICKNESS OF CONCRETE SIDEWALK.
   Minimum thickness of concrete sidewalk shall be as follows:
   (A)   Across driveways, seven inches; and
   (B)   Other sidewalks except across driveways, five inches.
(2000 Code, § 98.11) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.12 REQUIREMENT OF ALL SIDEWALKS TO BE PLACED ON A TWO-INCH CUSHION.
   All sidewalks shall be placed on a two-inch cushion of State Gradation CA-
6 aggregate, thoroughly tamped in place. This cushion is not included in the
thicknesses stated in §
98.11.
(2000 Code, § 98.12) Penalty, see §
98.99
MAINTENANCE
§ 98.25 OWNER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   All property owners shall be held responsible for the maintenance of such
conditions as to prevent the destruction of municipal installations in front of
their property. Protection of municipal property shall include the prevention
of the destruction due to vehicular use of private drives crossing curbs and
sidewalks.
(2000 Code, § 98.25) (Ord. 427, passed 10-4-1954)
§ 98.26 PRIVATE DRIVES.
   Where curbs, gutters or sidewalks are installed, such installations shall
not be crossed or used as private drives unless the portions of the drive
between the sidewalk and curb or gutter are paved and maintained smooth and
level with such surfaces. Such paving shall consist of at least six inches of
crushed stone (road-mix), or crushed stone with asphalt surfaces, or not less
than seven inches thickness of concrete. The sidewalk for the width of the
driveway use shall be considered as part of the driveway, and shall be
maintained by the property owner to serve in every way as a driveway as well as
a sidewalk, conforming in appearance to the remainder of the sidewalk in the
area.
(2000 Code, § 98.26) (Ord. 427, passed 10-4-1954) Penalty, see §
98.99
ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS
§ 98.40 UNLAWFUL FOR VEHICLE, FIVE TONS OR OVER, TO CROSS GUTTERS.
   No vehicle with the gross weight of five tons or more will be allowed to use
such driveways or otherwise cross over gutters or sidewalks.
(2000 Code, § 98.35) (Ord. 427, passed 10-4-1954) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.41 PARKING BETWEEN CURB OR GUTTER AND THE SIDEWALK.
   No parking shall be allowed between the gutter or curb and the sidewalk on
streets with concrete gutters.
(2000 Code, § 98.36) (Ord. 427, passed 10-4-1954) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.42 BURNING RUBBISH ON SIDEWALKS, GUTTERS PROHIBITED.
   No leaves, rubbish or other debris shall be disposed of, burned or
incinerated on paved surfaces, sidewalks, gutters, parkways or other municipal
property.
(2000 Code, § 98.37) (Ord. 427, passed 10-4-1954) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.43 OBSTRUCTING FLOW IN GUTTERS PROHIBITED.
   No property owner shall interfere or obstruct the flow in gutters or sewer-
intakes.
(2000 Code, § 98.38) (Ord. 427, passed 10-4-1954) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.44 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to place any encroachments or obstructions on any
sidewalk, street or other public right-of-way with the following exceptions.
   (A)   Irrigation systems. Allow the installation of private lawn sprinkling
systems within the village parkway/right-of-way for both residential and
commercial properties, under the following provisions.
      (1)   Contractor of homeowner shall secure a permit. Cost of the permit
shall be set in the fee schedule. An inspection of the piping and connections
are required, prior to backfill in the right-of-way.
      (2)   To secure a permit, a set of plans shall be submitted to the
Building Department reflecting the location of sprinkler heads and the required
reduced pressure zone (RPZ) valve.
      (3)   Lawn sprinkler systems are allowed only once under the public
sidewalk, installed parallel to and within six inches of the back of the public
sidewalk, and either one-way or half circle sprinkler heads should be used in
this area.
      (4)   The Illinois Department of Public Health requires that a licensed
plumber supervise the installation of lawn sprinkler systems and make the
physical connection between the sprinkler system and the RPZ to prevent
contamination of drinking water supplies. A yearly certification of the RPZ
value by a state licensed plumber is also required. A written statement of this
test shall be submitted to the Public Works Department.
      (5)   The original property owner(s) shall sign a release which states:
“The property owner will NOT, under any circumstances, hold the Village of
Matteson or any of its agents liable for replacing or repairing any sprinkler
heads or damaged piping in parkway/right-of-way. This includes any damage to
any part of the system caused by the Village of Matteson or any of its agents
working in the parkway/right-of-way or on village property.”
      (6)   Failure to comply with any portion of this section will result in
termination of all water service.
   (B)   Mailboxes. Masonry mailboxes and planters will be allowed under these
strictly enforced restrictions.
      (1)   No person shall construct, erect or alter a brick or masonry
mailbox without first securing a permit.
      (2)   Along with a permit application, a plat of survey should be
attached to show the following. The mailbox setback a minimum of 12 inches from
the back of curb but in no case shall any portion of the mailbox, including the
door when in the open position, extend past the back of curb; at least 12
inches from the driveway; the structure shall not be erected within five feet
of any buffalo box, water valve, vault/box, sanitary sewer manhole, storm sewer
manhole or inlet, or within ten feet nor immediately in front of a fire
hydrant; structure shall not exceed two feet square. The brickwork for the
mailbox shall be tied to the pad in such a manner so as to prevent the mailbox
from becoming detached from the pad.
      (3)   The original property owner(s) shall sign a release which states:
“The property owner will NOT, under any circumstances, hold the Village of
Matteson or its agents liable for replacing or repairing the damaged masonry
mailbox and/or planters by the Village of Matteson or its agents working in the
parkway/right-of-way or on village property.”
(2000 Code, § 98.39) (Ord. 1571, passed 10-17-1994; Ord. 2022, passed 4-4-2005)
Penalty, see §
98.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prevent and remove encroachments, see 65 ILCS 5/11-80-3
HOUSE NUMBERING
§ 98.55 LOTS AND HOUSES RUNNING NORTH AND SOUTH.
   All lots or houses located on north and south streets or on streets running
in a northerly and southerly direction shall be numbered from 211th Street,
beginning with number 21100 at the south line of 211th Street and increasing
towards the south.
(2000 Code, § 98.50) (Ord. 354, passed 3-4-1946)
§ 98.56 LOTS AND HOUSES RUNNING EAST AND WEST.
   All lots or houses located on east and west streets or on streets running in
an easterly and westerly direction shall be numbered from Kedzie Avenue,
beginning with number 3200 at the west line of Kedzie Avenue, and increasing
towards the west.
(2000 Code, § 98.51) (Ord. 354, passed 3-4-1946)
§ 98.57 EVEN NUMBERS.
   There shall be assigned one house number to each 25 feet of frontage on each
side of all streets. The even numbers on the south and north streets and
streets running in a northerly and southerly direction shall be on the west
side of said streets. The even numbers on the east and west streets or streets
running in an easterly and westerly direction shall be on the north side of
said streets.
(2000 Code, § 98.52) (Ord. 354, passed 3-4-1946)
§ 98.58 MAP TO SHOW NUMBERING.
   The Village Clerk shall keep a map of the village on which map a house
number has been assigned for each 25 feet of street frontage in accordance with
the provisions of this subchapter. House numbers are assigned all property
within the municipality fronting on municipal streets in accordance with the
house numbers appearing on said map. If any additional street or streets are
opened in the municipality, the property fronting on such streets shall be
assigned house numbers under this subchapter and in conformity with the house
numbers herein assigned property on parallel streets.
(2000 Code, § 98.53) (Ord. 354, passed 3-4-1946)
§ 98.59 HOUSES TO BE NUMBERED AS REQUIRED AND TO BE POSTED.
   It is made the duty of the owner, agent or person in possession of any
building in the municipality to number in accordance with this subchapter. Each
of the figures of every such number on any residence or apartment building
shall be not less than three inches in height and on any store and place of
business shall be not less than six inches in height. All numbers shall be
placed in a conspicuous place or near the entrance or entrances of the
buildings to which they are attached.
(2000 Code, § 98.54) (Ord. 354, passed 3-4-1946) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.60 CLERK TO FURNISH NUMBERING INFORMATION ON REQUEST.
   The Village Clerk shall inform the owner, agent or person in possession of
any building in the village as to the house number thereof at any time on
request.
(2000 Code, § 98.55) (Ord. 354, passed 3-4-1946)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is
not specifically provided, shall be fined as provided in §
10.99 of this code not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and
every day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(2000 Code, § 98.99)
CHAPTER 99: TREES AND VEGETATION
Section
Infected Trees
   
99.01   Laboratory analysis of tree in question
   
99.02   Infected trees to be cut down; notification to owner
   
99.03   Failure to comply
Weeds
   
99.15   Weeds declared a nuisance
   
99.16   Unlawful to permit noxious weeds to exceed certain height
   
99.17   Owner to destroy weeds
   
99.18   Failure to comply
INFECTED TREES
§ 99.01 LABORATORY ANALYSIS OF TREE IN QUESTION.
   Whenever any tree within the municipality appears to be, or is suspected of
being, infected with Dutch elm disease, and that fact is brought to the
attention of the Superintendent of Public Works, he or she shall cause a
laboratory analysis to be made of a specimen from the tree in question. If it
shall be found to be infected with Dutch elm disease, the Superintendent shall
order the infected tree cut down and destroyed.
(2000 Code, § 99.01) (Ord. 461, passed 8-5-1957)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to control and eradicate Dutch elm disease, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-11
§ 99.02 INFECTED TREES TO BE CUT DOWN; NOTIFICATION TO OWNER.
   All infected trees on municipal property shall be promptly cut down by the
municipality under the direction of the Superintendent of Public Works. When
the tree found to be infected is located on private property, the Village Clerk
shall notify the owner in writing if the owner resides within the municipality,
such writing to be delivered to the owner’s residence. If the owner does not
live within the municipality, the notice shall be given by registered mail
addressed to the person to whom was sent the bill for general property taxes
for the preceding year. The notice shall inform the owner that the tree or
trees are infected and shall direct that the infected trees be removed within
30 days from the date on which the notice is served or mailed.
(2000 Code, § 99.02) (Ord. 461, passed 8-5-1957)
§ 99.03 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   In case any owner, lessee, agent of such owner or occupant shall refuse or
neglect to destroy such infected tree or trees, the Board of Trustees may
direct that the tree or trees be destroyed.
(2000 Code, § 99.03)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to remove infected trees, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-12
WEEDS
§ 99.15 WEEDS DECLARED A NUISANCE.
   For the purpose of this chapter, Canadian thistle and all its varieties,
perennial sow thistles, European bind weed, leafy spurge, Russian knap weed,
hoary cress, ragweed, jimson and poison ivy, as well as any and all other
species and types of weeds, are declared a nuisance. Dandelions are also
declared a nuisance on any commercial properties.
(2000 Code, § 99.15) (Ord. 554, passed 7-16-1962; Ord. 4510, passed 6-20-2022)
§ 99.16 UNLAWFUL TO PERMIT NOXIOUS WEEDS TO EXCEED CERTAIN HEIGHT.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee, agent of such owner or occupant
of any real estate to permit any weeds to grow to a height exceeding six inches
anywhere in the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 99.16) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to destroy weeds at property owner’s expense, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-
6
§ 99.17 OWNER TO DESTROY WEEDS.
   It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee, agent or occupant of any real
estate located within the municipality on which any weeds exist to destroy the
same before they grow to a height exceeding six inches or before they reach a
seed-bearing stage whichever occurs first, and to prevent such weeds from
perpetuating themselves. In addition to the above it shall be the duty of every
owner, lessee, agent or occupant of any commercial real estate located within
the municipality on which any dandelion weeds exist to destroy the same before
they grow to a height exceeding six inches or before they reach a seed-bearing
stage whichever occurs first, and to prevent such weeds from perpetuating
themselves.
(2000 Code, § 99.17) (Ord. 981, passed 9-18-1978; Ord. 4510, passed 6-20-2022)
Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Costs, lien, notice and filing, see 65 ILCS 5/11-20-7
§ 99.18 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees may provide for the cutting of weeds or grass,
the trimming of trees or bushes, and the removal of nuisance bushes or trees in
the village, when the owners of real estate refuse or neglect to cut, trim or
remove them and to collect from the owners of private property the reasonable
cost thereof. This cost is a lien upon the real estate affected, superior to
all other liens and encumbrances, except tax liens; provided that within 60
days after such cost and expense is incurred the village, or person performing
the service by authority of the village, in his, her or its own name, files
notice of lien in the office of the recorder in the county in which such real
estate is located or in the office of the Registrar of Titles of such county if
the real estate affected is registered under the Torrens system. The notice
shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a description of the real estate
sufficient for identification thereof, the amount of money representing the
cost and expense incurred or payable for the service, and the date or dates
when such cost and expense was incurred by the village. However, the lien of
such village shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose rights in and to such
real estate have arisen subsequent to the cutting of weeds or grass, the
trimming of trees or bushes, or the removal of nuisance bushes or trees and
prior to the filing of such notice, and the lien of such village shall not be
valid as to any mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lienor whose rights in
and to such real estate arise prior to the filing of such notice. Upon payment
of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in such property
plus an administrative fee of $75, after notice of lien has been filed, the
lien shall be released by the village or person in whose name the lien has been
filed and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice of
lien.
   (B)   The cost of the cutting, trimming or removal of weeds, grass, trees or
bushes shall not be lien on the real estate affected unless a notice is
personally served on, or sent by certified mail to, the person to whom was sent
the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last preceding year.
The notice shall be delivered or sent after the cutting, trimming or removal of
weeds, grass, trees or bushes on the property. The notice shall state the
substance of this section and the substance of any village ordinance
implementing this section and shall identify the property, by common
description, and the location of the weeds to be cut.
(65 ILCS 5/11-20-7) (2000 Code, § 99.18) (Ord. 4461, passed 7-19-2021)
CHAPTER 100: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
   
100.01   Purpose and scope
   
100.02   Definitions
   
100.03   Annual registration required
   
100.04   Permit required; applications and fees
   
100.05   Action on permit applications
   
100.06   Effect of permit
   
100.07   Revised permit drawings
   
100.08   Insurance
   
100.09   Indemnification
   
100.10   Security
   
100.11   Permit suspension and revocation
   
100.12   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status
   
100.13   General construction standards
   
100.14   Traffic control
   
100.15   Location of facilities
   
100.16   Construction methods and materials
   
100.17   Vegetation control
   
100.18   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities
   
100.19   Clean-up and restoration
   
100.20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
100.21   Variances
   
100.22   Enforcement
 
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the village’s
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the village
rights-of-way and the village as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights-of-way in the village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including without limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the village’s residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities subject to this chapter. This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-
way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, licenses or similar agreements. The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   (E)   Effect of franchises, licenses or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers. In the event
that a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise,
license or similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound engineering judgment. The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards, conditions
and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so determines.
Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the village to
regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and
welfare.
(2000 Code, § 100.01) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 100.02 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Ill. Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   CABLE OPERATOR. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE. The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE. The municipal code of the Village of Matteson.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS. The Director of Public Works or his or her
designee.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY. For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer or his or her designee.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across or within rights-of-way under this chapter. For
purposes of this chapter, the term FACILITY shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent
to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the
Village Engineer or Director of Public Works to pose an unreasonable and
imminent risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the
ecological balance of the environment, including, but not limited to,
explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases,
poisons, etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two or
more utilities.
   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of two or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT. The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
100.04 and
100.05.
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane or coal-slurry.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall not include any
real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right-of-way.
   ROADWAY. The part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND. The amount of security required pursuant to §
100.10.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite or similar facilities. PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, or cable
or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to
the village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of the Federal
Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1500 et seq.), as now or hereafter
amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER. Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Includes every person engaged in making sales
of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v), the Illinois
Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Matteson.
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(2000 Code, § 100.02) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 100.03 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies a right-of-way within the village shall register
on January 1 of each year with the Director of Public Works, providing the
utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the right-of-
way and a 24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of
insurance as required in §
100.08, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(2000 Code, § 100.03) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.04 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this
chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within any
village right-of-way which changes the location of the facility, adds a new
facility, disrupts the right-of-way (as defined in this chapter) or materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above,
along, under, across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an
application with the Village Engineer or Director of Public Works and obtaining
a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers’ premises where there will be no disruption of
the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility’s name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      (2)   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest in the work;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed.
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations;
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
100.08;
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
100.10;
      (9)   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see §
100.21); and
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) above, the permit application
shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific utility that
is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “certificate of public
convenience and necessity” or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District (other local or state entities with jurisdiction), have been
satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant’s duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village within 30 days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount established in the village fee schedule
for development permits. No application fee is required to be paid by any
electricity utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure
maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act,
35 ILCS 645.
(2000 Code, § 100.04) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.05 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Director of
Public Works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, the Director of Public Works shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Director of Public Works is
satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter
and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Director of
Public Works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Works, that the construction proposed
under the application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Additional village review of applications of telecommunications
retailers.
      (1)   Pursuant to the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4, a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to
commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans, specifications
and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose and intent of the
facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications retailer to the
village not less than ten days prior to the commencement of work requiring no
excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of work
requiring excavation. The Director of Public Works shall specify the portion of
the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Director of Public Works fails to provide
such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either
ten days after service of notice to the village by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or
25 days after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case
of work involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications
retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
100.04, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an
application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of division (A) above.
   (C)   Additional village review of applications of holders of state
authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007. Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state-issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq., shall be deemed
granted 45 days after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by
the village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes,
ordinances and regulations.
(2000 Code, § 100.05) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 100.06 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the village with
such village representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(2000 Code, § 100.06) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.07 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within 90 days after
the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall
specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from
the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for variance in accordance with §
100.21. If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility
so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans
therefor.
(2000 Code, § 100.07) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.08 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or constructing any facility in
the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in divisions (A)(1)(a) and (A)(1)(b) below:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly referred to as
“X,” “C” and “U” coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
            1.   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each
person;
            2.   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any
one accident; and
            3.   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles
with a combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property
damage for each accident;
         (c)   Worker’s compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
      (2)   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
         “It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be
canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after
receipt by the village by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such
intent to cancel or not to renew.”
      (2)   Within ten days after receipt by the village of said notice, and in
no event later than ten days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) above. A
utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such self-
insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional insureds
under division (A) above, or the requirements of divisions (B), (C) and (D)
above. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required under division (A) above,
such as evidence that the utility is a “private self-insurer” under the
Worker’s Compensation Act, 820 ILCS 305/1 et seq..
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility’s liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state. (All insurance
carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated “A-“ or better and of a class
size “X” or higher by A.M. Best Company.)
(2000 Code, § 100.08) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.09 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected
and appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
(2000 Code, § 100.09) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 100.10 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee’s sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this chapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
non-performance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form.
      (1)   The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the village in the
form, at the permittee’s election, of cash, a surety bond in a form acceptable
to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to
the village.
      (2)   Any surety bond or letter of credit provided pursuant to this
division (B) shall, at a minimum:
         (a)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
         (b)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection
by the village of any amounts covered by it; and
         (c)   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within
the state at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right-of-way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the Director of Public Works, and may also include
reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are likely to be
incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where the
construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the Director of
Public Works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow the permittee to
post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to each phase of the
construction under the permit. The amount of the Security Fund for phased
construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would have been
required under the provisions of this division (C) for any single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals.
      (1)   The village, upon 14-days’ advance written notice clearly stating
the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights under this
division (D), may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund, provided that the
permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount within the 14-day
notice period.
      (2)   Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
         (a)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
         (b)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due
and unpaid;
         (c)   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
         (d)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the
village determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the
Security Fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 days after receipt of written notice from the
village that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund, the
permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in division
(C) above.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the Security Fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the Security Fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C) above.
   (G)   Closing and return of Security Fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited. The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(2000 Code, § 100.10) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 100.11 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      (3)   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare;
or
      (4)   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-
of-way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such
removal to the village within ten days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation.
      (2)   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in this division (C).
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A)
above.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of division (C) above, the village or its
designee may, at the option of the village: correct the deficiencies; upon not
less than 20-days’ notice to the permittee, remove the subject facilities or
equipment; or after not less than 30-days’ notice to the permittee of failure
to cure the noncompliance, deem them abandoned and property of the village. The
permittee shall be liable in all events to the village for all costs of
removal.
(2000 Code, § 100.11) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 100.12 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change. A utility shall notify the village no less
than 30 days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the right-
of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility or
the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village’s right-
of-way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(2000 Code, § 100.12) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.13 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic-Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices;
      (7)   Flagger’s Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Director of Public Works shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the Director of Public Works shall state which standard or
principle will apply to the construction, maintenance or operation of a
facility in the future.
(2000 Code, § 100.13) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.14 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The village’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices and this code.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
100.20, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable under the
circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the village.
(2000 Code, § 100.14) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.15 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this division
(A).
      (1)   No interference with village facilities. No utility facilities
shall be placed in any location if the Director of Public Works determines that
the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
village’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village’s utility facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (0.6 m) behind the face of
the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (0.3
m) of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way line.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right-of-way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right-of-way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line and any above-grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities. Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities.
      (3)   Ninety degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a 90 degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC’s
rules entitled, Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines (83 Ill.
Adm. Code Part 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way
line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 C.F.R. § 192.707).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way.
      (2)   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right-of-way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed.
(2000 Code, § 100.15) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.16 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking.
         (a)   Pits and shoring. Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Director
of Public Works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking operations
and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations are
completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected by
barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than six inches. Borings over six
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and following
pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside diameter of
the following pipe by more than one inch (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings with diameters six inches or less. Borings of six inches
or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with auger,
or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of § 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Director of Public Works.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         (c)   Drip line of trees. The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Director of Public Works, the utility, at its expense, shall
remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility,
place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement,
sidewalk, and curbs.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this division (A)(4)
is permitted under §
100.21, the following requirements shall apply.
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Director of Public Works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven years, or resurfaced in the last three
years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be an
emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before the
time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if
extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
Type of Facility                        Minimum Cover
Communication, cable or video service   18 to 24 inches (0.6 m), as determined
lines                                   by village
Electric lines                          30 inches (0.8 m)
Gas or petroleum products               30 inches (0.8 m)
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                    protection
Water line                              Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                        protection
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill. Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled Rules for Construction
of Electric Power and Communications Lines and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities.
            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if the crossing is installed by the use of “moles,” “whip augers” or other
approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation or the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten business days after
placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of “moles”, “whip augers” or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission, distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 -
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. Part 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B31.4).
      (5)   Waterlines, sanitary sewer lines, stormwater sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois.
      (6)   Ground-mounted appurtenances. Ground-mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending one foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Director of Public Works. With the approval of
the Director of Public Works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation-free area. The housing for ground-mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Director of Public
Works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms or other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be
obtained from the village.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Director of Public Works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of
construction are those set forth in this chapter.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence
and location of existing above-ground and underground facilities within the
rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make
its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying
possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act, 220
ILCS 50/1 et seq.
(2000 Code, § 100.16) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.17 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities - compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable state laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the village as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utilities - tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable state laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use.
      (1)   Except as provided in the following division (D)(2), no utility
shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or
vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth,
insects or disease.
      (2)   Spraying of any type of brush-killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights-of-way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Director of Public Works that such spraying is the only practicable
method of vegetation control.
(2000 Code, § 100.17) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.18 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the corporate authorities have
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within 90
days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the Director of Public Works
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event that the village does not direct the utility
that abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to
the village, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the
alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility
or person.
(2000 Code, § 100.18) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.19 CLEAN-UP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within ten days after any portion of the rights-of-
way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by
the utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration
of entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made
using materials and methods approved by the Director of Public Works. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the Director of Public Works for good cause shown.
(2000 Code, § 100.19) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.20 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General. Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or
within rights-of-way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility’s expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit.
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Director of Public Works or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
   (D)   Graffiti removal. The utility shall be solely responsible for the cost
of the removal of all graffiti from all of its cable cabinets and other
equipment. If graffiti is not removed after ten days written notice from the
village to the utility, then the village may, but is not obligated, to so
remove the said graffiti. Upon demand by the village to the utility, the
village shall be reimbursed for all costs incurred by the village for said
graffiti removal.
   (E)   Reduction in size of cable cabinets. If and when the availability of
the size of the cable cabinets are reduced in size, the utility shall be
required at its sole cost and expense to immediately replace all of its
oversized installed cabinets with a reduced size cabinet.
(2000 Code, § 100.20) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.21 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Director of
Public Works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Director of Public Works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Director of Public Works may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Director of Public Works may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Director
of Public Works under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to
appeal to the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the
Village Clerk within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement,
decision or determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration
of the appeal at the Board’s next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at
least seven days after the filing of the appeal. The Village Board shall timely
decide the appeal.
(2000 Code, § 100.21) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 100.22 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 100.22) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village
will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
village’s costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(2000 Code, § 100.99) (Ord. 3042, passed 2-19-2008)
CHAPTER 101: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
101.01   Special events
   
101.02   Permit required
   
101.03   General restrictions
   
101.04   Application requirements and procedure
   
101.05   Additional conditions
   
101.06   Special business promotion of temporary outdoor vehicle display
§ 101.01 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   A special event is described as a one-time or infrequently occurring event
outside normal programs or activities of the sponsoring or organizing
individual or group. A special event may be permitted in any zoning district
upon application to the Village Clerk’s office for review and approval.
(Ord. 4037, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 101.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A special events permit is required for any of the following activities:
   (A)   Any organized athletic, fund raising or public awareness type of
events that may require the use of any public streets or sidewalks as their
route. The routing of these types of events is subject to the authorization of
the Village Police, Fire and Public Works Departments;
   (B)   Special business promotions, excluding temporary outdoor sales (such
as tent sales, parking lot sales, farmers markets, farm stands, sidewalk sales
and similar sales) as these are regulated by the zoning ordinance. The use of
searchlights, hot air balloons and inflatable symbols may be permitted in
conjunction with a special business promotion;
   (C)   Carnivals, parades, petting zoos and fireworks displays;
   (D)   Church socials, weddings and yard parties; and
   (E)   Block parties subject to the following:
      (1)   Any block party that may necessitate the closing or cordoning off
of any public right-of-way is subject to the authorization of the Village
Police and Fire Departments and the Public Works Department;
      (2)   For safety reasons, block parties require the organizers to obtain
written permission of at least half of the residents who live on that block
affected by the street closing prior to any village review of their permit
request;
      (3)   Upon village approval of the special event permit, the organizers
are required to provide all residents of that block with written notification
of the date and times of the party and notification that the street will be
closed for through traffic; and
      (4)   The Department of Public Works will drop off the street barricades
at or near the streets that require blocking. The organizers will be required
to set up the street barricades at the beginning of the party. At the
conclusion of the party, the organizers will be required to remove the
barricades to the parkways for later pick-up by the Public Works Department.
(Ord. 4037, passed 3-15-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 101.03 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.
   Special events shall be subject to the following restrictions.
   (A)   Special events shall be limited to no more than two occurrences per
calendar year for each zoning lot.
   (B)   Special events shall be limited to a maximum of five consecutive days
each with no less than 60 days between special events.
   (C)   No painted markings of any kind will be permitted on any of the
village’s streets, sidewalks, public rights-of-way or hike and bike trails.
   (D)   Special event hours shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. through 10:00 p.m.
Sunday through Thursday; and 9:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m. Friday and Saturday.
   (E)   The use of a tent in conjunction with a special event is allowed. If a
tent is erected, used or maintained, then it shall observe all yard setback
requirements in zoning district where located.
(Ord. 4037, passed 3-15-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 101.04 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All persons desiring to conduct a special event shall first submit an
application to the Village Clerk’s office not later than 14 business days prior
to the event. The Village Clerk will forward all applications for a special
event permit to appropriate personnel in other departments, as necessary, for
review and approval.
   (B)   Such application shall contain the following:
      (1)   A site plan, illustrating the location of the proposed special
event, parking and circulation paths, access locations and type of pedestrian
and traffic control safety measures to be installed;
      (2)   Dates and times for the proposed special event;
      (3)   Type of equipment to be used (i.e., grill, lighting) and power
source (i.e., charcoal, propane, electricity);
      (4)   Required application fee;
      (5)   Other details or information as may be required above; and
      (6)   If the applicant is not the owner of the property, then written
permission from the property owner shall be provided at time of application.
(Ord. 4037, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 4198, passed 8-12-2013)
§ 101.05 ADDITIONAL CONDITIONS.
   The village may impose additional conditions upon the issuance of a special
event permit to ensure the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the
residents and participants.
(Ord. 4037, passed 3-15-2010)
§ 101.06 SPECIAL BUSINESS PROMOTION OF TEMPORARY OUTDOOR VEHICLE DISPLAY.
   Special business promotions involving the outdoor off-premises display of
new and used motor vehicles shall not be subject to the general restrictions of
§
101.03 but shall be subject to the regulations in the following divisions (A)
through (G).
   (A)   Applicants for a special business promotion for outdoor off-premises
display of new and used motor vehicles shall have an established motor vehicle
dealership located in the village.
   (B)   The promotion shall be permitted for one month, from April through
October, and may be renewed for additional monthly terms.
   (C)   The area of the promotion shall be located in a portion of a public
parking lot of a mall or business that has not less than 100 spaces and the
area of the promotion shall not be more than 15% of the total parking spaces.
   (D)   The vehicles shall be parked in the designated parking stalls unless a
parking location plan is approved as a part of the permit. The vehicles shall
meet all requirements of the Illinois Vehicle Code and ordinances of the
village.
   (E)   The promotion period may be renewed by the village if the promotion
was operated in compliance with all ordinances of the village and did not
create a public safety issue or nuisance.
   (F)   The promotion area may only include temporary structures as shown on
the approved parking plan for the protection and comfort of employees and
customers which shall be maintained in accordance with village ordinances.
   (G)   The applicant shall comply with all sign code regulations of the
village.
(Ord. 4158, passed 6-18-2012) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 102: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   
102.01   Purpose and scope
   
102.02   Definitions
   
102.03   Regulation of small wireless facilities
   
102.04   Dispute resolution
   
102.05   Indemnification
   
102.06   Insurance
§ 102.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
    (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Act.
   (B)   Conflicts with other ordinances. This chapter supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws
or regulations.
(Ord. 4440, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 102.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or
mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the village for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK. A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VI.D.1.a.i through Section VLD.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance
adopted by the village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the village in
public rights-of-way.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the village to perform an action
or initiate, continue,  or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. Right-of-way does not include village- owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six cubic feet; and (ii) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following
types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of
equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and
other services.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 4440, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 102.03 REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Permitted use. Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
division (C)(9) regarding height exceptions or variances, but not subject to
zoning review or approval if they are collocated (i) in rights-of-way in any
zoning district; or (ii) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively
for commercial or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit required. An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      (1)   Application requirements. A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the village, together with the village's small cell
facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act
of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application
as it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge; and
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      (2)   Application process. The village shall process applications as
follows:
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the village fails to
approve or deny the application within 90 days after the submission of a
completed application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75
days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the
ninetieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day
after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt of
the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the
permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (c)   1.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the village fails to approve or
deny the application within 120 days after the submission of a completed
application.
            2.   However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the village in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
105 days after the submission of a completed application.
            3.   The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one
hundred twentieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth
day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the village. The receipt
of the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the village's denial of the
permit request within the time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (d)   1.   The village shall deny an application which does not meet
the requirements of this chapter.
            2.   If the village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
            3.   The village shall document the basis for a denial, including
the specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
village denies an application.
            4.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the
village and resubmit the revised application once within 30 days after notice
of denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application
fee. The village shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days
after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure
to resubmit the revised application within 30 days of denial shall require the
application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the village's review period.
            5.   The applicant must notify the village in writing of its
intention to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis,
which may be submitted with the revised application.
            6.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility.
         (e)   Pole attachment agreement. Within 30 days after an approved
permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the
village and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment agreement,
provided by the village for the initial collocation on a municipal utility pole
by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small
wireless facility on a municipal utility pole, the village and the applicant
shall enter into a license supplement of the master pole attachment agreement.
      (3)   Completeness of application.
         (a)   Within 30 days after receiving an application, the village shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an
application is incomplete, the village must specifically identify the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the village fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days after all documents,
information and fees specifically enumerated in the village's permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the village.
         (b)   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the village sends
the notice of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing
information.
      (4)   Tolling. The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
village; or
         (b)   A local, state or federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      (5)   Consolidated applications.
         (a)   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities
within the jurisdiction of the village shall be allowed, at the applicant's
discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for
the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure.
         (b)   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities,
the village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the
application and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which
incomplete information has been provided or that do not qualify for
consolidated treatment or that are denied. The village may issue separate
permits for each collocation that is approved in a consolidated application.
      (6)   Duration of permits.
         (a)   The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than
five years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the
village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or
modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable village codes or any
provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
         (b)   If the Act is repealed as provided in Section 90 therein,
renewals of permits shall be subject to the applicable village code provisions
or regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
      (7)   Means of submitting applications. Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the village by personal
delivery at the village's designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
   (C)   Collocation requirements and conditions.
      (1)   Public safety space reservation. The village may reserve space on
municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the village reasonably
determines that the municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      (2)   Installation and maintenance. The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contracts that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      (3)   No interference with public safety communication frequencies.
         (a)   The wireless provider's operation of the small wireless
facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications.
         (b)   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency's communications equipment.
         (c)   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
         (d)   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
         (e)   The village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with
the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous division. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      (4)   (a)   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless
facilities on village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution
or transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole
or the electric supply zone of the pole.
         (b)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
         (c)   For purposes of this division, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      (5)   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable codes and
local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
      (6)   The wireless provider shall comply with written design standards
that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable
stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth in a village
ordinance, written policy adopted by the village, a comprehensive plan or other
written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way,
including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      (7)   Alternate placements.
         (a)   Except as provided in this collocation requirements and
conditions division, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocation
small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility
poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility
pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small
wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the village may propose
that the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or
existing wireless support structure within 100 feet of the proposed
collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to use the
alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the alternate
location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional material
costs as determined by the applicant.
         (b)   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the village,
the applicant shall provide written certification describing the property
rights, technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does
not satisfy the criteria in this division.
      (8)   Height limitations.
         (a)   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet above the utility pole or wireless support structure on which the
small wireless facility is collocated.
         (b)   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures
on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
            1.   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the village, that is located within
300 feet of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure
and that is in the same right-of-way within the jurisdictional boundary of the
village, provided the village may designate which intersecting right-of-way
within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or wireless support structures
shall control the height limitation for such facility; or
            2.   Forty-five feet above ground level.
      (9)   Height exceptions or variances. If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions
set forth in Village Zoning Ordinance.
      (10)   Contractual design requirements. The wireless provider shall
comply with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the village and
a private property owner that concern design or construction standards
applicable to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-
of-way.
      (11)   Ground-mounted equipment spacing. The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      (12)   Undergrounding regulations. The wireless provider shall comply
with local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding
requirements that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of
existing utility poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the
requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests
to install such new utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do
not prohibit the replacement of utility poles.
      (13)   Collocation completion deadline. Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within 180 days after issuance of the permit, unless
the village and the wireless provider agree to extend this period or a delay is
caused by make-ready work for a municipal utility pole or by the lack of
commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the wireless
provider has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Otherwise, the permit shall be void unless the village grants an extension in
writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Application fees. Application fees are imposed as follows:
      (1)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $650 for an application
to collocate a single small wireless facility on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure, and $350 for each small wireless facility addressed
in a consolidated application to collocate more than one small wireless
facility on existing utility poles or wireless support structures.
      (2)   Applicant shall pay an application fee of $1,000 for each small
wireless facility addressed in an application that includes the installation of
a new utility pole for such collocation.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of state law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      (4)   The village shall not require an application, approval or permit,
or require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the village at least ten days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with division (D) under the section; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      (5)   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (E)   Exceptions to applicability. Nothing in this chapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      (1)   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled
by the village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      (2)   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      (3)   (a)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/18c-7201), Metra Commuter Rail or any
other public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in § 16-
102 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-102), without the consent of the
rail carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility. The provisions
of this chapter do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such
utility's wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and
maintained consistent with the provisions of § 16-108.5(i) of the Public
Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(i)).
         (b)   For the purposes of this division, "public utility" has the
meaning given to that term in § 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/
3-105). Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from
any requirement (a) to obtain a franchise or a state-issued authorization to
offer cable service or video service; or (b) to obtain any required permission
to install, place, maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than
small wireless facilities subject to this chapter.
   (F)   Pre-existing agreements.
      (1)   Existing agreements between the village and wireless providers that
relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on village utility
poles, that are in effect on January 1, 2021, remain in effect for all small
wireless facilities collocated on the village's utility poles pursuant to
applications submitted to the village before January 1, 2021, subject to
applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after January 1, 2021, shall comply with this chapter.
      (2)   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the village
on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the
village makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small
wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application
submitted two or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying
the village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing
agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for
the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the
village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the village
before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option
under this division.
   (G)   Annual recurring rate.
      (1)   A wireless provider shall pay to the village an annual recurring
rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a village utility pole located
in a right-of-way that equals (i) $200 per year; or (ii) the actual, direct and
reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of space on the village
utility pole.
      (2)   If the village has not billed the wireless provider actual and
direct costs, the fee shall be $200 payable on the first day after the first
annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent to
collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (H)   Abandonment.
      (1)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of
written notice from the village notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
      (2)   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within 90 days
of such notice, the village may remove or cause the removal of such facility
pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for municipal utility
poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of nuisances or by
other law for removal and cost recovery.
      (3)   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the village if
it sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
village. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
(Ord. 4440, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 102.04 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than $200 per year per municipal utility pole, with rates to
be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 4440, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 102.05 INDEMNIFICATION.
   A wireless provider shall indemnity and hold the village harmless against
any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnity or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability.
(Ord. 4440, passed 1-19-2021)
§ 102.06 INSURANCE.
   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
   (A)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   (B)   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
   (C)   (1)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum
protection limits consistent with its requirements of other users of village
improvements or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and
property damage.
      (2)   The wireless provider shall include the village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification
and documentation of inclusion of the village in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
      (3)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the village. A wireless
provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-
insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds
under this section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability
to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the village.
(Ord. 4440, passed 1-19-2021)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   AMUSEMENTS AND GAMES
      
113.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS
      
114.   SERVICES
      
115.   RETAIL
      
116.   FOOD DEALERS AND ESTABLISHMENTS
      
117.   SOUND AMPLIFYING DEVICES
      
118.   VENDING MACHINES
      
119.   TOBACCO
      
120.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
      
121.   ADULT USE LICENSING AND REGULATION
      
122.   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSING
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   General business licenses
   
110.02   License required
   
110.03   Applications for licenses
   
110.04   Forms for licenses
   
110.05   Signatures
   
110.06   Investigations
   
110.07   Fees for licenses
   
110.08   Termination of licenses
   
110.09   Building and premises
   
110.10   Transfer; change of location
   
110.11   Inspections of the premises
   
110.12   Business not to be a nuisance
   
110.13   Revocation of licenses
   
110.14   Posting license
   
110.15   Lighting of off-street parking areas
   
110.16   Conflict with Cook County earned sick leave regulations
   
110.17   Conflict with Cook County minimum wage ordinance
Contractors
   
110.30   Contractor licensing
Cross-reference:
   Automobile renting occupation tax, see §§
37.001 through
37.003
   Automobile renting use tax, see §§
37.015 and
37.016
   Motorcycle leasing and renting, see §§
73.025 through
73.037
   Municipal retailer’s occupation tax, see §§
37.050 through
37.053
   Municipal service occupation tax, see §§
37.065 through
37.068
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 GENERAL BUSINESS LICENSES.
   (A)   It shall be necessary to obtain a license from the village in order to
engage in any general business or service in the village, provided, however,
that if such service or business being conducted in the village consists of
displays for trade shows, craft shows or short term events, and said events are
for a period of no more than five consecutive days, and are not held more than
three times in anyone fiscal year, then in such event, said business or service
shall not be required to obtain a general business license as required herein.
   (B)   In the event there is no specific fee for a particular business, the
annual fee shall be based upon the total area utilized for business operations
or the area under the control of the business, excluding, loading docks and
parking areas:
 
Area                                                              Fee
Home based business conducted within the business owners dwelling $75
0 to 2,500 square feet                                            $150
2,501 to 5,000 square feet                                        $175
5,001 to 10,000 square feet                                       $200
10,001 to 20,000 square feet                                      $250
20,001+ square feet                                               $300
 
   (C)   Licenses shall be issued on an annual basis for each calendar business
operation or portion of a calendar year. Applications for business licenses
with the requisite fee payment shall be submitted to the Village Clerk in
person as provided in §
110.03 or postmarked on before December 31 of the preceding calendar year.
(2000 Code, § 110.01) (Ord. 957, passed 12-19-1977; Ord. 1348, passed 4-18-
1988; Ord. 1479, passed 9-3-1991; Ord. 1659, passed 2-18-1997; Ord. 1905,
passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 4170, passed 10-29-2012; Ord. 4484, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 110.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any of the businesses
hereinafter referred to in this title within the municipality without having
obtained a license.
(2000 Code, § 110.02) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES.
   Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be
made in writing to the Village Clerk in the absence of provisions to the
contrary. Each application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or
license desired, the location to be used, if any, the time covered, and the fee
to be paid. Each application shall contain such additional information as may
be needed for the proper guidance of municipal officials in the issuing of the
permit or license applied for.
(2000 Code, § 110.03) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949)
§ 110.04 FORMS FOR LICENSES.
   Forms for all licenses, permits and applications therefor shall be prepared
and kept on file by the Village Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 110.04) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949)
§ 110.05 SIGNATURES.
   Each license or permit issued shall bear the signature of the President and
the Village Clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary.
(2000 Code, § 110.05) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949)
§ 110.06 INVESTIGATIONS.
   On the receipt of an application for a license or permit where the
ordinances of the municipality require an inspection or investigation before
the issuance of such permit or license, the Village Clerk shall refer such
applications to the proper officer for making such investigation. The officer
charged with the duty of making the investigation or inspection shall do so
promptly and make a report thereon favorable or otherwise.
(2000 Code, § 110.06) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949)
§ 110.07 FEES FOR LICENSES.
   (A)   In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for
licenses or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor
is made to the Village Clerk. For business licenses other than home occupation,
a late fee of $50 shall be applied for any payment received after January 1 and
$100 if not paid by January 31. For home occupation licenses, a late fee of $25
shall be applied for any payment received after January 1 and $50 if not paid
by January 31.
   (B)   When a business is commenced after the beginning of the license year,
the annual license fee for the balance of the year will be charged in full, and
there shall be no proportionate deduction of the annual fee.
   (C)   (1)   In addition to their business license fee, food establishments
shall pay an inspection fee in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Category                   Fee
Food service establishment $225
Retail food store          $125
 
      (2)   The category of a food establishment shall be determined in
accordance with the definitions of RETAIL FOOD STORE and FOOD SERVICE
ESTABLISHMENT as contained in the Illinois Department of Public Health’s
publications titled Retail Food Store Sanitation Code and Food Service
Sanitation Code, respectively.
(2000 Code, § 110.07) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949; Ord. 1137, passed 4-5-1982;
Ord. 1905, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 4484, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 110.08 TERMINATION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Commencing on May 1, 1997, all annual licenses that are issued shall
terminate on December 31, 1997. All annual licenses issued on or after January
1, 1998, shall terminate on December 31 of the year issued.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, all licenses issued pursuant to
Chapter 111, Alcoholic Beverages, shall continue to terminate on April 30 next
following its issuance.
(2000 Code, § 110.08) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949; Ord. 1659, passed 2-18-1997)
§ 110.09 BUILDING AND PREMISES.
   No licenses shall be issued for the conduct of any business if the premises
and the building to be used for the purpose do not fully comply with the
requirements of the municipality. No licenses or permit shall be issued for the
conduct of any business or the performance of any act which would involve a
violation of the zoning code of the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 110.09) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949)
§ 110.10 TRANSFER; CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   (A)   Licenses issued may be transferred by the original licensee, provided
that written notice thereof is given to the Village Clerk within ten days
before the transfer is made.
   (B)   The location of any licensed business or occupation may be changed
provided ten days’ notice thereof is given to the Clerk, in the absence of any
provision to the contrary, provided the building, zoning and fronting consent
requirements of the municipal ordinances are complied with.
(2000 Code, § 110.10) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949)
§ 110.11 INSPECTIONS OF THE PREMISES.
   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the
operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by
ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance
provisions or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the
licensee or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected to admit
thereto any proper official of the municipality for the purpose of making such
inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
(2000 Code, § 110.11) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.12 BUSINESS NOT TO BE A NUISANCE.
   No business, whether licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as
to amount to a nuisance in fact.
(2000 Code, § 110.12) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.13 REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   Any license or permit may be revoked by the President at any time during the
life of such license or permit for any violation by the licensee of this
chapter or provisions relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of
the license or permit, or to the premises occupied. Such revocation may be in
addition to any fine imposed.
(2000 Code, § 110.13) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.14 POSTING LICENSE.
   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the
municipality to keep his or her license posted in a prominent place on the
premises at all times.
(2000 Code, § 110.14) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.15 LIGHTING OF OFF-STREET PARKING AREAS.
   It is required that all owners, managers or their agent be required to
illuminate all lights installed in all off-street parking areas located within
commercial areas and shopping centers, on all days that business is being
conducted, from the period of dusk to and including one hour after the closing
of the business establishments located adjacent to the off-street parking area.
(2000 Code, § 110.15) (Ord. 1054, passed 5-19-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.16 CONFLICT WITH COOK COUNTY EARNED SICK LEAVE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMPLOYEE. An individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of
the number of persons the employer employs. For purposes of this section,
EMPLOYEE does not mean an employee of the Village of Matteson.
      EMPLOYER.
         (a)   Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, business trust or any person or group of persons that
gainfully employs at least one employee. To qualify as an EMPLOYER, such
individual, group or entity must maintain a business facility within the
geographical boundaries of the village and conduct business within the village.
         (b)   For purposes of this section, the term EMPLOYER shall not
include:
            1.   The government of the United States or a corporation wholly
owned by the government of the United States;
            2.   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian
tribe;
            3.   The government of the State of Illinois or any agency or
department thereof; or
            4.   Units of local government, including the Village of Matteson.
      VILLAGE. The Village of Matteson, Cook County, Illinois.
   (B)   Earned sick leave.
      (1)   Employers located or conducting business within the territorial
boundaries of the village shall not be required to offer or provide earned sick
leave to employees who work at least 80 hours within any 120-day period. No
additional obligations with regard to earned sick leave adopted by the County
Board of Commissioners shall apply to employers located or conducting business
within the village.
      (2)   All employers located or conducting business within the village
shall comply with all applicable federal and/or state laws and regulations, as
such laws and regulations may exist from time to time, with regard to the
payment of paid sick leave.
      (3)   Except for incentive agreements directly between employers and the
county, including, but not limited to, 6b tax classification status incentives,
no additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave, including, without
limitation, any additional obligations by ordinance adopted by the County Board
of Commissioners, shall apply to employers located or conducting business
within the village.
(Ord. 4344, passed 6-19-2017)
§ 110.17 CONFLICT WITH COOK COUNTY MINIMUM WAGE ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMPLOYEE. Has the meaning ascribed to such term in § 3(d) of the Illinois
Minimum Wage Law (820 ILCS 5/3(d). For purposes of this section, EMPLOYEE shall
not include an employee of the Village of Matteson.
      EMPLOYER.
         (a)   Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, business trust or any person or group of persons that
gainfully employs at least one employee. To qualify as an EMPLOYER, such
individual, group or entity must maintain a business facility within the
geographic boundaries of the village or conduct business within the village.
         (b)   For purposes of this section, the term EMPLOYER shall not
include:
            1.   The government of the United States or a corporation wholly
owned by the government of the United States;
            2.   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian
tribe;
            3.   The government of the State of Illinois or any agency or
department thereof; or
            4.   Units of local government, including the Village of Matteson.
   (B)   Minimum wage.
      (1)   Employers located in or conducting business within the territorial
boundaries of the village shall comply with all applicable federal and state
laws and regulations with respect to the payment of minimum hourly wages for
non-tipped employees, including, but not limited to, wages established by the
Fair Labor Standards Division of the Illinois Department of Labor. No employer
located in or conducting business within the village shall be required to pay
employees a minimum hourly wage in excess of those wages established by federal
and/or state laws, including, but not limited to, the minimum wage rate
established by the Fair Labor Standards Division of the Illinois Department of
Labor.
      (2)   Except for incentive agreements directly between employers and the
county, including, but not limited to, 6b tax classification status incentives,
no additional obligations with regard to minimum hourly wages, including,
without limitation, any additional obligations by ordinance adopted by the
County Board of Commissioners, shall apply to employers located in or
conducting business within the village, except those required by federal and/or
state laws and regulations, as such laws and regulations may exist from time to
time.
(Ord. 4346, passed 6-26-2017)
CONTRACTORS
§ 110.30 CONTRACTOR LICENSING.
   (A)   CONTRACTOR shall mean any person, firm or corporation that has agreed
to perform work that is regulated by the building, plumbing, electrical,
mechanical and related codes and ordinances of the village for a property owner
or his or her agent.
   (B)   (1)   Any contractor intending to perform work for which a permit is
required within the corporate limits shall first obtain a license. A license
shall be in effect for a period of one year from the date it is issued
providing the contractor maintains compliance with all of the requirements of
this section. The contractor shall make application to the village and pay an
annual fee of $100.
      (2)   In addition, the contractor shall provide proof of general
liability insurance written by an insurer licensed to do business in the state
in the following amounts:
 
                      Minimum Coverage
Personal injury       $500,000
Property damage       $500,000
Worker’s compensatioAs required by law
 
      (3)   The village shall be named as a certificate holder. In addition,
all contractors shall post a license and permit bond in the amount of $10,000
naming the village as obligee. In the event a contractor’s insurance or bond is
cancelled during the license year, the contractor may reinstate such license or
bond and regain active status as a contractor without payment of an additional
fee for that year.
   (C)   In addition to the above requirements, a contractor seeking an
electrical contractor’s license shall provide evidence of his or her
qualifications through one of the following means:
      (1)   Provide a copy of his or her electrical contractor’s license from
another municipality or state that performs licensure testing acceptable to the
Village Building Commissioner or his or her designee; and
      (2)   Provide proof of passing a residential, journeyman or master
electrical exam from a recognized testing service acceptable to the Village
Building Commissioner or his or her designee. Contractors passing only a
residential exam will be issued permits for residential electrical work only.
(2000 Code, § 110.20) (Ord. 1912, passed 5-5-2003)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Local Liquor Commissioner, issuance authority
   
111.03   License required to sell liquor
   
111.04   Applications for licenses
   
111.05   When license shall not be issued
   
111.06   Change of licensee, change of premises
   
111.07   Termination of license
   
111.08   Fees to be paid to municipality
   
111.09   Number of licenses to be issued
   
111.10   Record to be kept of licenses issued
   
111.11   Duration of license
   
111.12   Renewal of license
   
111.13   Closing hours
   
111.14   Restaurants, clubs, closing hours
   
111.15   Regulations and prohibited activities for licensed premises
   
111.16   Revocation of license
   
111.17   Age of employees
   
111.18   Health, sanitation and inspection requirements
   
111.19   Manager’s license
   
111.20   Responsibilities of licensee
   
111.21   Additional restrictions on hiring persons under 21 years of age
   
111.22   Revocation order not stayed by appeal
   
111.23   Appeal of findings of Local Liquor Commissioner limited to official
record
   
111.24   Assessment of costs of hearings
   
111.25   Additional required fees
License Classifications
   
111.35   Licenses to be divided into groups
   
111.36   Class “A” license
   
111.37   Class “B” license
   
111.38   Class “C” license
   
111.39   Class “C-1” license
   
111.40   Class “D” license
   
111.41   Class “E” license; conditions
   
111.42   Class “E-1” license
   
111.43   Class “F” license
   
111.44   Class “F-1” license
   
111.45   Class “G” club license
   
111.46   Class “H” license
   
111.47   Class “I” license
   
111.48   Class "J" license
   
111.49   Class "J-V" license
   
111.50   Automatic reduction of license classification
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR. Includes alcohol, spirits, wine and beer, and every liquid
or solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and
capable of being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of
this chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured
alcohol produced in accordance with Acts of Congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing 0.50% or less of
alcohol by volume.
   CLUB. A corporation organized under the laws of this state, not for
pecuniary profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the
sale or consumption of alcoholic liquors, kept, used and maintained by its
members through the payment of annual dues, and owning, hiring or leasing a
building or space in a building, of such extent and character as may be
suitable and adequate for the reasonable and comfortable use and accommodation
of its members and their guests, and provided with suitable and adequate
kitchen and dining room space and equipment, and maintaining a sufficient
number of servants and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and
meals for its members and their guests; provided that such club files with the
President at the time of its application for a license under this chapter two
copies of a list of names and residences of its members, and similarly files
within ten days of the election of any additional member his or her name and
address; and provided that its affairs and management are conducted by a Board
of Trustees, Executive Committee or similar body chosen by the members at their
annual meeting, and that no member or any officer, agent or employee of the
club is paid or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other
compensation, any profits from the distribution or sale of alcoholic liquor to
the club or the members of the club or its guests introduced by members beyond
the amount of such salary as may be fixed and voted at any annual meeting of
the members or by its Board of Directors, or other governing body, out of the
general revenue of the club.
   HOTEL. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed, and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers
and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 25 or more
rooms are used for sleeping accommodations of such guests, and having one or
more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests, such sleeping
accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or
buildings in connection therewith, and such building or buildings, structure or
structures being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room
equipment and capacity.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out
to the public where meals are served, and where meals are actually and
regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity, and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
   RETAIL SALE. The sale for use or consumption, and not for resale.
(2000 Code, § 111.01)
§ 111.02 LOCAL LIQUOR COMMISSIONER, ISSUANCE AUTHORITY.
   There is hereby created the office of Liquor Commissioner, who shall be the
Village President, with all of the powers and duties as established by state
statute, this village code and any other village ordinance, resolution or
regulation. The Liquor Commissioner shall receive an annual salary as
established by the Board of Trustees. A license for the sale of alcoholic
liquor shall be issued by the Liquor Commissioner, subject to the provisions of
this chapter relating to licenses in general.
(Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 111.03 LICENSE REQUIRED TO SELL LIQUOR.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the
municipality any alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer’s
license.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit the on-site management
to be conducted by someone other than an owner, partner(s), or in the case of a
corporation, an officer, director or stockholder holding 5% or more of the
shares of the corporation, unless such manager has the same qualifications as
the licensee including residency of this state.
(2000 Code, § 111.02) (Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES.
   (A)   All applications for retail liquor dealer’s licenses shall be
accompanied by a payment of a $200 non-refundable pre-application fee.
   (B)   The application shall be made to the Liquor Commissioner in writing,
signed by the applicant if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof
if a club or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the
following information and statements:
      (1)   The name, date of birth and address of the applicant in the case of
an individual; in the case of a partnership, the names, dates of birth and
addresses of all the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; and in
the case of a corporation or club, the date of incorporation, the purpose for
which it was organized, the names, dates of birth and addresses of the
officers, directors and all stockholders owning more than 5% of the outstanding
stock of the corporation;
      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, his or her place of birth, and if
a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his or her naturalization;
      (3)   A description of the business conducted by the applicant for the
two years immediately prior to the date of his or her application;
      (4)   The address and description of the premises at which the applicant
proposes to sell alcoholic liquor;
      (5)   A statement that the applicant is the owner of the premises at
which he or she proposes to sell alcoholic liquor under a license issued
pursuant to this chapter, or that he or she has a lease on said premises for
the full period for which the license is to be issued. The Liquor Commissioner
may, as a condition to the issuance of a license, require evidence of
applicant’s ownership or leasing of such premises, including, but not limited
to, title policies, deeds and executed leases;
      (6)   Proof of adequate insurance coverage for dram shop, liability,
worker’s compensation, tenant or owners insurance for the premises and
equipment;
      (7)   Whether the applicant has applied elsewhere for a liquor license,
and the full particulars with respect to the disposition of such other
application(s);
      (8)   A statement that the applicant has never been convicted of a felony
and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or
provision contained in the laws of this state, or this chapter. Applicants are
subject to a criminal background investigation to determine eligibility for
such license. The authorization for such is deemed granted by the execution of
the application. The investigatory agency shall furnish all records of
convictions, unless expunged, to the Liquor Commissioner;
      (9)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or
by a federal government, has been revoked, and the reasons therefor;
      (10)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any state, federal
or local laws in the conduct of his or her place of business; and
      (11)   Such other information as the Liquor Commissioner may require
including, but not limited to, fingerprinting.
(2000 Code, § 111.03) (Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 111.05 WHEN LICENSE SHALL NOT BE ISSUED.
   No license shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the municipality;
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation of the community
in which he or she resides;
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper of or is keeping a
house of ill fame;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality;
   (G)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;
   (H)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license on a first application;
   (I)   A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co-partnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license;
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for
any reason other than citizenship and residence within the political
subdivision;
   (K)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent,
unless said manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee;
   (L)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of a federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this chapter, or shall have forfeited his or her
bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such violation;
   (M)   A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought,
or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the license is
to be issued;
   (N)   Any law-enforcing public officials, including, but not limited to, any
President or the Board of Trustees or any President or member of a County
Board; and no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor;
   (O)   Any person, association or corporation not eligible for a state retail
liquor dealer’s license;
   (P)   A person who knowingly files false or incomplete information on a
liquor license application;
   (Q)   A limited liability corporation if the manager would not be eligible
to receive a license for any reason other than residency within this state;
   (R)   A corporation unless incorporated in this state;
   (S)   A person convicted of drug related crimes, whether felony or
misdemeanor;
   (T)   A person who is not the owner of the business;
   (U)   A person, partnership or corporation with a federal wagering stamp;
and
   (V)   An applicant who owes a debt to the village.
(2000 Code, § 111.04) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964; Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 111.06 CHANGE OF LICENSEE, CHANGE OF PREMISES.
   (A)   Any change in licensee information shall be reported to the Liquor
Commissioner within 30 days.
   (B)   A person licensed pursuant to this chapter is authorized to sell
alcoholic liquor only at the premises, place or location described in the
application and license.
   (C)   If the licensee desires to change the location of the licensed
establishment, the licensee shall, prior to occupying or using the changed
location to conduct any activity regulated under this chapter, obtain a new
liquor license from the Liquor Commissioner in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to conduct any activity
regulated under this chapter at a changed location without first having
obtained a new liquor license for that location.
   (D)   (1)   If the licensee expands the licensed establishment, the licensee
shall, prior to occupying or using the expanded space for any activity
regulated under this chapter, file an expanded establishment amended liquor
license application.
      (2)   The application shall include:
         (a)   A copy of the building plans for the expanded establishment;
         (b)   The proposed floor plan;
         (c)   An estimate of the occupancy of the premises for which the
expanded establishment amended liquor license is sought; and
         (d)   Any other information that the Liquor Commissioner may require
to determine whether the expansion of the licensed establishment complies with
the requirements of this code.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for a licensee to conduct any activity
regulated under this chapter in any expanded space at a licensed establishment
without first having obtained an amended liquor license.
      (4)   For purposes of this division (D), the term EXPAND or EXPANSION or
EXPANDED ESTABLISHMENT means any increase in the square footage of the area of
an establishment where liquor is offered for sale, or sold to, or served to, or
consumed by members of the general public. The term EXPAND or EXPANSION or
EXPANDED ESTABLISHMENT does not include the mere reconfiguration of existing
space as described in the original or renewal license application.
(Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 111.07 TERMINATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   All licenses shall terminate on April 30, next following its issuance.
The annual fee shall be paid in full for all or any part of the year ending
April 30.
   (B)   All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued for the
full year, and there shall be given to the village a bond conditioned for the
payment of the license fee with sufficient sureties to be approved by the
President and Board of Trustees. The sureties shall be held responsible for any
unpaid license fee on the part of the licensee.
(2000 Code, § 111.05) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964; Ord. 1138, passed 4-5-1982)
§ 111.08 FEES TO BE PAID TO MUNICIPALITY.
   The fees shall be paid to the President at the time application is made, and
shall be turned over to the Treasurer. In the event the license applied for is
denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant; if the license is granted,
then the fee shall be deposited in the general corporate fund or in such other
fund as shall have been designated by the Board of Trustees by prior action.
(2000 Code, § 111.06) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964)
§ 111.09 NUMBER OF LICENSES TO BE ISSUED.
   There shall be issued by the village not more than the following number of
each class of liquor license:
Class Number
Class Number
“A�0
“B�2
“C�6
“C-10��
“D�11
“E�0
“E-12��
“F�2
“F-11��
“G�1
“I�1
"J"   1
"J-V" 1
 
(2000 Code, § 111.07) (Ord. 1701, passed 5-4-1998; Ord. 1711, passed 11-16-
1998; Ord. 1744, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 1795, passed 3-19-2001; Ord. 1797,
passed 4-2-2001; Ord. 1815, passed 6-18-2001; Ord. 1823, passed 9-17-2001; Ord.
1825, passed 10-15-2001; Ord. 1836, passed 3-4-2002; Ord. 1838, passed 4-1-
2002; Ord. 1916, passed 5-19-2003; Ord. 1948, passed 1-5-2004; Ord. 1966,
passed 3-1-2004; Ord. 2040, passed 6-6-2005; Ord. 2058, passed 11-21-2005; Ord.
2094, passed 1-16-2007; Ord. 3050, passed 3-17-2008; Ord. 3083, passed 12-1-
2008; Ord. 3085, passed 12-15-2008; Ord. 4003, passed 6-1-2009; Ord. 4005,
passed 7-20-2009; Ord. 4035, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 4041, passed 5-3-2010; Ord.
4106, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 4143, passed 1-17-2012; Ord. 4146, passed 2-21-
2012; Ord. 4157, passed 5-14-2012; Ord. 4171, passed 11-5-2012; Ord. 4178,
passed 1-22-2013; Ord. 4179, passed 1-22-2013; Ord. 4192, passed 6-3-2013; Ord.
4193, passed 6-3-2013; Ord. 4196, passed 7-1-2013; Ord. 4210, passed 12-17-
2013; Ord. 4212, passed 12-16-2013; Ord. 4213, passed 1-21-2014; Ord. 4214,
passed 1-21-2014; Ord. 4216, passed 3-17-2014; Ord. 4217, passed 3-17-2014;
Ord. 4234, passed 6-9-2014; Ord. 4239, passed 8-18-2014; Ord. 4252, passed 3-2-
2015; Ord. 4277, passed 7-20-2015; Ord. 4290, passed 10-19-2015; Ord. 4291,
passed 10-19-2015; Ord. 4293, passed 11-16-2015; Ord. 4309, passed 3-21-2016;
Ord. 4324, passed 10-17-2016; Ord. 4326, passed 12-19-2016; Ord. 4339, passed
4-24-2017; Ord. 4347, passed 7-17-2017; Ord. 4349, passed 8-21-2017; Ord. 4356,
passed 2-20-2018; Ord. 4390, passed 7-22-2019; Ord. 4391, passed 7-22-2019;
Ord. 4409, passed 3-17- 2020; Ord. 4415, passed 5-18-2020; Ord. 4420, passed 7-
20-2020; Ord. 4424, passed 9-21-2020; Ord. 4431, passed 11-16-2020; Ord. 4432,
passed 11-16-2020; Ord. 4433, passed 11-16-2020; Ord. 4435, passed 12-14-2020;
Ord. 4436, passed 12-14-2020; Ord. 4447, passed 4-26-2021)
§ 111.10 RECORD TO BE KEPT OF LICENSES ISSUED.
   The President shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such
licenses issued by him or her; and shall furnish the Village Clerk, Treasurer,
Chief of Police and the License Committee each with a copy thereof. On the
issuance of any new license or the revocation of any old license, the President
shall give written notice of the action to each of these officers within 48
hours of the notice.
(2000 Code, § 111.08) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964)
§ 111.11 DURATION OF LICENSE.
   A license shall be and is purely a personal privilege good and valid for not
more than one year after issuance, unless sooner revoked as provided in §
111.16. A license shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. A license shall not descend by the laws of testacy or intestate
devolution, but it shall cease on the death of the licensee; provided that the
executor or administrator of the estate of any deceased licensee and the
trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in
part of a license hereunder and of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business
of the sale of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may
exercise the privileges of the deceased, insolvent or bankrupt licensee after
the death of such decedent or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the
expiration of such license, but not longer than six months after the death,
bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee. A refund shall be made of that
portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee shall be
prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the provisions
of this section.
(2000 Code, § 111.09) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964)
§ 111.12 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration thereof,
provided he or she is then qualified to receive a license, and the premises for
which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purposes. The
renewal privilege provided for herein shall not be construed as a vested right
which shall prevent the President from decreasing the number of licenses to be
issued within his or her jurisdiction.
   (B)   Applications for renewal may be made on application forms to be
supplied by the Village Clerk, which forms need not contain all of the
information required on an original application for initial license. Said
renewal applications shall, however, include a statement under oath by the
license holder requesting a renewal that there have been no changes whatsoever
in the circumstances of the renewal applicant or in the operation of the
subject business, which would change the answers to any of the questions
originally answered in the original application on file with the village. Such
form may require such additional information as the Liquor Control Commissioner
may deem necessary.
   (C)   Whenever there has been a change in circumstances in regard to the
renewal applicant or the operation of the business currently being licensed, a
new complete application shall be filed prior to issuance of a renewal of any
existing license. In the event that any license holder desires to apply for a
different classification of liquor license, such applicant shall be required to
complete and file a new complete application as if he or she were a new
applicant.
(2000 Code, § 111.10) (Ord. 1585, passed 2-21-1995)
§ 111.13 CLOSING HOURS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the village between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except on
Sunday, as provided in division (B) below. However, it shall be lawful for
holders of Class “A” and “Club” licenses to sell or offer for sale at retail
any alcoholic liquor in the village until 2:00 a.m. on Saturday. Any extension
of the hours to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic liquor at retail shall
only be permitted upon approval of the Village Board.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the village between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday.
However, it shall be lawful for holders of Class “F” license to sell or offer
for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village beginning at 10:00 a.m.
on Sunday.
(2000 Code, § 111.11) (Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010; Ord. 4233, passed 5-12-
2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.14 RESTAURANTS, CLUBS, CLOSING HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful to keep open for business or to admit the public to any
premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold at retail during the hours
within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited, provided that in the case
of restaurants, clubs and hotels, such establishments may be kept open during
such hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be sold to or consumed by the public
during such hours.
(2000 Code, § 111.12) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.15 REGULATIONS AND PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES FOR LICENSED PREMISES.
   (A)   In premises on which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on
the premises is licensed, other than a restaurant, hotel or club, no screen,
blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows
or on the doors of such licensed premises, nor inside such premises, which
shall prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the
street, road or sidewalk at all times. No booth, screen, partition or other
obstruction, nor any arrangement of lights or lighting, shall be permitted in
or about the interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. Said
premises must be so located that there shall be a full view of the entire
interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where
liquor is sold for consumption on the premises shall be continuously lighted
during business hours by natural light or artificial white light so that all
parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In case the
view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing provisions shall
be willfully obscured or permitted to be obscured by the licensee, or in any
manner obstructed, then such license shall be subject to revocation in the
matter herein provided. In order to enforce the provisions of this section, the
President shall have the right to require the filing with him or her of plans,
drawings and photographs showing the clearance of the view as above required.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee to sell, give or
deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of 21 years. It shall be
unlawful for any person having been issued a license or such licensee’s
employee to permit any person under 21 years of age to enter or remain within
the licensed premises after 10:00 p.m., unless the licensed premises has a food
service in operation after 10:00 p.m. and such person under the age of 21 years
is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. It shall be unlawful for any
licensee, or any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or employee
of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit any person under the age of 21
years to tend bar or to draw, pour or mix any alcoholic liquor.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent
the employment of persons who are at least 18 years of age as waiters,
waitresses, hosts or hostesses in restaurants or hotels for the purpose of
serving food and alcoholic liquor in the licensed retail premises. All
licensees operating restaurants, hotels or clubs, shall have present upon the
premises at any time alcoholic liquor is being served a person, not under the
age of 25 years, who will be responsible for the direction, management or
supervision of the business and/or its employees. It shall be unlawful for any
licensee or any agent or employee of any licensee holding a retail liquor
license authorizing the sale of alcoholic liquor not for consumption on the
premises to permit any employee under the age of 21 years or any customer of
any age to register, by mechanical means, the sale of any alcoholic liquor,
including beer and wine.
   (C)   No licensee or employee of a licensee shall:
      (1)   Solicit, induce or request any patron of the licensed establishment
to purchase any alcoholic or nonalcoholic beverage for himself or herself or
any other employee of the licensed establishment; or
      (2)   Knowingly serve to any employee any alcoholic or nonalcoholic
beverage which was purchased by any patron.
   (D)   No licensee shall conduct business until such business has obtained a
license for a manager which manager shall be the designated representative of
the licensee in all matters relating to the village and the liquor license.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of a licensee to divide a
manufacturer’s package containing more than one can or bottle of beer, malt
liquor or ale, in order to sell an individual can or bottle, except for
consumption on the licensed premises.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of a licensee to sell, give, offer or
expose for sale, or deliver an individual can or bottle of beer, malt liquor or
ale with a capacity of 16 ounces or less, except for consumption on the
licensed premises.
   (G)   No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage, in or at
any public park or park land within the village, unless specifically as a part
of a group or organization registered with the village through a reservation of
the park area in accordance with the rules and procedures of the Park
Department.
   (H)   No person shall be in possession of any glass, can or open container
containing alcoholic liquor on any public street, thoroughfare, public or
private parking lot or any other public way and place unless there is an
appropriate permit issued by the village.
   (I)   No person, firm or corporation licensed to sell alcoholic liquor, or
his or her employees or agents, shall permit any person to remove from such
premises, any alcoholic liquor in any open container, unless properly sealed.
   (J)   No person shall have in his or her possession an open container
containing alcoholic liquor within or on a motor vehicle, including
motorcycles, while parked or standing on a public street or public parking lot
in the village, or while such vehicle is in motion.
   (K)   Sign required.
      (1)   All premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall post a
notice at each exit stating:
 
NO BEER, LIQUOR OR WINE MAY BE CARRIED IN AN OPEN CONTAINER OUT OF THIS
BUILDING.
 
      (2)   Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state in letters
at least one inch in height.
   (L)   No license shall be issued for the sale at retail of any alcoholic
liquor within 100 feet of any church, school other than an institution of
higher learning, hospital, home for aged or indigent persons or for veterans,
their spouses or children or any military or naval station; provided, that this
prohibition shall not apply to hotels offering restaurant service, regularly
organized clubs or to restaurants, food shops or other places where sale of
alcoholic liquors is not the principal business.
   (M)   No licensee shall permit or allow any illegal activity on the licensed
premises. It is the affirmative duty of a licensee, agent or employee to report
promptly to the Police Department all illegal activity reported to or observed
by the licensee on or within sight of the licensed premises; to answer fully
and truthfully all questions of an identified police officer who inquires or
investigates concerning persons or events in or around the licensed business;
to cooperate with the police in any such inquiry or investigation, including
the giving of oral or written statements to the police at reasonable times and
locations in the course of investigations; and to sign a complaint against any
person whom the licensee observes in any illegal conduct or activity on or
within sight of the licensed premises.
   (N)   Transfer, possession and consumption of alcoholic liquor;
restrictions.
      (1)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase, or accept a gift of
such alcoholic liquor or have such alcoholic liquor in his or her possession.
      (2)   If a licensee or his or her agents or employees believes or has
reason to believe that a sale or delivery of any alcoholic liquor is prohibited
because of the non-age of the prospective recipient, he or she shall, before
making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive
identification, containing proof of age, issued by a public officer in the
performance of his or her official duties.
      (3)   No person shall transfer, alter or deface such an identification
card; use the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information.
      (4)   No person shall purchase, accept delivery or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this section.
      (5)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under 21 years of
age is unlawful.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, lease or sign a
contract for the use of a public sleeping unit, hotel or motel room and
knowingly permit a gathering in that unit or room of two or more persons under
the age of 18 years of age where alcoholic liquor is possessed or consumed by
said minors.
      (7)   The possession and dispensing, or consumption by a person under 21
years of age of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or
ceremony, or the consumption by a person under 21 years of age under the direct
supervision and approval of the parents or parent or those persons standing in
loco parentis of such person under 21 years of age in the privacy of a home, is
not prohibited by this section.
(2000 Code, § 111.13) (Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010; Ord. 4127, passed 11-21-
2011; Ord. 4299, passed 2-16-2016) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.16 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The President may revoke any retail liquor dealer’s license for any
violation of this chapter, or for any violation of any state law pertaining to
the sale of alcoholic liquor.
(2000 Code, § 111.14) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964)
§ 111.17 AGE OF EMPLOYEES.
   Any person under the age of 21 years is prohibited from at any time
attending any bar and from drawing, pouring or mixing any alcoholic liquor in
any licensed retail premises.
(2000 Code, § 111.15) (Ord. 1042, passed 1-7-1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.18 HEALTH, SANITATION AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Every person licensed hereunder, who shall sell any alcoholic liquor for
consumption on the premises of such licensee, shall keep and maintain the
licensed premises equipped with running hot and cold water and adequate
sanitary washing facilities for the cleansing of glasses and service utensils,
shall provide separate and adequate toilet facilities for both males and
females pursuant to the requirements of this code.
(Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 111.19 MANAGER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   All licensees pursuant to this chapter shall not open for
business without having obtained a manager’s license for an individual who
shall be responsible to manage and direct the business activities of the
licensee and shall be the legal representative of the licensee to the village
regarding any and all matters affecting the village’s issuance of said license.
The manager may or may not be the owner but must be an individual and meet the
qualifications and restrictions of the licensee as provided in §
111.15, except does not need to be a resident of the village and shall submit
an application in writing.
      (2)   The application must be verified by the owner of the license and at
a minimum, include the following:
         (a)   The name, date of birth, residence address, current telephone
number and Social Security number;
         (b)   A copy of any management agreement;
         (c)   A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted
of a felony, gambling offense, violation of a law concerning the manufacture,
possession or sale of cannabis, narcotics or controlled substances, or
violation of law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic
liquor;
         (d)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has held a
license for the sale of alcoholic liquor in any state which has been revoked
and the reasons for revocation;
         (e)   A statement that the applicant will not violate any laws of the
state, United States or the village in the conduct of business; and
         (f)   Such other information as the Liquor Commissioner may require
including, but not limited to, fingerprinting.
   (B)   Persons applying for a manger’s license are subject to a criminal
background investigation to determine eligibility for such license. The
authorization for such is deemed granted by the execution of the application.
The investigatory agency shall furnish all records of convictions, unless
expunged, to the Liquor Commissioner.
(Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 111.20 RESPONSIBILITIES OF LICENSEE.
   A licensee is responsible to the community surrounding the licensed
premises. A liquor license issued or renewed after the effective date of this
section shall be subject to suspension or revocation if the licensee’s business
becomes or creates a nuisance. A licensed business is or creates a nuisance if
within any consecutive 12 months not less than five separate incidents occur on
the licensed premises, involving acts that violate any federal or state law
defining a felony, or any federal or state law or municipal ordinance
regulating narcotics, controlled substances or weapons. It is not a defense to
a charge of violating this section that the licensee or the licensee’s
employees or agents were not personally involved in the commission of the
illegal acts.
(Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 111.21 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS ON HIRING PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
111.15(B), a licensee may engage, employ or permit a person under 18 years of
age to work on the licensed premises, if the person under 18 years of age has
no duties relating to the sale, dispensing, service or delivery of alcoholic
liquor on the premises.
   (B)   A licensee who engages, employs or permits a person under 18 years of
age to work pursuant to division (A) above shall not assign or permit that
person to perform any duties or acts relating to the sale, dispensing, service
or delivery of alcoholic liquor on the premises.
   (C)   A licensee who engages, employs or permits a person less than 18 years
of age to work as allowed in division (A) above shall be responsible for
compliance with the state law, in connection with the employment of any person
under the age of 16 years. The licensee shall be responsible for assuring that
the person so engaged, employed or permitted to work does not consume, obtain
or possess alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises.
(Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.22 REVOCATION ORDER NOT STAYED BY APPEAL.
   An order of the Liquor Commissioner revoking a village license under this
chapter shall take immediate effect if the Liquor Commissioner finds that any
of the following circumstances are present:
   (A)   The revocation is for violation of any federal or state law or village
ordinance regulating the sale, use or possession of firearms;
   (B)   The revocation is for violation of any federal or state law or village
ordinance regulating the sale, use or possession of narcotics or other
controlled substances as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code;
   (C)   The revocation is for violation of any federal or state law or village
ordinance relating to prostitution;
   (D)   The revocation is for sale of alcoholic liquor to a minor, and the
licensee was disciplined for three or more similar sales, occurring in separate
incidents, within the prior three years; or
   (E)   The revocation is for violations of this code or the rules and
regulations of the village related to health and sanitation in a food
establishment. For purposes of division (D) above, DISCIPLINE means revocation,
suspension or a voluntary closing in lieu of suspension. In the event that a
revocation order contains a finding described in divisions (A), (B), (C), (D)
or (E) of this section, the effect of the revocation shall not be stayed
pending an appeal by the licensee to the Illinois Liquor Commissioner under the
Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/11-1 et seq..
(Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 111.23 APPEAL OF FINDINGS OF LOCAL LIQUOR COMMISSIONER LIMITED TO OFFICIAL
RECORD.
   All appeals to the Illinois Liquor Control Commission by a liquor licensee
of the village of a decision, order or action of and by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner or designee having the effect of fining a liquor licensee
or suspending or revoking the liquor license issued by the village shall be
limited to review of the official record of the formal proceedings before the
Liquor Commissioner.
(Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 111.24 ASSESSMENT OF COSTS OF HEARINGS.
   Any licensee determined by the Liquor Commissioner to have violated any of
the provisions of the Illinois Liquor Control Act, 235 ILCS 5/11-1 et seq.,
this chapter or any other valid ordinance or resolution enacted by the Village
Council, or any applicable rule or regulation established by the Liquor
Commissioner or by the Illinois Liquor Control Commission, shall pay to the
village the costs of the hearing before the Liquor Commissioner on such
violation. The Liquor Commissioner shall determine the costs incurred by the
village including court reporter fees, the cost of transcripts or records,
attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders, and other
miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village. The licensee shall pay said
costs to the village within 30 days of notification of the costs of the Liquor
Commissioner. Failure to pay said costs within 30 days of notification is a
violation of this section, and may be cause for imposition of a fine, license
revocation or suspension. In the event of an appeal to the State Liquor Control
Commission, and in cases where appeal is taken under the Administrative Review
Act, 735 ILCS 5/3-1010 et seq., payment is due 40 days after entry of an order
by the State Commission or appropriate court, as the case may be, finally
affirming the determination of the Village Liquor Commissioner.
(Ord. 4071, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 111.25 ADDITIONAL REQUIRED FEES.
   In addition to the annual fee for the license as required in this chapter,
an additional fee in the sum of $200 shall be assessed for each additional
permanent bar that is being operated on the licensed premises, which bar is
under the same ownership and management as the licensee for the premises for
which the license has been issued.
(2000 Code, § 111.34) (Ord. 1585, passed 2-21-1995; Ord. 4431, passed 11-16-
2020)
LICENSE CLASSIFICATIONS
§ 111.35 LICENSES TO BE DIVIDED INTO GROUPS.
   Licenses are divided into 12 classes.
(2000 Code, § 111.25) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964; Ord. 698, passed 4-14-1969;
Ord. 1138, passed 4-5-1982)
§ 111.36 CLASS “A” LICENSE.
   (A)   Class “A” license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified in the license of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises.
Class “A” license shall also authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor in package
form. Class “A” license shall also authorize the furnishing of live music on
the premises for dancing, exhibitions or live musical entertainment. The annual
fee for the license shall be $1,500, payable annually in advance.
   (B)   For holders of Class “A” licenses it shall be unlawful to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except on Sunday. However, it shall be lawful for
holders of Class “A” licenses to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the village until 2:00 a.m. on Saturday.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the village, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for New Year’s Eve continuing into
New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour, but in no event to be
any later than 3:00 a.m.
(2000 Code, § 111.26) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964; Ord. 1138, passed 4-5-1982;
Ord. 1315, passed 3-16-1987; Ord. 1424, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. 1898, passed 4-
7-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.37 CLASS “B” LICENSE.
   (A)   Class “B” license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified in the license of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises.
Class “B” license shall also authorize the sale of alcoholic liquors in package
form. The annual fee for the license shall be $1,400, payable annually in
advance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “B” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except on Sunday; however it shall be lawful for
holders of Class “B” licenses to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the village until 2:00 a.m. on Saturday.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “B” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village, between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for New Year’s Eve continuing into
New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour, but in no event to be
any later than 3:00 a.m.
(2000 Code, § 111.27) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964; Ord. 1138, passed 4-5-1982;
Ord. 1315, passed 3-16-1987; Ord. 1424, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. 1898, passed 4-
7-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.38 CLASS “C” LICENSE.
   (A)   Class “C” license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified in the license of alcoholic liquor solely for consumption on the
premises. Class “C” license shall also authorize the furnishing of live music
on the premises for dancing, exhibitions or live musical entertainment. The
annual fee for the license shall be $1,500, payable annually in advance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “C” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except on Saturday and Sunday.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “C” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on Saturday or between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and
12:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for New Year’s Eve continuing into
New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour, but in no event to be
any later than 3:00 a.m.
(2000 Code, § 111.28) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964; Ord. 1138, passed 4-5-1982;
Ord. 1315, passed 3-16-1987; Ord. 1424, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. 1898, passed 4-
7-2003; Ord. 4106, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 4108, passed 7-18-2011) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 111.39 CLASS “C-1” LICENSE.
   (A)   Class “C-1” license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified in the license of alcoholic liquor solely for consumption on the
premises. Class “C-1” license shall also authorize for only one day of each
week, the furnishing of live music on the premises for dancing, exhibitions or
live musical entertainment. The annual fee for the license shall be $1,500,
payable annually in advance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “C-1” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except on Sunday; however, it shall be lawful for
holders of Class “C-1” licenses to sell or offer for sale at retail any
alcoholic liquor in the village until 2:00 a.m. on Saturday.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “C-1” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village, between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for New Year’s Eve continuing into
New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour, but in no event to be
any later than 3:00 a.m.
(2000 Code, § 111.28.1) (Ord. 4003, passed 6-1-2009) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.40 CLASS “D” LICENSE.
   (A)   Class “D” license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified in the license of alcoholic liquor solely for consumption on the
premises. The annual fee for the license shall be $1,500, payable annually in
advance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “D” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except on Sunday; however, it shall be lawful for
holders of Class “D” licenses to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the village until 2:00 a.m. on Saturday.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “D” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village, between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for New Year’s Eve continuing into
New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour, but in no event to be
any later than 3:00 a.m.
(2000 Code, § 111.29) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964; Ord. 1138, passed 4-5-1982;
Ord. 1315, passed 3-16-1987; Ord. 1424, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. 1898, passed 4-
7-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.41 CLASS “E” LICENSE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Class “E” license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified in the license of beer and wine only for consumption on the premises
in conjunction with the service of food. The annual fee for the license shall
be $1,100, payable annually in advance.
   (B)   Class “E” licenses shall be strictly subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   No beer nor wine shall be served or sold to any person except in
connection with the taking of a food order to be served to the person. The food
order shall consist of not less than one sandwich for any person being served
or sold beer or wine.
      (2)   No beer nor wine shall be served, sold or furnished to any person
for consumption away from the premises to which the license is applicable but
all beer and wine sold under a Class “E” license shall be for consumption on
the premises of the licensee to which the license is applicable.
      (3)   No counter or bar will be permitted on the premises for the sale of
beer or wine to any patrons. The licensee may, however, have a service bar for
employees to place beer and wine orders and receive beer and wine for service
to patrons of the licensee in accordance with the order of the patrons.
      (4)   The holder of a Class “E” license may not sell beer nor wine in
package form.
   (C)   The sale and service of beer or wine shall be restricted to hours when
meals and food are served on the premises to which the license is applicable
but under no circumstances shall any beer or wine be served prior to 11:00 a.m.
or after 11:00 p.m. on any day, except that on Sunday no beer or wine shall be
sold prior to 12:00 p.m.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for each New Year’s Eve continuing
into New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour.
(2000 Code, § 111.30) (Ord. 596, passed 2-3-1964; Ord. 1138, passed 4-5-1982;
Ord. 1315, passed 3-16-1987; Ord. 1424, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. 1898, passed 4-
7-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.42 CLASS “E-1” LICENSE.
   (A)   Class “E-1” license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified in the license of alcoholic liquor solely for consumption on the
premises. Class “E-1” license shall also authorize the furnishing of live music
on the premises for dancing, exhibitions or live musical entertainment. The
annual fee for the license shall be $1,500, payable annually in advance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class "E-1" to sell or offer for
sale any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 11:
00 a.m. on any day, except that on Sunday no alcoholic liquor shall be sold
prior to 12:00 p.m.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for each New Year’s Eve continuing
into New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour.
(Ord. 4347, passed 7-17-2017; Ord. 4422, passed 8-17-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.43 CLASS “F” LICENSE.
   (A)   Class “F” license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified in the license of packaged alcoholic liquor, but shall not authorize
the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. The annual
fee for the license shall be $1,300, payable annually in advance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “F” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours
of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, except on Sunday.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for holders of a Class “F” license to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village prior to 10:00
a.m. on Sunday.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for New Year’s Eve continuing into
New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour.
(2000 Code, § 111.31) (Ord. 1049, passed 3-3-1980; Ord. 1138, passed 4-5-1982;
Ord. 1315, passed 3-16-1987; Ord. 1424, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. 1889, passed 1-
6-2003; Ord. 1898, passed 4-7-2003; Ord. 4233, passed 5-12-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.44 CLASS “F-1” LICENSE.
   (A)   Class “F-1” license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified in the license of packaged beer and wine, only, but shall not
authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on any portion of
the licensed premises, where the packaged beer and wine is being sold. The
annual fee for the license shall be $1,300, payable annually in advance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “F-1” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours
of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. the following day, except on Sunday.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “F-1” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village prior to 12:00
p.m. on Sunday.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for New Year’s Eve continuing into
New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour.
(Ord. 4035, passed 2-16-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.45 CLASS “G” CLUB LICENSE.
   (A)   Class “G” club license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquors by a club for the use or consumption on the premises permanently
occupied by the club. Class “G” license shall also authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquors in package form to members only. The annual license fee for
such club license is $900, payable annually in advance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “G” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except on Sunday. However, it shall be lawful for
holders of Class “G” licenses to sell of offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the village until 2:00 a.m. on Saturday.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the village, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for New Year’s Eve continuing into
New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour, but in no event to be
any later than 3:00 a.m.
(2000 Code, § 111.32) (Ord. 1127, passed 1-18-1982; Ord. 1138, passed 4-5-1982;
Ord. 1315, passed 3-16-1987; Ord. 1898, passed 4-7-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.46 CLASS “H” LICENSE.
   (A)   The Liquor Commissioner is authorized in his or her discretion to
issue Class “H” special event or temporary liquor licenses for the sale of
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. A Class “H” special event
or temporary license shall be issued solely in connection with an event held to
raise funds for religious, charitable, benevolent or educational purposes. No
such Class “H” license may be for a period of more than three days. No fee
shall be charged for the Class “H” license.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “H” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except on Sunday; however, it shall be lawful for
holders of Class “H” licenses to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the village until 2:00 a.m. on Saturday.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “H” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village, between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for New Year’s Eve continuing into
New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour but in no event to be
any later than 3:00 a.m.
(2000 Code, § 111.33) (Ord. 1138, passed 4-5-1982; Ord. 1315, passed 3-16-1987)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.47 CLASS “I” LICENSE.
   (A)   Class “I” license shall authorize the retail sale on the premises
specified in the license of alcoholic liquor solely for consumption on the
premises; provided, however, the package sales of wine only shall be permitted
in conjunction with the sale of carry out orders of food. The annual fee for
the license shall be $1,500 payable annually in advance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “I” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., except on Sunday; however, it shall be lawful for
holders of Class “I” licenses to sell or offer for sale at retail any alcoholic
liquor in the village until 2:00 a.m. on Saturday.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for holders of Class “I” licenses to sell or
offer for sale at retail any alcoholic liquor in the village, between the hours
of 3:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any of the closing hour restrictions contained in this
section, the closing hours specified herein for New Year’s Eve continuing into
New Year’s Day shall be extended for one additional hour, but in no event to be
any later than 3:00 a.m.
(2000 Code, § 111.33.1) (Ord. 1823, passed 9-17-2001; Ord. 1898, passed 4-7-
2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.48 CLASS "J" LICENSE.
   (A)   Class "J" license shall authorize the retail sale of package alcoholic
liquor for consumption off the premises as an incidental part of a grocery
store that has a minimum gross floor area of 50,000 square feet.
   (B)   Alcoholic liquor sold in original packages and for off-premises
consumption shall not be opened or consumed on the premises.
   (C)   For holders of Class "J" license, it shall be unlawful to sell
alcoholic liquor before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. Monday through Sunday.
   (D)   The annual fee for the license shall be $4,000 payable annually in
advance.
(Ord. 4431, passed 11-16-2020; Ord. 4486, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 111.49 CLASS "J-V" LICENSE.
   (A)   Class "J-V" license shall authorize the sale of beer and wine by the
drink for consumption on the premises, as an incidental part of a grocery store
that has a minimum gross area of 50,000 square feet.
   (B)   The point of sale of wine and beer by the drink for consumption on the
premises shall be limited to no more than one distinct indoor location within
the premises. All locations must submit a site plan, along with a copy of the
licensee's state video gaming license issued by the Illinois Gaming Board to
the Liquor Commissioner.
   (C)   For holders of Class "J-V" license, it shall be unlawful to sell
alcoholic liquor before 11:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. daily and before noon or
after 10:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   (D)   The on-premises consumption of beer and wine by the drink is not
permitted throughout the retail floor area of the premises.
   (E)   The annual fee for the J-V license shall be $3,000 payable annually in
advance, in addition to the license fee for a "J" license.
(Ord. 4431, passed 11-16-2020; Ord. 4486, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 111.50 AUTOMATIC REDUCTION OF LICENSE CLASSIFICATION.
   Upon the expiration of any license, closure of the business receiving the
license, or the revocation by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the
State Liquor Control Commission of any such license authorized by §§
111.36 through
111.47 hereof, such license shall no longer be available and the number of
licenses for such class authorized in §§
111.36 through
111.47 hereof shall be automatically reduced to reflect the non-availability of
such license.
(Ord. 4473, passed 10-18-2021)
CHAPTER 112: AMUSEMENTS AND GAMES
Section
Amusements
   
112.01   Applicability
   
112.02   License required to operate
   
112.03   Street shows
   
112.04   Inspections of exhibitions and amusements
   
112.05   License required for coin-operated amusement devices
   
112.06   License required for motion pictures and theatricals
Charitable Games
   
112.20   Charitable games permitted
   
112.21   State Department of Revenue license required
AMUSEMENTS
§ 112.01 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this subchapter, except as to licensing and fees, shall
apply to all public shows, theatricals, circuses and other amusements in the
village.
(2000 Code, § 112.01) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949)
§ 112.02 LICENSE REQUIRED TO OPERATE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open
to the public and to which a fee for admission is charged, without securing a
license.
   (B)   For such licenses the following fees shall be paid:
      (1)   Carnivals, $50 per day;
      (2)   Circuses, $100 per day; and
      (3)   Other amusements, $5 per day.
(2000 Code, § 112.02) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 STREET SHOWS.
   No permit for any carnival, circus, exhibition, show or any amusement shall
be given on any public street or in such a place that the only main
accommodation for the public or the audience will be in a public place, except
on order of the Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 112.03) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.04 INSPECTIONS OF EXHIBITIONS AND AMUSEMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see that every exhibition,
amusement or any other public show is inspected by a member of the Police
Department to ensure conformity with the ordinances of the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 112.04) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949)
§ 112.05 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate or have on any premises,
any coin-operated amusement device, without first having obtained a license.
   (B)   The annual license fee for a coin-operated amusement device shall be
as follows:
      (1)   Pinball devices, as per fee schedule; and
      (2)   Electromechanical-video machines, as per fee schedule.
(2000 Code, § 112.05) (Ord. 873, passed 7-7-1975; Ord. 1139, passed 4-5-1982;
Ord. 1265, passed 8-5-1985; Ord. 1444, passed 9-17-1990) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.06 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give, present or conduct any motion
picture or theatricals to which a fee for admittance is charged, excepting
performances given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision and
auspices of a religious, educational or charitable organization, without having
secured a license. The annual license fee for the presentation or conducting of
any motion picture or theatrical shall be $80 for the period from May 1, 1997,
to December 31, 1997, being the date of termination. Commencing on January 1,
1998, and on January 1 of each year following issuance, the annual fee shall be
$125.
(2000 Code, § 112.06) (Ord. 956, passed 12-19-1977; Ord. 1659, passed 2-18-
1997) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHARITABLE GAMES
§ 112.20 CHARITABLE GAMES PERMITTED.
   Charitable games as described in 230 ILCS 30/1 et seq., entitled “Charitable
Games Act”, be and the same are hereby allowed and permitted within the village
limits.
(2000 Code, § 112.15) (Ord. 1394, passed 4-3-1989)
§ 112.21 STATE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   All charitable games allowed and permitted within the village shall comply
with all of the provisions of the 230 ILCS 30/1 et seq., including, but not
limited to, prior issuance of licenses by the Illinois Department of Revenue,
as required therein.
(2000 Code, § 112.16) (Ord. 1394, passed 4-3-1989) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 113: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
Cable Communications
   
113.001   Short title
   
113.002   Definitions
   
113.003   Rights and privileges of grantee
   
113.004   Agreement and incorporation of application by reference
   
113.005   Franchise territory
   
113.006   Duration and acceptance of franchise
   
113.007   Franchise renewal
   
113.008   Franchise renewal in the event of change in federal law
   
113.009   Police powers
   
113.010   Cable television franchise required
   
113.011   Use of grantee facilities
   
113.012   Initial franchise costs
   
113.013   Notices
   
113.014   Letter of credit/security deposit
   
113.015   Performance bond
   
113.016   Liability and insurance
   
113.017   Indemnification
   
113.018   Rights of individuals
   
113.019   Public notice
   
113.020   Service availability and record request
   
113.021   System construction
   
113.022   Construction and technical standards
   
113.023   Use of streets
   
113.024   Operational standards
   
113.025   Customer service standards
   
113.026   Continuity of service mandatory
   
113.027   Complaint procedure
   
113.028   Grantee rules and regulations
   
113.029   Franchise fee
   
113.030   Transfer of ownership or control
   
113.031   Availability of books and records
   
113.032   Other petitions and applications
   
113.033   Fiscal reports
   
113.034   Removal of cable television system
   
113.035   Required services and facilities
   
113.036   Rules and regulations
   
113.037   Performance evaluation sessions
   
113.038   Rate change procedures
   
113.039   Forfeiture and termination
   
113.040   Foreclosure
   
113.041   Receivership
   
113.042   Compliance with state and federal laws
   
113.043   Landlord/tenant
   
113.044   Applicants’ bids for initial franchise
   
113.045   Financial, contractual, shareholder and system disclosure for
franchises
   
113.046   Theft of services and tampering
   
113.047   Procedures
Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
   
113.060   Definitions
   
113.061   Registration of telecommunications providers
   
113.062   Municipal telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
   
113.063   Collection, enforcement and administration of village fees
   
113.064   Compliance with other laws
   
113.065   Existing franchise and licenses
   
113.066   Enforcement
   
113.067   Violations
Cable/Video Service Provider Fee and PEG Access Support Fee
   
113.080   Definitions
   
113.081   Cable/video service provider fee imposed
   
113.082   PEG access support fee imposed
   
113.083   Applicable principles
   
113.084   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
113.085   Audits of cable/video service provider
   
113.086   Late fees/payments
Cable and Video Customer Protection Law
   
113.100   Customer service and privacy protection law
   
113.101   Enforcement
   
113.102   Schedule of penalties
   
113.103   Customer credits
 
   
113.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Emergency 911 telephone system surcharge, see §§
37.095 through
37.102
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
§ 113.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Matteson Cable
Television Franchise Ordinance”, hereinafter “franchise” or “ordinance.”
(2000 Code, § 113.01) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADDITIONAL SERVICE. Any subscriber service provided by the grantee for which
a special charge is made based on program or service content, time or spectrum
space usage.
   BASIC SERVICE. All subscriber services provided by the grantee in one or
more service tiers, which includes the delivery of local broadcast stations,
and public, educational and government access channels. BASIC SERVICE does not
include optional program and satellite service tiers, a la carte services, per
channel, per program or auxiliary services for which a separate charge is made.
However, the grantee may include other satellite signals on the basic service
tier.
   BOARD. The Matteson Village Board.
   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, CABLE SYSTEM or SYSTEM or CABLE TELEVISION
SYSTEM. A system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides or
other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, designed and constructed
for the purpose of producing, receiving, transmitting, amplifying and
distributing audio, video and other forms of electronic, electrical or optical
signals, which includes cable television service and which is located in the
village. The definition shall not include any such facility that serves or will
serve only subscribers without using village rights-of-way.
   CLASS IV CHANNEL. A signaling path provided by a cable communications system
to transmit signals of any type from a subscriber terminal to another point in
the cable communications system.
   COMPLAINT. Any complaint regarding service, picture quality, charges or
other matter relating to the cable system made by a customer to the grantee,
whether in written or oral form.
   CONTROL or CONTROLLING INTEREST. Actual working control or ownership of a
system in whatever manner exercised. A rebuttable presumption of the existence
of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership,
directly or indirectly, by any person or entity (except underwriters during the
period in which they are offering securities to the public) of 5% or more of a
cable system or the franchise under which the system is operated. A change in
the control or controlling interest of an entity which has control or a
controlling interest in a grantee shall constitute a change in the control or
controlling interest of the system under the same criteria. CONTROL or
CONTROLLING INTEREST as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one
person or entity.
   CONVERTER. An electronic device which converts signals to a frequency not
susceptible to interference within the television receiver of a subscriber, and
by an appropriate channel selector also permits a subscriber to view more than
12 channels delivered by the system at designated converter dial locations.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed,
designated or elected agent or successor.
   GRANTEE. A person or entity to whom or which a franchise under this
subchapter is granted by the village, along with the lawful successors or
assigns of such person or entity.
   GROSS REVENUES. All revenue collected directly or indirectly by the grantee,
arising from or attributable to the provision of cable service by the grantee
within the village including, but not limited to: periodic fees charged
subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel or per-program
service; installation and reconnection fees; leased channel fees; converter
rentals and/or sales; program guide revenues; studio or production equipment
rentals; late or administrative fees; upgrade, downgrade or other change-in-
service fees; advertising revenues; revenues from home shopping and bank-at-
home channels; revenues from the sale, exchange, use or cable cast of any
programming developed on the system for community or institutional use; and any
value (at retail price levels) of any non-monetary remuneration received by
grantee in consideration of the performance of advertising or any other cable
service of the system; and franchise fees, provided, however, that this shall
not include any taxes on services furnished by the grantee herein imposed
directly upon any subscriber or user by the state, local or other governmental
unit and collected by the grantee on behalf of the governmental unit.
   INITIAL SERVICE AREA. All areas in the village having a density of at least
20 dwelling units per street mile.
   INSTALLATION. The connection of the system from feeder cable to subscribers’
terminals.
   MAY. This term is permissive.
   MONITORING. Observing a communications signal, or the absence of a signal,
where the observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer, whether the
signal is observed by visual or electronic means, for any purpose whatsoever;
provided MONITORING shall not include system-wide, non-individually addressed
sweeps of the system for purposes of verifying system integrity, controlling
return paths transmissions, or billing for pay services.
   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. As applied to the grantee shall mean those hours
during which similar businesses in the village are open to serve customers. In
all cases, NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS must include some evening hours at least one
night per week, and some weekend hours.
   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS. Those service conditions that are within the
control of the grantee. Those conditions that are not within the control of the
grantee include, but are not limited to: natural disasters, civil disturbances,
power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather
conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control of the
grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view
events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods, and
maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.
   SERVICE INTERRUPTION. The loss of either picture or sound or both for a
single or multiple subscriber(s).
   SHALL. This term is mandatory.
   STREET. The surface of and all rights-of-way and the space above and below
any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place,
sidewalk, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or easement now or hereafter
held by the village for the purpose of public travel and shall include other
easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the
village which shall, within their proper use and meaning entitle the grantee to
the use thereof for the purposes of installing poles, wires, cable, conductors,
ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and
other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a cable
television system.
   SUBSCRIBER. Any person, firm, grantee, corporation or association lawfully
receiving any service provided by a grantee pursuant to this subchapter.
   USER. A party utilizing a cable television system channel for purposes of
production or transmission of material to subscribers, as contrasted with
receipt thereof in a subscriber capacity.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Matteson, Illinois.
(2000 Code, § 113.02) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.003 RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF GRANTEE.
   Any franchise granted by the village pursuant to state statutes (65 ILCS 5/
11-42-11) shall grant to the grantee the right and privilege to erect,
construct, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under
the streets now in existence and as may be created or established during its
terms any poles, wires, cable, underground conduits, manholes and other
television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation
of a cable system. Any such franchise granted shall be on the same and similar
terms and conditions.
(2000 Code, § 113.03) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.004 AGREEMENT AND INCORPORATION OF APPLICATION BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Upon adoption of any franchise agreement and execution thereof by the
grantee, the grantee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions
contained in this subchapter.
   (B)   Any grantee also agrees to provide all services specifically set forth
in its application and to provide cable television service within the confines
of the village; and by its acceptance of the franchise, the grantee
specifically grants and agrees that its application is thereby incorporated by
reference and made a part of the franchise. In the event of a conflict between
such proposals and the provisions of this subchapter, the provisions of the
franchise agreement shall control.
(2000 Code, § 113.04) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.005 FRANCHISE TERRITORY.
   Any franchise is for the current territorial limits of the village and for
any area henceforth added thereto during the term of the franchise.
(2000 Code, § 113.05) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.006 DURATION AND ACCEPTANCE OF FRANCHISE.
   Any franchise and the rights, privileges and authority hereby authorized
shall take effect and be in force from and after the signing of a franchise
agreement by the village, as provided by law, and shall continue in force and
effect for an initial term of no longer than 12 years, provided that within 15
days after the date of village approval of the franchise the grantee shall file
with the village its unconditional acceptance of the franchise and promise to
comply with and abide by all its provisions, terms and conditions. Such
acceptance and promise shall be in writing duly executed and sworn to, by, or
on behalf of the grantee before a notary public or other officer authorized by
law to administer oaths. Such franchise shall be non-exclusive and revokable.
(2000 Code, § 113.06) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.007 FRANCHISE RENEWAL.
   Pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 546, the following procedure shall apply.
   (A)   The village may, on its own initiative, during the six-month period
which begins with the thirty-sixth month before the franchise expiration,
commence a proceeding which affords the public in the village appropriate
notice and participation for the purpose of identifying the future cable-
related community needs and interests and reviewing the performance of the
grantee under the franchise. If the grantee submits, during such six-month
period, a written renewal notice requesting the commencement of such
proceeding, the village shall commence such proceeding not later than six
months after the date such notice is submitted.
   (B)   Upon completion of the proceeding under division (A) above, the
grantee may, on its own initiative or at the request of the village, submit a
proposal for renewal. The village may establish a date by which such proposal
shall be submitted.
   (C)   Upon submittal by the grantee of a proposal to the village for the
renewal of the franchise, the village shall provide prompt, public notice of
such proposal and renew the franchise or issue a preliminary assessment that
the franchise should not be renewed, and at the request of the grantee or on
its own initiative, commence an administrative proceeding, after providing
prompt, public notice of such proceeding.
   (D)   The village shall consider in any administrative proceeding whether:
      (1)   The grantee has substantially complied with material terms of the
existing franchise and with applicable law;
      (2)   The quality of the grantee’s service, including signal quality,
response to consumer complaints and billing practices, but without regard to
the mix or quality of cable services or other services provided over the
system, has been reasonable in the light of community needs;
      (3)   The grantee has the financial, legal and technical ability to
provide the services, facilities and equipment as set forth in the grantee’s
proposal; and
      (4)   The grantee’s proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-
related community needs and interests, taking into account the costs of meeting
such needs and interests.
   (E)   In any proceeding under division (D) above, the grantee shall be
afforded adequate notice and the grantee and the village, or its designee,
shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right
to introduce evidence (including evidence related to issues raised in the
proceedings under division (A) above), to require the production of evidence
and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such proceeding.
   (F)   At the completion of a proceeding under division (D) above, the
village shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for
renewal based upon the record of such proceeding and transmit a copy of such
decision to the grantee. Such decision shall state the reasons therefor.
   (G)   Any denial of a proposal for renewal that has been submitted in
compliance with the procedures set forth above, shall be based on one or more
adverse findings made with respect to the factors described at divisions (D)(1)
through (D)(4) above pursuant to the record of the proceeding under said
division (D) above. The village may not base a denial of renewal on a failure
to substantially comply with the material terms of the franchise or on events
considered under division (D)(2) above unless the village has provided the
grantee with notice and the opportunity to cure or in any case in which it is
documented that the village has waived its right to object.
   (H)   The grantee may appeal any final decision or failure of the village to
act in accordance with the procedural requirements of this section. The court
shall grant appropriate relief if the court finds that any action of the
village is not in compliance with the procedural requirements of this section;
or in the event of a final decision of the village denying the renewal
proposal, the grantee has demonstrated that the adverse finding of the village
with respect to each of the factors described in divisions (D)(1) through (D)
(4) above on which the denial is based is not supported by a preponderance of
the evidence, based on the record of the administrative proceeding.
(2000 Code, § 113.07) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.008 FRANCHISE RENEWAL IN THE EVENT OF CHANGE IN FEDERAL LAW.
   In the event that any or all of the above-referenced provisions of federal
law are repealed, the following relevant section(s) shall apply.
   (A)   At least 24 months prior to the expiration of the franchise, the
grantee shall inform the village in writing of its intent to seek renewal of
the franchise.
   (B)   The grantee shall submit a proposal for renewal which demonstrates:
      (1)   It has been and continues to be in substantial compliance with the
material terms, conditions and limitations of this subchapter and its
franchise;
      (2)   Its system has been installed, constructed, maintained and operated
in accordance with the accepted standards of the industry, and this subchapter
and its franchise;
      (3)   It has the legal, technical, financial and other qualifications to
provide the facilities, services and equipment set forth in its proposal; and
      (4)   It has made a good faith effort to provide services and facilities
which accommodate the demonstrated needs of the community as may be reasonably
ascertained by the village through a public process.
   (C)   After giving public notice, the village shall proceed to determine
whether the grantee has satisfactorily performed its obligations under the
franchise. To determine satisfactory performance, the village shall consider
technical developments and performance of the system, programming, other
services offered, cost of services and any other particular requirements set
forth in this subchapter. The village shall also consider the grantee’s reports
made to the village and to the FCC, and the village may require the grantee to
make available specified records, documents and information for this purpose,
and may inquire specifically whether the grantee will supply services
sufficient to meet community needs and interests. Industry performance on a
national basis shall also be considered. Provision shall be made for public
comment with adequate prior notice of at least ten days.
   (D)   The village shall then prepare any amendments to this subchapter that
it believes necessary.
   (E)   If the village finds the grantee’s performance satisfactory, and finds
the grantee’s technical, legal and financial abilities acceptable, and finds
the grantee’s renewal proposal meets the future cable-related needs of the
village, a new franchise may be granted pursuant to this subchapter, as
amended, for a period to be determined.
   (F)   If the grantee is determined by the village to have performed
unsatisfactorily, new applicants may be sought and evaluated, and a franchise
award shall be made by the village according to franchising procedures adopted
by the village.
(2000 Code, § 113.08) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.009 POLICE POWERS.
   (A)   In accepting a franchise, the grantee acknowledges that its rights
thereunder are subject to the police power of the village to adopt and enforce
general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and it
agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the
village pursuant to such power.
   (B)   Any conflict between the provisions of a franchise and any other
present or future lawful exercise of the village’s police powers shall be
resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of
general application in the jurisdiction, or applies exclusively to the grantee
or cable television systems which contains provisions inconsistent with this
subchapter, shall prevail only if upon such exercise the village finds a danger
to health, safety, property or the general welfare or if such exercise is
mandated by law.
(2000 Code, § 113.09) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.010 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   No cable television system shall be allowed to operate or to occupy or use
the streets (that is, rights-of-way) for system installation and maintenance
purposes without a franchise.
(2000 Code, § 113.10) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.011 USE OF GRANTEE FACILITIES.
   The village and the grantee shall work together to agree to terms and
conditions which allow the village to install and maintain upon the poles of
the grantee, any wire or pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with
the cable television system operations of the grantee, so long as the village
maintains a similar right with the utilities operating in the village. The
village shall indemnify and hold harmless the grantee from any claim that might
arise due to or as a result of the village’s use.
(2000 Code, § 113.11) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.012 INITIAL FRANCHISE COSTS.
   Costs to be borne by a grantee shall include any requirements or charges
incidental to the awarding or enforcing of its initial franchise, but shall not
be limited to: reasonable administrative, engineering, legal and consulting
expenses; all costs of publications of notices prior to any public meeting
provided for pursuant to this subchapter; and any costs not covered by
application fees incurred by the village in its study, preparation of proposal
documents, evaluation of all applications and examinations of the applicant’s
qualifications.
(2000 Code, § 113.12) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.013 NOTICES.
   All notices from the grantee to the village pursuant to any franchise shall
be sent to the Mayor’s office, with a copy to the chief administrative officer.
The grantee shall maintain with the village, throughout the term of the
franchise, an address for service of notices by mail. The grantee shall
maintain a central office to address any issues relating to operating under
this cable television subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 113.13) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.014 LETTER OF CREDIT/SECURITY DEPOSIT.
   (A)   Within 15 days after the award of an initial franchise, the grantee
shall deposit with the village either an irrevocable letter of credit from a
financial institution or a security deposit in the amount of $100,000 with the
form to be established by the village.
   (B)   Within 15 days after the award of a renewal franchise, the grantee
shall deposit with the village either an irrevocable letter of credit from a
financial institution or a security deposit in the amount of $10,000 with the
form to be established by the village.
   (C)   The form and content of such letter of credit or security deposit
shall be approved by the Village Attorney. These instruments shall be used to
ensure the faithful performance of the grantee of all provisions of this
subchapter, and to ensure compliance with all orders, permits and directions of
any agency, commission, board, department, division or office of the village
having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under this subchapter, and to
ensure the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the
village which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of
the system.
   (D)   The letter of credit or security deposit shall be maintained at the
amount established in division (A) above for the entire term of the franchise,
even if amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to this subchapter.
   (E)   If the grantee fails to pay to the village any compensation within the
time fixed herein; or fails to pay to the village any taxes due and unpaid; or
fails to repay the village any damages, costs or expenses which the village is
compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection
with the franchise, the village shall provide the grantee with written notice
informing the grantee that such amounts are due to the village. The written
notice shall describe in reasonable detail the specific reasons for the
assessment. The grantee shall have 30 days subsequent to receipt of the notice
in which to pay the amounts the village has stated it is owed, or within ten
days of receipt of the village notice, notify the village that there is a
dispute as to whether grantee believes such amounts are due the village. Such
notice by the grantee to the village shall specify with particularity the basis
of grantee’s belief that such monies are not due the village, and shall stay
the running of the 30-day cure period pending a Board decision. The Board shall
hear the grantee’s dispute. The grantee must be given at least ten days’ notice
of the hearing. At the hearing, the grantee shall be entitled to the right to
present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel. After the hearing,
the village shall provide the grantee a copy of its action, along with
supporting documents. In the event the village upholds the finding of
outstanding monies due the village by the grantee, the village may immediately
withdraw the amount thereof, with interest from the letter of credit or
security deposit.
   (F)   The rights reserved to the village with respect to the letter of
credit are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether reserved by
the franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a
right with respect to such letter of credit shall affect any other right the
village may have.
   (G)   The letter of credit shall contain the following endorsement: “It is
hereby understood and agreed that this letter of credit or security deposit may
not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the
surety until 30 days after receipt by the village, by registered mail, of a
written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew.”
   (H)   Upon receipt of the 30-day notice, this shall be construed as a
default granting the village the right to demand payment from the bank for
either the security deposit or letter of credit.
   (I)   The village at any time during the term of this subchapter, may waive
the grantee’s requirement to maintain a letter of credit or security deposit.
The waiver of the requirement can be initiated by the village or grantee.
(2000 Code, § 113.14) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.015 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   Within 30 days after the award of an initial or renewal franchise, the
grantee shall file with the village a performance bond in the amount of
$100,000. This bond shall be maintained throughout the construction period, and
until such time as determined by the village, unless specified in the franchise
agreement.
   (B)   If the grantee fails to comply with any law, ordinance or resolution
governing the franchise, or fails to well and truly observe, fulfill and
perform each term and condition of the franchise, as it relates to the
conditions relative to the construction, operation or maintenance of the
system, including the franchise agreement that is incorporated herein by
reference, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally, from the principal
and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the village as a
result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification or cost
of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee, plus a reasonable
allowance for attorney fees, including the village’s legal staff, and costs, up
to the full amount of the bond. This section shall be an additional remedy for
any and all violations outlined in §
113.014.
   (C)   The village may, upon completion of construction of the service area,
waive or reduce the requirement of the grantee to maintain the bond. However,
the village may require a performance bond to be posted by the grantee for any
construction subsequent to the completion of the initial service areas, in a
reasonable amount and upon such terms as determined by the village.
   (D)   The bond shall contain the following endorsement: “It is hereby
understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the surety nor the
intention not to renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after receipt by
the village, by registered mail, a written notice of such intent to cancel and
not to renew.”
   (E)   Upon receipt of a 30-day notice, this shall be construed as default
granting the village the right to demand payment on the bond.
   (F)   The village, at any time during the term of this subchapter, may waive
grantee’s requirement to maintain a performance bond. The waiver of the
requirement can be initiated by the village or the grantee.
(2000 Code, § 113.15) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.016 LIABILITY AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   The grantee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of the franchise
specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the franchise,
liability insurance insuring the village and the grantee in the minimum amount
of:
      (1)   One million dollars for property damage to any one person;
      (2)   Three million dollars for property damage from any one accident;
      (3)   One million dollars for personal injury to any one person; and
      (4)   Three million dollars for personal injury from any one accident.
   (B)   The certificate of insurance obtained by the grantee in compliance
with this section must be approved by the Village Attorney and such insurance
policy certificate of insurance, along with written evidence of payment of
required premiums, shall be filed and maintained with the village during the
term of the franchise. The grantee shall immediately advise the Village
Attorney of any litigation that may develop that would affect this insurance.
   (C)   Neither the provisions of this section nor any damages recovered by
the village thereunder, shall be construed to or limit the liability of the
grantee under any franchise issued hereunder or for damages.
   (D)   Such insurance policies provided for herein shall name the grantor,
its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees as additional insured,
and shall be primary to any insurance carried by the grantor, and shall contain
the following endorsement: “It is hereby understood and agreed that this
insurance policy may not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to
renew be stated by the surety until 30 days after receipt by the village, by
registered mail, of written notice of such intention to cancel or not to
renew.”
(2000 Code, § 113.16) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.017 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Disclaimer of liability. The village shall not at any time be liable
for injury or damage occurring to any person or property from any cause
whatsoever arising out of the construction, maintenance, repair, use,
operation, condition or dismantling of the grantee’s cable television system or
due to the act or omission of any person or entity other than the village or
those persons or entities for which the village is legally liable as a matter
of law.
   (B)   Indemnification. The grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense,
indemnify and hold harmless the village, all associated, affiliated, allied and
subsidiary entities of the village now existing or hereinafter created, and
their respective officers, boards, commissions, employees, agents, attorneys
and contractors (hereinafter referred to as “indemnitees”) from and against:
      (1)   Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims,
liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation,
reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants),
which may be imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by
reason of any act or omission of the grantee, its personnel, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors, resulting in personal injury, bodily injury,
sickness, disease or death to any person, or damage to, loss of or destruction
of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander, invasion of privacy and
unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name, copyright, patent, service mark
or any other right of any person, firm or corporation, which may arise out of
or be in any way connected with the construction, installation, operation,
maintenance, use or condition of the cable television system caused by grantee,
its subcontractors or agents or the grantee’s failure to comply with any
federal, state or local statute, ordinance or regulation;
      (2)   Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims,
liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation,
reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants),
which are imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by
reason of any claim or lien arising out of work, labor, materials or supplies
provided or supplied to the grantee, its contractors or subcontractors, for the
installation, construction, operation or maintenance of the cable television
system. Upon the written request of the village such claim or lien shall be
discharged or bonded within 15 days following such request; and
      (3)   Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims,
liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation,
reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants),
which may be imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by
reason of any financing or securities offering by grantee or its affiliates for
violations of the common law or any laws, statutes or regulations of the state
or of the United States, including those of the Federal Securities and Exchange
Commission, whether by the grantee or otherwise; excluding therefrom, however,
claims which are solely based upon and arise solely out of information supplied
by the village to the grantee in writing and included in the offering materials
with the express written approval of the village prior to the offering.
   (C)   Assumption of risk. The grantee undertakes and assumes for its
officers, agents, contractors and subcontractors and employees all risk of
dangerous conditions, if any, on or about any village-owned or controlled
property, including public rights-of-way and easements, and the grantee hereby
agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the indemnitees against and from any
claim asserted or liability imposed upon the indemnitees for personal injury or
property damage to any person arising out of the installation, operation,
maintenance or condition of the cable television system or the grantee’s
failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, ordinance or
regulation.
   (D)   Defense of indemnitees. In the event any action or proceeding shall be
brought against the indemnitees by reason of any matter for which the
indemnitees are indemnified hereunder, the grantee shall, upon notice from any
of the indemnitees, at the grantee’s sole cost and expense, resist and defend
the same with legal counsel acceptable to the Village Attorney, provided
further, however, that the grantee shall not admit liability in any such matter
on behalf of the indemnitees without the written consent of the Village
Attorney or the Village Attorney’s designee.
   (E)   Notice. The village shall give the grantee prompt notice of the making
of any written claim or the commencement of any action, suit or other
proceeding covered by the provisions of this section.
   (F)   Nonwaiver of statutory limits. Nothing in this agreement is intended
to express or imply a waiver by the village of statutory provisions, privileges
or immunities of any kind or nature as set forth in Illinois Statutes,
including the limits of liability of the village as exists presently or as may
be increased from time to time by the legislature.
(2000 Code, § 113.17) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.018 RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   The grantee shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on the
basis of race, color, religion, national origin, income, gender, marital
status, sexual preference or age. The grantee shall comply at all times with
all other applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and all
executive and administrative orders relating to nondiscrimination which are
hereby incorporated and made part of this subchapter by reference.
   (B)   The grantee shall strictly adhere to the equal employment opportunity
requirements of the Federal Communications Commission and of state and local
governments, and as amended from time to time.
   (C)   The grantee shall, at all times, comply with the privacy requirements
of state and federal law.
   (D)   The grantee is required to make all services available to all
residential dwellings throughout the service area.
(2000 Code, § 113.18) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.019 PUBLIC NOTICE.
   Minimum public notice of any public meeting relating to the franchise shall
be by publication at least once in a local newspaper of general circulation at
least ten days prior to the meeting, by posting at the Village Municipal Center
by announcement and shall be on at least one channel of the grantee’s system
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for five consecutive days prior
to the meeting.
(2000 Code, § 113.19) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.020 SERVICE AVAILABILITY AND RECORD REQUEST.
   The grantee shall provide cable television service throughout the entire
franchise area pursuant to the provisions of the franchise and shall keep a
record for at least three years of all requests for service received by the
grantee. This record shall be available for public inspection at the local
office of the grantee during regular office hours.
(2000 Code, § 113.20) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.021 SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   New construction timetable.
      (1)   Within two years from the date of the award of an initial
franchise, the grantee must make cable television service available to every
dwelling unit within the service area.
         (a)   The grantee must make cable television service available to at
least 20% of the dwelling units within the service area within six months from
the date of the award of the franchise.
         (b)   The grantee must make cable television service available to at
least 50% of the dwelling units within the service area within one year from
the date of the award of the franchise.
      (2)   The grantee, in its application, may propose a timetable of
construction which will make cable television service available in the service
area sooner than the above minimum requirements, in which case the said
schedule will be made part of the franchise agreement, and will be binding upon
the grantee.
      (3)   Any delay beyond the terms of this timetable, unless specifically
approved by the village, will be considered a violation of this subchapter for
which the provisions of either §§
113.039 or
113.047 shall apply, as determined by the village.
      (4)   In special circumstances the village may waive 100% completion
within the two-year time frame, provided substantial completion is accomplished
within the allotted time frame, substantial completion to be not less than 95%.
Justification for less than 100% must be submitted subject to the approval of
the village.
   (B)   Line extensions.
      (1)   In areas of the franchise territory not included in the initial
service areas, the grantee shall be required to extend its system pursuant to
the following requirements.
         (a)   No customer shall be refused service arbitrarily. The grantee is
hereby authorized to extend the cable system as necessary within the village.
To expedite the process of extending the cable system into a new subdivision,
the village will forward to the grantee an approved engineering plan of each
project. Subject to the density requirements, the grantee shall commence the
design and construction process upon receipt of the final engineering plan.
Upon notification from the village that the first home in the project has been
approved for a building permit, the grantee shall have a maximum of three
months to complete the construction/activation process within the applicable
project phase.
         (b)   The grantee shall extend and make cable television service
available to every dwelling unit in all unserved, developing areas having at
least 20 dwelling units planned per street mile, as measured from the existing
system, and shall make every effort to extend its system simultaneously with
the installation of utility lines, provided that it can enter into such joint
trench agreements on reasonable terms and conditions.
      (2)   In areas not meeting the requirements for mandatory extension of
service, the grantee shall provide, upon the request of a potential subscriber
desiring service, an estimate of the grantee’s costs required to extend service
to the subscriber. The grantee shall then extend service upon request of the
potential subscriber. The grantee may require advance payment or assurance of
payment satisfactory to the grantee. In the event the area subsequently reaches
the density required for mandatory extension, such payments shall be refunded
to the subscriber.
      (3)   In cases of new construction or property development where
utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall
give the grantee reasonable notice of such construction or development, and of
the particular date on which open trenching will be available for the grantee’s
installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided
at the grantee’s expense. The grantee shall also provide specifications as
needed for trenching. Costs of trenching and easements required to bring
service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner;
except that if the grantee fails to install its conduit, pedestals and/or
vaults, and laterals within ten working days of the date the trenches are
available, as designated in the notice given by the developer or property
owner, then should the trenches be closed after the ten-day period, the cost of
new trenching is to be borne by the grantee. Except for the notice from the
developer or property owner of the particular date on which trenching will be
available to the grantee, notice provided to the grantee by the village of the
opening of a trench shall also satisfy the requirement of reasonable notice if
sent to the local general manager or system engineer of the grantee.
   (C)   Serving additional areas. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent
the grantee from serving areas not covered under this section upon agreement
with developers, property owners, residents or businesses.
   (D)   Line extension policy. A grantee, in its application, may propose a
line extension policy that will result in serving more residents of the village
than as required above, in which case the grantee’s policy will be incorporated
into the franchise agreement and will be binding on the grantee.
   (E)   Violation. The violation of this section shall be considered a breach
of the terms of this subchapter, for which the provisions of either §§
113.039 or
113.047 shall apply, as determined by the village.
(2000 Code, § 113.21) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.022 CONSTRUCTION AND TECHNICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Compliance with construction and technical standards. The grantee
shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner
consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental
requirements and FCC technical standards. In addition, the grantee shall
provide the village, upon request, a written report of the results of the
grantee’s annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to Federal
Communications Commission standards and requirements.
   (B)   Additional specifications.
      (1)   Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable television
system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables and
wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and telephone
lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled
with due respect for engineering considerations.
      (2)   The grantee shall at all times comply with:
         (a)   National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards);
         (b)   National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters);
         (c)   Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction; and
         (d)   Applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations.
      (3)   In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the
safety of persons or property in the franchise area or other areas where the
grantee may have equipment located.
      (4)   Any antenna structure used in the system shall comply with
construction, marking and lighting of antenna structure, required by the United
States Department of Transportation.
      (5)   All working facilities and conditions used during construction,
installation and maintenance of the cable television system shall comply with
the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
      (6)   Radio frequency (RF) leakage shall be checked at reception
locations for emergency radio services to prove no interference signal
combinations are possible. Stray radiation shall be measured adjacent to any
proposed aeronautical navigation radio sites to prove no interference to
airborne navigational reception in the normal flight patterns. FCC rules and
regulations shall govern.
      (7)   The grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing standby
power for headend, transportation and trunk amplifiers for a minimum of two
hours.
      (8)   In all areas of the village where the cables, wires and other like
facilities of public utilities are placed underground, the grantee shall place
its cables, wires and other like facilities underground. When public utilities
relocate their facilities from pole to underground, the cable operator must
concurrently do so.
(2000 Code, § 113.22) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.023 USE OF STREETS.
   (A)   Interference with persons and improvements. The grantee’s system,
poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so that
none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons or
interfere with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of the streets and public ways, or interfere with any improvements
the village may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the
free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements or public property.
   (B)   Restoration to prior condition. In case of any disturbance of
pavement, sidewalk, landscaping, driveway or other surfacing, the grantee
shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the village,
replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway, landscaping or surface of
any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before the work was
needed and in accordance with standards for such work set by the village.
   (C)   Erection, removal and common uses of poles.
      (1)   No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the
grantee without prior approval of the village with regard to location, height,
types and any other pertinent aspect. However, no location of any pole or wire-
holding structure of the grantee shall be a vested interest and such poles or
structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense
whenever the village determines that the public convenience would be enhanced
thereby.
      (2)   Where poles or other wire-holding structures already existing for
use in serving the village are available for use by the grantee, but it does
not make arrangements for such use, the village may require the grantee to use
such poles and structures if it determines that the public convenience would be
enhanced thereby and the terms of the use available to the grantee are just and
reasonable.
   (D)   Relocation of facilities. If at any time during the period of the
franchise the village shall elect to alter, or change the grade of any street,
alley or other public ways, the grantee, upon reasonable notice by the village,
shall remove or relocate as necessary its poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.
   (E)   Cooperation with building movers. The grantee shall, on the request of
any person holding a building moving permit issued by the village, temporarily
raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such
temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the grantee shall have the authority to require such
payment in advance. The grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours advance
notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
   (F)   Tree trimming. The grantee shall not remove any tree or trim any
portion, either above, at or below ground level, of any tree within any public
place without the prior consent of the village. The grantee shall provide
notice to any affected residents at the same time that the grantee applies to
the village for consent to perform tree trimming. The village shall have the
right to do the trimming requested by the grantee at the cost of the grantee.
Regardless of who performs the work requested by the grantee, the grantee shall
be responsible, shall defend and hold village harmless from any and all damages
to any tree as a result of trimming, or to the property surrounding any tree,
whether such tree is trimmed or removed.
(2000 Code, § 113.23) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.024 OPERATIONAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The grantee shall maintain all parts of the system in good condition
throughout the entire franchise period.
   (B)   Upon the reasonable request for service by any person located within
the franchise territory, the grantee shall, within 30 days, furnish the
requested service to such person within terms of the line extension policy.
   (C)   The grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and
interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such
interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur
during periods of minimum system use.
   (D)   The grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere
with television reception of subscribers or persons not served by the grantee,
nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the
operation of the various utilities serving the residents within the confines of
the village nor shall other utilities interfere with the grantee’s system.
(2000 Code, § 113.24) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.025 CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the
enforcement of any federal, state or local law or regulation concerning
customer service or consumer protection that imposes customer service standards
or consumer protection requirements that exceed the customer service standards
set out in this subchapter or that address matters not addressed in this
subchapter.
   (B)   The grantee shall maintain a local or toll-free telephone access line
which is available to its subscribers and shall have knowledgeable, qualified
representatives available to respond to customer telephone inquiries 24 hours
per day, seven days per week.
   (C)   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time, including
wait time and the time required to transfer the call, shall not exceed 30
seconds. This standard shall be met no less than 90% of the time as measured on
a quarterly basis.
   (D)   Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a busy
signal less than 3% of the total time that the office is open for business.
   (E)   Customer service centers and bill payment locations will be open for
walk-in customer transactions a minimum of eight hours per day Monday through
Friday, unless there is a need to modify those hours because of the location or
customers served. The grantee and village by mutual consent shall establish
supplemental hours on weekdays and weekends as fits the needs of the community.
   (F)   Under normal operating conditions, each of the following standards
will be met no less than 95% of the time, as measured on an annual basis.
      (1)   Standard installations will be performed within seven business days
after an order has been placed. A standard installation is one that is within
125 feet of the existing system.
      (2)   Excluding those situations that are beyond its control, the grantee
will respond to any service interruption promptly and in no event later than 24
hours from the time of initial notification. All other regular service requests
will be responded to within 36 hours during the normal work week for that
system. The appointment window alternatives for installations, service calls
and other installation activities will be: “morning” or “afternoon”; not to
exceed a four-hour “window” during normal business hours for the system, or at
a time that is mutually acceptable. The grantee shall schedule supplemental
hours during which appointments can be scheduled based on the needs of the
community. If at any time an installer or technician is running late, an
attempt to contact the customer will be made and the appointment rescheduled as
necessary at a time that is convenient to the customer.
   (G)   Upon service interruption of a subscriber’s cable service, the
following shall apply.
      (1)   For service interruptions of more than four hours and up to four
days, the grantee shall provide, at the subscriber’s request, a credit of one-
thirtieth of one month’s fees for affected services for each 24-hour period
service is interrupted for an accumulated four or more hours for any
subscriber, with the exception of subscribers disconnected because of non-
payment or excessive signal leakage.
      (2)   For interruptions of four days or more in one month, the grantee
shall provide, at the subscriber’s request, a pro-rata credit for affected
services for all affected subscribers.
   (H)   The grantee shall provide written information for each of the
following areas at the time of installation and at any future time upon the
request of the customer:
      (1)   Product and services offered;
      (2)   Prices and service options;
      (3)   Installation and service policies; and
      (4)   How to use the cable television services.
   (I)   Bills will be clear, concise and understandable, with all charges for
cable services itemized.
   (J)   A grantee may not impose a late, administrative or other fee on a
customer for non-payment of a bill until 30 days have elapsed after the end of
the billing cycle which is the subject of the unpaid bill.
   (K)   A grantee may not disconnect a customer for non-payment of disputed
bills until such a time as the dispute has been resolved, in accordance with
the grantee’s customer service policies.
   (L)   Credits will be issued promptly, but no later than the customer’s next
billing cycle following the resolution of the request and the return of the
equipment by the grantee if service has been terminated.
   (M)   The grantee shall notify customers a minimum of 30 days in advance of
any rate or channel change.
   (N)   The grantee shall maintain and operate its network in accordance with
the rules and regulations incorporated herein or as may be promulgated by the
Federal Communications Commission, the United States Congress or applicable
laws of the state.
   (O)   The grantee shall continue, through the term of the franchise, to
maintain the technical standards and quality of service set forth in this
subchapter. Should the village find, by resolution, that the grantee has failed
to maintain these technical standards and quality of service, and should it, by
resolution, specifically enumerate improvements to be made, the grantee shall
make such improvements. Failure to make such improvements within three months
of such resolution will constitute a breach of a condition for which penalties
contained in §
113.047 are applicable.
   (P)   The grantee shall keep a monthly service log which indicates the
nature of each service complaint (excluding programming complaints) received in
the last 24 months, the date and time each complaint was received, the
disposition of each complaint, and the time and date thereof. This log shall be
made available for periodic inspection by the village.
   (Q)   The grantee shall provide a copy of the customer service standards
included in this section to every subscriber via a bill insert at least once
every calendar year. The grantee shall also provide a copy of these customer
service standards to every new customer within 30 days of connection.
(2000 Code, § 113.25) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.026 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE MANDATORY.
   (A)   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service
as long as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. If
the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the system, the
grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous,
uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances for a period not to
exceed six months. If the village gives notice of intent to terminate or fails
to renew the franchise, the grantee shall act so as to ensure that all
subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the
circumstances, for a period not to exceed three months after the franchise
agreement has terminated.
   (B)   If there is a change of franchise, or if a new operator acquires the
system, the grantee shall cooperate with the village, new franchisee or
operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such
period, the grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during
which it operates the system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its
services until it no longer operates the system.
   (C)   If the grantee fails to operate the system for seven consecutive days
without prior approval of the village or without just cause, the village may,
at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as
the grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the village or a
permanent operator is selected. If the village is required to fulfill this
obligation for the grantee, the village shall be entitled to all revenues for
any period during which it operates the system and the grantee shall reimburse
the village for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the
system received by the village that are the result of the grantee’s failure to
perform.
(2000 Code, § 113.26) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.027 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Mayor or chief elected official is designated as having primary
responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise and for the
implementation of complaint procedures.
   (B)   During the terms of the franchise and any renewal thereof, the grantee
shall maintain a central office for the purpose of receiving and resolving all
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar
matters. The office must be reachable by a local and/or toll-free telephone
call to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment functions
and similar matters. The grantee will make good faith efforts to arrange for
one or more payment locations in a central location where customers can pay
bills or conduct other business activities.
   (C)   As subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system, the grantee
shall, by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure, furnish information
concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the
name, address and local telephone number of the employee or employees or agent
to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be addressed.
   (D)   When there have been similar complaints made, or where there exists
other evidence, which, in the judgment of the village, in consultation with the
grantee, casts doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service, the
village shall have the right and authority to require the grantee to test,
analyze and report on the performance of the system. The grantee shall fully
cooperate with the village in performing such testing and shall prepare results
and a report, if requested, within 30 days after notice. Such report shall
include the following information:
      (1)   The nature of the complaint or problem that precipitated the
special tests;
      (2)   The system component(s) tested;
      (3)   The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
      (4)   The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was
resolved; and
      (5)   Any other information pertinent to the tests and analysis which may
be required.
   (E)   The village may request that tests be supervised, at the village’s
expense, by an independent professional engineer or equivalent of the village’s
choice. The engineer shall sign all records of special tests and forward to the
village such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and
commending actions to be taken.
   (F)   The village’s rights under this section shall be limited to requiring
tests, analysis and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics
based on complaints or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the
village has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaints or other evidence
require that tests be performed to protect the public against substandard cable
service.
(2000 Code, § 113.27) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.028 GRANTEE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The grantee shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be
reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its rights and perform
its obligations under the franchise, and to assure uninterrupted service to
each and all of its customers; provided, however, that such rules, regulations,
terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or
applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
(2000 Code, § 113.28) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.029 FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   A grantee shall pay to the village a franchise fee in the amount
designated in the franchise agreement. Unless otherwise specified in the
franchise agreement, such franchise fee shall be the maximum amount as allowed
by law or such lesser amount as may be designated by the village.
   (B)   The franchise fee payment shall be in addition to any other tax or
payment owed to the village by the grantee and shall not be construed as
payment in lieu of municipal property taxes or other state, county or local
taxes.
   (C)   The franchise fee and any other costs or penalties assessed shall be
payable quarterly on a calendar year basis to the village within 30 days of the
end of each quarter. The grantee shall also file a complete and accurate
verified statement of all gross receipts as previously defined within 30 days
after the end of the quarter.
   (D)   The village shall have the right to inspect the grantee’s income
records and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be
payable under this subchapter; provided, however, that such audit shall take
place within 60 months following the close of each of the grantee’s fiscal
years. Any additional amount due the village as a result of an audit shall be
paid within 30 days following written notice to the grantee by the village,
which notice shall include a copy of the audit report.
   (E)   If any franchise payment or recomputed amount, cost or penalty, is not
made on or before the applicable dates heretofore specified, interest shall be
charged daily from such date at an annual rate of 12%. The grantee shall
reimburse the village for any additional expenses and costs incurred by the
village by reason of the delinquent payment(s).
(2000 Code, § 113.29) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.030 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL.
   (A)   A franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or
in part, or leased or sublet in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either
legal or equitable or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest
in any person without the prior written consent of the village, except that any
financing arrangement, including, but not limited to, a mortgage or pledge,
shall not be deemed a “transfer” controlled by this section. The grantee may,
however, transfer or assign the franchise to a wholly owned subsidiary of the
grantee and such subsidiary may transfer or assign the franchise back to the
grantee without such consent, providing that such assignment is without any
release of liability of the grantee. Any proposed assignee must show legal,
technical and financial responsibility as determined by the village and must
agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise. The village shall have
120 days to act upon any request for approval of a sale or transfer submitted
in writing that contains or is accompanied by such information as is required
in accordance with FCC regulations and by the village. The village shall be
deemed to have consented to a proposed transfer or assignment if its refusal to
consent is not communicated in writing to the grantee within 120 days following
receipt of written notice and receipt of all necessary information as to the
effect of the proposed transfer or assignment upon the public, unless the
requesting party and the village agree to an extension of time. The village
shall not unreasonably withhold consent to a proposed transfer.
   (B)   The grantee shall promptly notify the village of any actual or
proposed change in, or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of
control of the grantee. The word “control” as used herein is not limited to
major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner
exercised. A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred
shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of
persons of 5% of the voting shares of the grantee. Every change, transfer or
acquisition of control of the grantee that is not conducted pursuant to the
terms and conditions of this subchapter shall make the franchise subject to
cancellation unless and until the village shall have consented thereto, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining
whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control,
the village may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling
party, and the grantee shall assist the village in such inquiry.
   (C)   The consent or approval of the village to any transfer of the grantee
shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the village in and to
the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subordinate to
the terms and conditions of the franchise.
   (D)   In the absence of extraordinary circumstances, the village shall not
be required to approve any transfer or assignment of a new franchise prior to
substantial completion of construction of the proposed system.
   (E)   In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved
without the successor(s) in interest becoming a signatory to the franchise
agreement.
(2000 Code, § 113.30) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.031 AVAILABILITY OF BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   The grantee shall fully cooperate in making available at reasonable
times, and the village shall have the right to inspect, where reasonably
necessary for the enforcement of the franchise, books, records, maps, plans and
other like materials of the grantee applicable to the cable television system,
at any time during normal business hours; provided where volume and convenience
necessitate, the grantee may require inspection to take place on the grantee
premises.
   (B)   The following records and/or reports shall be sent to the village, but
no more frequently than on an annual basis if so mutually agreed upon by the
grantee and the village:
      (1)   A quarterly review and resolution or progress report submitted by
the grantee to the village;
      (2)   Periodic preventive maintenance reports;
      (3)   Any copies of FCC Form 395-A (or successor form) or any
supplemental forms related to equal opportunity or fair contracting policies;
      (4)   Subscriber inquiry/complaint resolution data and the right to
review documentation concerning these inquiries and/or complaints periodically;
and
      (5)   Periodic construction update reports including, where appropriate,
the submission of as-built maps.
(2000 Code, § 113.31) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.032 OTHER PETITIONS AND APPLICATIONS.
   Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports submitted
by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, to the Securities and
Exchange Commission or to any other federal or state regulatory commission or
agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable television
operations authorized pursuant to the franchise or received from such agencies
shall be provided upon request to the village.
(2000 Code, § 113.32) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.033 FISCAL REPORTS.
   The grantee shall file annually with the village no later than 120 days
after the end of the grantee’s fiscal year, a copy of a gross revenues
statement certified by an officer of the grantee.
(2000 Code, § 113.33) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.034 REMOVAL OF CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM.
   At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted or when any
renewal is denied, or upon its termination as provided herein, the grantee
shall forthwith, upon notice by the village, remove at its own expense all
designated portions of the cable television system from all streets and public
property within the village. If the grantee fails to do so, the village may
perform the work at the grantee’s expense. Upon such notice of removal, a bond
shall be furnished by the grantee in an amount sufficient to cover this
expense.
(2000 Code, § 113.34) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.035 REQUIRED SERVICES AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   The grantee shall make available to subscribers the option to receive
a minimum of 85 channels.
   (B)   (1)   The grantee shall maintain the following:
         (a)   At least one specially-designated, noncommercial public access
channel available on a first-come, nondiscriminatory basis;
         (b)   At least one specially-designated channel per school district
for use by local educational authorities;
         (c)   At least one specially-designated channel for local governmental
uses;
         (d)   At least one specially-designated channel for leased access
uses; and
         (e)   An institutional network (I-Net) of cable, optical, electrical
or electronic equipment, including cable television systems, used for the
purpose of transmitting two-way telecommunications signals interconnecting
designated entities to be determined by the village. Such network may be
provided as needed by utilizing capacity on the system.
      (2)   Provided, however, that the public access, education and local
government channels shall be combined on one channel until such time as
additional channels become necessary as mutually agreed to by the village and
the grantee. The grantee shall make a channel available for leased access uses
in accordance with the requirements of federal law. Studios and associated
production equipment will be located in a mutually agreed upon site to meet the
public’s need for public access, education and local government channels as
noted in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b) and (B)(1)(c) above. Financial and
technical support and replacement and maintenance of equipment of this facility
shall be separately incorporated into the franchise by agreement.
   (C)   The grantee shall provide emergency broadcast capacity pursuant to FCC
rules. The grantee shall cooperate with the village in the use and operation of
the emergency alert override system.
   (D)   Interconnection.
      (1)   The grantee may be requested to interconnect its system with other
communication facilities. Such interconnection shall be made within the time
limit established by the village.
      (2)   Upon receiving a request from the village to interconnect, the
franchisee shall immediately initiate negotiations with the other affected
system or systems in order that all costs may be shared equally among cable
companies for both construction and operation of the interconnection link.
      (3)   The franchisee may be granted reasonable extensions of time to
interconnect or the village may rescind its request to interconnect upon
petition by the franchisee to the village if it finds that the franchisee has
negotiated in good faith and has arrived at impasse with the operator or
franchising authority of the system to be interconnected, or if the franchisee
determines that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable or
unacceptable increase in subscriber rates or that interconnection is
technically unfeasible.
      (4)   The grantee shall cooperate with any interconnection corporation,
regional interconnection authority or village, county, state and federal
regulatory agency which may be hereafter established for the purpose of
regulating, financing, or otherwise providing for the interconnection of cable
systems beyond the boundaries of the village.
   (E)   The grantee shall provide such additional services and facilities as
are contained in its application, which is incorporated by reference herein.
(2000 Code, § 113.35) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.036 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In addition to the inherent powers of the village to regulate and
control any cable television franchise, and those powers expressly reserved by
the village, or agreed to and provided for herein, the right and power is
hereby reserved by the village to promulgate such additional regulations as it
shall find necessary in the exercise of its lawful powers and furtherance of
the terms and conditions of the franchise; provided, however, that such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions
hereof or applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations.
   (B)   The village may also adopt such regulations at the request of grantee
upon application.
(2000 Code, § 113.36) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.037 PERFORMANCE EVALUATION SESSIONS.
   (A)   The village and the grantee may hold scheduled yearly performance
evaluation sessions within 30 days of the third, sixth and ninth anniversary
dates of the grantee’s award or renewal of the franchise and as may be required
by federal and state law.
   (B)   Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of
the franchise at the request of the village or the grantee.
   (C)   All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a
newspaper of general circulation in accordance with legal notice. The grantee
shall notify its subscribers of all evaluation sessions by announcements on at
least one channel of its system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m.,
for five consecutive days preceding each session.
   (D)   Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation
session may include, but are not limited to: service rate structures; franchise
fee, penalties, free or discounted services; application of new technologies;
system performance; services provided; programming offered; customer
complaints; privacy; amendments to this subchapter; judicial and FCC rulings;
line extension policies; and grantee or village rules.
   (E)   Members of the general public may add topics either by working through
the negotiating parties or by presenting a petition. If such a petition bears
the valid signatures of 50 or more residents of the village, the proposed topic
or topics shall be added to the list of topics to be discussed at the
evaluation session.
(2000 Code, § 113.37) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.038 RATE CHANGE PROCEDURES.
   Pursuant to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of
1992, being 47 U.S.C. §§ 325 et seq. and 47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq., the village
is currently certified to regulate the basic service rates charged by grantee.
Under these rules, grantee is required to obtain approval from the village for
a rate increase for any change to the rates for basic service. Should federal
or state law permit further rate regulation beyond basic service, the village
may assume such rate regulation and adopt appropriate procedures for such
regulation.
(2000 Code, § 113.38) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.039 FORFEITURE AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the village
under this subchapter or otherwise, the village reserves the right to terminate
the franchise and all rights and privileges of the grantee hereunder in the
event of a substantial breach of its terms and conditions. A substantial breach
by the grantee shall include, but shall not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Violation of any material provision of the franchise or any
material rule, order, regulation or determination of the village made pursuant
to the franchise;
      (2)   Attempt to evade any material provision of the franchise or to
practice any fraud or deceit upon the village or its subscribers or customers;
      (3)   Failure to begin or complete system construction or system
extension as provided under §
113.021;
      (4)   Failure to provide the services promised in the grantee’s initial
application as incorporated herein by §
113.004;
      (5)   Failure to restore service after 96 consecutive hours of
interrupted service, except when approval of such interruption is obtained from
the village; or
      (6)   Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or
negotiation of the franchise.
   (B)   The foregoing shall not constitute a major breach if the violation
occurs but is without fault of the grantee or occurs as a result of
circumstances beyond its control. The grantee shall not be excused by mere
economic hardship nor by misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers
or employees.
   (C)   The village may make a written demand that the grantee comply with any
such provision, rule, order or determination under or pursuant to the
franchise. If the violation by the grantee continues for a period of 30 days
following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action
has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the village may
place the issue of termination of the franchise before the Village Board. The
village shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at least 20 days prior to
the date of such meeting, a written notice of intent to request such
termination and the time and place of the meeting. Public notice shall be given
of the meeting and the issue(s) which the Board is to consider.
   (D)   The Village Board shall hear and consider the issue(s) and shall hear
any person interested therein and any relevant evidence, and shall determine
whether or not any violation by a grantee has occurred, after affording grantee
rights of due process to be heard and an opportunity to present all relevant
evidence and witnesses. The grantee may, at its own expense, make a transcript
of any such hearing.
   (E)   If the Village Board determines that the violation by the grantee was
the fault of the grantee and within its control, the Board may, by resolution
declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be forfeited and terminated
unless there is compliance within such period as the Board may fix, such period
to not be less than 30 days; provided, however, that no opportunity for
compliance need be granted for fraud or misrepresentation. Any such resolution
shall state with particularity the reasons for forfeiture and termination.
   (F)   The issue of forfeiture and termination shall automatically be placed
upon the Board agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for compliance.
The Board may then terminate the franchise forthwith upon finding that the
grantee has failed to achieve compliance or it may further extend the period,
at its discretion.
(2000 Code, § 113.39) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.040 FORECLOSURE.
   Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of
the system, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a substantial
part of the system, the grantee shall notify the village of such fact, and such
notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the
grantee has taken place, and the provisions of the franchise governing the
consent of the village to such change in control of the grantee shall apply.
(2000 Code, § 113.40) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.041 RECEIVERSHIP.
   The village shall have the right to cancel a franchise 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct the business of
the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other
action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been
vacated prior to the expiration of 120 days, or unless:
   (A)   Within 120 days after his or her election or appointment, such
receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this
subchapter and remedied all defaults thereunder; and
   (B)   Such receiver or trustee, within the 120 days, shall have executed an
agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises,
whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and
every provision of this subchapter and the franchise granted to the grantee.
(2000 Code, § 113.41) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.042 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of the franchise to the contrary,
the grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the
state and federal government or any administrative agencies thereof; provided,
however, if any such state or federal law or regulation shall require the
grantee to perform any service, or shall permit the grantee to perform any
service, or shall prohibit the grantee from performing any service, in conflict
with the terms of the franchise or of any law or regulation of the village,
then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, the grantee shall notify
the village of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation
or law and the laws or regulations of the village or the franchise.
   (B)   If the village determines that a material provision of this subchapter
is affected by any subsequent action of the state or federal government, the
village and the grantee shall negotiate to modify any of the provisions herein
to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and
purpose of this agreement.
(2000 Code, § 113.42) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.043 LANDLORD/TENANT.
   (A)   Interference with cable service prohibited. Neither the owner of any
multiple-unit residential dwelling nor his or her agent or representative shall
interfere with the right of any tenant or lawful resident thereof to receive
cable television service, cable installation or maintenance from a cable
television grantee regulated by and lawfully operating under a valid and
existing franchise issued by the village.
   (B)   Penalties and charges to tenants for service prohibited. Neither the
owner of any multiple-unit residential dwelling nor his or her agent or
representative shall penalize, charge or surcharge a tenant or resident or
forfeit or threaten to forfeit any right of such tenant or resident, or
discriminate in any way against such tenant or resident who requests or
receives cable television service from a grantee operating under a valid and
existing cable television franchise issued by the village.
   (C)   Reselling service prohibited. No person shall resell, without the
expressed, written consent of both the grantee and the village, any cable
service, program or signal transmitted by a cable television grantee under a
franchise issued by the village.
   (D)   Protection of property permitted. Nothing in this subchapter shall
prohibit a person from requiring that cable television system facilities
conform to laws and regulations and reasonable conditions necessary to protect
safety, functioning, appearance and value of premises or the convenience and
safety of persons or property.
   (E)   Risks assumed by grantee. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit a
person from requiring a grantee to agree to indemnify the owner, or his or her
agents or representatives for damages or from liability for damages caused by
the installation, operation, maintenance or removal of cable television
facilities.
(2000 Code, § 113.43) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.044 APPLICANTS’ BIDS FOR INITIAL FRANCHISE.
   (A)   All bids received by the village from the applicants for an initial
franchise will become the sole property of the village.
   (B)   The village reserves the right to reject any and all bids and waive
informalities and/or technicalities where the best interest of the village may
be served.
   (C)   All questions regarding the meaning or intent of this subchapter or
application documents shall be submitted to the village in writing. Replies
will be issued by addenda, mailed or delivered to all parties recorded by the
village as having received the application documents. The village reserves the
right to make extensions of time for receiving bids as it deems necessary.
Questions received less than 14 days prior to the date for the opening of bids
will not be answered. Only replies to questions by written addenda will be
binding. All bids must contain an acknowledgment of receipt of all addenda.
   (D)   Bids must be sealed, and submitted at the time and place indicated in
the application documents for the public opening. Bids may be modified at any
time prior to the opening of the bids, provided that any modifications must be
duly executed in the manner that the applicant’s bid must be executed. No bid
shall be opened or inspected before the public opening.
   (E)   Before submitting a bid, each applicant is encouraged to:
      (1)   Examine this subchapter and the application documents thoroughly;
      (2)   Familiarize himself or herself with local conditions that may in
any manner affect performance under the franchise;
      (3)   Familiarize himself or herself with federal, state and local laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations affecting performance under the franchise;
and
      (4)   Carefully correlate the bid with the requirements of this
subchapter and the application documents.
   (F)   The village may make such investigations as it deems necessary to
determine the ability of an applicant to perform under the franchise, and the
applicant shall furnish to the village all such information and data for this
purpose as the village may request. The village reserves the right to reject
any bid if the evidence submitted by, or investigation of, such applicant fails
to satisfy the village that such applicant is properly qualified to carry out
the obligations of the franchise and to complete the work contemplated therein.
Conditional bids will not be accepted.
   (G)   All bids received shall be placed in a secure depository approved by
the village and shall not be opened nor inspected prior to the public opening.
(2000 Code, § 113.44) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.045 FINANCIAL, CONTRACTUAL, SHAREHOLDER AND SYSTEM DISCLOSURE FOR
FRANCHISES.
   (A)   No franchise will be granted to any applicant unless all requirements
and demands of the village regarding financial, contractual, shareholder and
system disclosure have been met.
   (B)   Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest
in the applicant, shall fully disclose all agreements and undertakings, whether
written or oral, or implied with any person, firm, group, association or
corporation with respect to the franchise and the proposed cable television
system. The grantee of a franchise shall disclose all other contracts to the
village as the contracts are made. This section shall include, but not be
limited to, any agreements between local applicants and national companies.
   (C)   Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest
in the applicant, shall submit all requested information as provided by the
terms of this subchapter or the application documents, which are incorporated
herein by reference. The requested information must be complete and verified as
true by the applicant.
   (D)   Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest
in the applicant, shall disclose the numbers of shares of stock, and the
holders thereof, and shall include the amount of consideration for each share
of stock and the nature of the consideration.
   (E)   Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest
in the applicant, shall disclose any information required by the application
documents regarding other cable systems in which they hold an interest of any
nature, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Locations of all other franchises and the dates of award for each
location;
      (2)   Estimated construction costs and estimated completion dates for
each system;
      (3)   Estimated number of miles of construction and number of miles
completed in each system as of the date of this application; and
      (4)   Date for completion of construction as promised in the application
for each system.
   (F)   Applicants, including all shareholders and parties with any interest
in the applicant, shall disclose any information required by the application
documents regarding pending applications for other cable systems, including,
but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Location of other franchise applications and date of application
for each system;
      (2)   Estimated dates of franchise awards;
      (3)   Estimated number of miles of construction; and
      (4)   Estimated construction costs.
(2000 Code, § 113.45) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
§ 113.046 THEFT OF SERVICES AND TAMPERING.
   (A)   No person may intentionally do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain or attempt to obtain cable television service from a company
by trick, artifice, deception, use of an illegal device or illegal decoder or
other fraudulent means with the intent to deprive that company of any or all
lawful compensation for rendering each type of service obtained. The intent
required for a violation of this division (A)(1) may be inferred from the
presence on the property and in the actual possession of the defendant of a
device not authorized by the cable television company, the major purpose of
which is to permit reception of cable television services without payment. This
inference is rebutted if the defendant demonstrates that he or she or she
purchased that device for a legitimate use;
      (2)   Give technical assistance or instruction to any person in obtaining
or attempting to obtain any cable television service without payment of all
lawful compensation to the company providing that service. This division (A)(2)
does not apply if the defendant demonstrates that the technical assistance or
instruction was given or the installation of the connection, descrambler or
receiving device was for a legitimate use;
      (3)   Make or maintain a connection, whether physical, electrical,
mechanical, acoustical or by other means, with any cables, wires, components or
other devices used for the distribution of cable television services for the
purpose of distributing cable television service to any other dwelling unit
without authority from a cable television company;
      (4)   Make or maintain a connection, whether physical, electrical,
mechanical, acoustical or by other means, with any cables, wires, components or
other devices used for the distribution of cable television services for the
purpose of obtaining cable television service without payment of all lawful
compensation to the company providing the service. The intent required for a
violation of this division (A)(4) may be inferred from proof that the cable
service to the defendant’s residence or business was connected under a service
agreement with the defendant and has been disconnected by the cable television
company and that thereafter there exists in fact a connection to the cable
system at the defendant’s residence or business;
      (5)   Make or maintain any modification or alteration to any device
installed with the authorization of a cable television company for the purpose
of intercepting or receiving any program or other service carried by that
company which that person is not authorized by that company to receive. The
intent required for a violation of this division (A)(5) may be inferred from
proof that, as a matter of standard procedure, the cable television company
places written warning labels on its converters or decoders explaining that the
tampering with the device is a violation of law and that the converter or
decoder is found to have been tampered with, altered or modified so as to allow
the reception or interception of programming carried by the cable television
company without authority to do so. The trier of fact may also infer that a
converter or decoder has been altered or modified from proof that the cable
television company, as a matter of standard procedure, seals the converters or
decoders with a label or mechanical device, that the seal was shown to the
customer upon delivery of the decoder and that the seal has been removed or
broken. The inferences under this division (A)(5) are rebutted if the cable
television company cannot demonstrate that the intact seal was shown to the
customer;
      (6)   Possess without authority any device or printed circuit board
designed to receive from a cable television system any cable television
programming or services offered for sale over that cable television system,
whether or not the programming or services are encoded, filtered, scrambled or
otherwise made unintelligible, or perform or facilitate the performance of any
of the acts under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5) above with the intent that
that device or printed circuit be used to receive that cable television
company’s services without payment. Intent to violate this division (A)(6) for
direct or indirect commercial advantage or private financial gain may be
inferred from proof of the existence on the property and in the actual
possession of the defendant of a device if the totality of circumstances,
including quantities or volumes, indicates possession for resale; and
      (7)   Manufacture, import into this state, distribute, publish,
advertise, sell, lease or offer for sale or lease any device, printed circuit
board or any plan or kit for a device or for a printed circuit designed to
receive the cable television programming or services offered for sale over a
cable television system from a cable television system, whether or not the
programming or services are encoded, filtered, scrambled or otherwise made
unintelligible, with the intent that the device, printed circuit, plan or kit
be used for the reception of that company’s services without payment. The
intent required for a violation of this division (A)(7) may be inferred from
proof that the defendant has sold, leased or offered for sale or lease any
device, printed circuit board, plan or kit for a device or for a printed
circuit board in violation of this division (A)(7) and during the course of the
transaction for sale or lease the defendant expressly states or implies to the
buyer that the product will enable the buyer to obtain cable television service
without charge.
   (B)   Civil liability for theft of cable television service.
      (1)   Any person who incurs injury as a result of a violation of §
113.999 may bring a civil action against the person who committed the
violation.
      (2)   If the person who incurs the loss prevails against a person who
committed the violation wilfully and for the purpose of commercial advantage or
prevails against a person who has committed more than one violation of §
113.999, the court may grant the prevailing party any or all the following:
         (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(e), not more than $10,000
per violation;
         (b)   Actual damages;
         (c)   Any profits of the violators that are attributable to the
violation and that are not taken into account in determining the amount of
actual damages under division (B)(2)(b) above;
         (d)   Notwithstanding the limitations under the Illinois Compiled
Statutes, costs, disbursement and reasonable attorney fees; and
         (e)   If the court finds that the violation was committed wilfully and
for the purpose of commercial advantage, the court may increase the amount
granted under division (B)(2)(a) above not to exceed $50,000 per violation.
      (3)   If damages under division (B)(2)(c) above are requested, the party
who committed the violation shall be required to provide information on the
violator’s gross revenues, the violator’s deductible expenses and the elements
of profit attributable to factors other than the violation.
      (4)   In addition to other remedies available under this section, the
courts may grant the injured party a temporary or permanent injunction.
(2000 Code, § 113.46) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.047 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Whenever the village believes that the grantee has violated one or
more terms, conditions or provisions of the franchise, and wishes to impose
monetary penalties, a written notice shall be given to the grantee informing it
of such alleged violation or liability. The written notice shall describe in
reasonable detail the specific violation so as to afford the grantee an
opportunity to remedy the violation. The grantee shall have 30 days subsequent
to receipt of the notice in which to correct the violation before the village
may impose penalties unless the violation is of such a nature so as to require
more than 30 days and the grantee proceeds diligently within the 30 days to
correct the violation. In any case where the violation is not cured within 60
days of notice from the village, or such other time as the grantee and the
village may mutually agree to, the village may proceed to impose liquidated
damages.
   (B)   The grantee may, within ten days of receipt of notice, notify the
village that there is a dispute as to whether a violation or failure has, in
fact, occurred. Such notice by the grantee to the village shall specify with
particularity the matters disputed by the grantee and shall stay the running of
the 30-day cure period pending Board decision as required below. The Board
shall hear the grantee’s dispute, the grantee must be given at least five days
notice of the hearing. At the hearing, the grantee shall be entitled to the
right to present evidence and the right to be represented by counsel. After the
hearing, the village shall provide grantee a copy of its action, along with
supporting documents. In the event the village upholds the finding of a
violation, the grantee shall have 30 days subsequent, or such other time period
as the grantee and the village mutually agree, to correct the violation.
   (C)   The rights reserved to the village under this section are in addition
to all other rights of the village whether reserved by this subchapter or
authorized by law or equity, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right
with respect to penalties shall affect any other right the village may have.
(2000 Code, § 113.47) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997) Penalty, see §
113.999
MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE
§ 113.060 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS CHARGES.
      (1)   The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or services costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel termination
point within the village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel
termination point within the village and charged for that portion of the
interstate inter-office channel provided within the village.
      (2)   However, GROSS CHARGES shall not include:
         (a)   Any amounts added to a purchaser’s bill because of a charge made
under the fee imposed by this subchapter, additional charges added to a
purchaser’s bill under §§ 9-221 or 9-222 of the Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS
5/9-221, 220 ILCS 5/9-222 and 220 ILCS 5/9-222.1, amounts collected under the
Illinois Municipal Code, being 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq., the tax imposed by the
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act, 35 ILCS 630/1 et seq., 911 surcharges or the
tax imposed by § 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (b)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside
the village;
         (c)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage
of data or information of subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment, and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
         (d)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
         (e)   Charges to business enterprises certified under the Public
Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/9-221, 220 ILCS 5/9-222 and 220 ILCS 5/9-222.1,
to the extent of such exemption and during the period of time specified by the
village;
            1.   Charges to business enterprises certified under Section 95 of
the Reimagining Energy and Vehicles in Illinois Act, to the extent of the
exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce
and Economic Opportunity.
            2.   Charges to business enterprises certified under Section 110-95
of the Manufacturing Illinois Chips for Real Opportunity (MICRO) Act, to the
extent of the exemption and during the period of time specified by the
Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity.
            3.   Charges to entities certified under Section 605-1115 of the
Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity Law of the Civil Administrative
Code of Illinois to the extent of the exemption and during the period of time
specified by the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity.
         (f)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent
that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries
or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
         (g)   Bad debts (BAD DEBT means any portion of a debt that is related
to a sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
         (h)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated
telecommunications devices; or
         (i)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided to the village.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any municipal street, alley, water or public right-of-
way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to locate or
permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY shall not include any real or personal village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THE STATE. Any retailer having
or maintaining within the State of Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an
office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office,
warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other representative
operating within this state under the authority of the retailer or its
subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business or agent or other
representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether such
retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, SERVICE ADDRESS
means the customer’s place of primary use as defined in 35 ILCS 638/1 et seq.
(the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act). For air-to-ground
systems, and the like, SERVICE ADDRESS shall mean the location of the
customer’s primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in the state where bills are sent.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Messages or information transmitted through use of
local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph
services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, private line
services, specialized mobile radio services, or any other transmission of
messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points
by wire, cable fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio satellite or similar
facilities. Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall also include wireless telecommunications as hereinafter defined.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by him or
her or it to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. Retailer access changes, right of access charges,
charges for use of inter-company facilities, and all telecommunications resold
in the subsequent provision and used as a component of, or integrated into,
end-to-end telecommunications service shall not be included in gross charges as
sales for resale. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of cable
services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications Act of
1984 (47 U.S.C. §§ 521 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village
through an open system as defined in the Rules of the Federal Communications
Commission (47 C.F.R. §§ 76.1550 et seq.) as now or hereafter amended.
Beginning January 1, 2001, prepaid telephone calling arrangements shall not be
considered TELECOMMUNICATIONS subject to the tax imposed under this Act. For
purpose of this section, PREPAID TELEPHONE CALLING ARRANGEMENTS means that term
as defined 35 ILCS 120/2-27 (Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act).
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.
      (1)   Any telecommunications retailer; and
      (2)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right-of-way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER or RETAILER or CARRIER. Every person engaged in
the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined in this
subchapter. The village may, in its discretion, upon application, authorize the
collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer not maintaining a place of
business within the village.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS. Cellular mobile telephones services, personal
wireless services as defined in section (C) of the Telecommunications Act of
1996 (Pub. Law No. 104-104), 42 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7), as now or hereafter
amended, including all commercial mobile radio services, and paging services.
(35 ILCS 635/10) (2000 Code, § 113.55) (Ord. 1692, passed 11-17-1997)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications Municipal Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act, see 35 ILCS
635/1 et seq.
§ 113.061 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS.
   (A)   Every telecommunications provider as defined by this subchapter shall
register with the village within 30 days after the effective date of this
subchapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to §
113.063(C) shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with this section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the village
pursuant to division (A) above has an affirmative duty to submit an amended
registration form or current return as required by §
113.063(C), as the case the information provided by the telecommunications
provider in the registration form or most recent return on file with the
village.
(2000 Code, § 113.56) (Ord. 1692, passed 11-17-1997)
§ 113.062 MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE.
   (A)   A village telecommunication infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of 1.0% of all
gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service addresses
within the village for telecommunications originating or received in the
village.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this subchapter, the village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights-of-way within the village by telecommunications retailer.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this subchapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this subchapter shall be collected, enforced and administered as
set forth in §
113.063.
(2000 Code, § 113.57) (Ord. 1692, passed 11-17-1997)
§ 113.063 COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF VILLAGE FEES.
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer’s service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the Village Administrator, the
infrastructure maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to
the month in which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that
the telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed 2% of the
village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse itself for
expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure maintenance fee to the
village shall be accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the
Village Administrator, which shall contain such information as the Village
Administrator may reasonably require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this subchapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by
such telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the village. The charge imposed under division
(A) above by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this subchapter shall
constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether
as a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this subchapter, from telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the Village Administrator may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this subchapter by telecommunications retailers
shall not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as
described immediately below:
      (1)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the Telecommunications Excise Tax
Act, being 35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.;
      (2)   “Gross receipts” for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in the Illinois Municipal Code;
      (3)   “Gross charges” for purposes of the municipal telecommunications
tax as prescribed in the Illinois Municipal Code; and
      (4)   “Gross revenue” for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed the Public Utilities Act, being 220 ILCS 5/9-221,
220 ILCS 5/9-222 and 220 ILCS 5/9-222.1.
   (G)   (1)   The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit
the books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this
subchapter to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly
accounted to the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee.
      (2)   Any underpayment of the amount of the village infrastructure
maintenance fee due to the village by the telecommunications retailer shall be
paid to the village plus 5% of the total amount of the underpayment determined
in an audit.
      (3)   If the audit indicates that the underpayment was more than 3% of
the amount remitted to the village in a timely manner as provided in this
subchapter, then the telecommunication retailer shall reimburse the village for
any costs incurred by the village in conducting the audit. Any amount payable
to the village pursuant to this division (G) shall be paid to the village
within 21 days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
   (H)   The Village Administrator, or his or her designee, may promulgate such
further or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement
of this subchapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from
time to time and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are
registered pursuant to §
113.061 of such regulations.
(2000 Code, § 113.58) (Ord. 1692, passed 11-17-1997)
§ 113.064 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall excuse any person or entity from
obligations imposed under any law, including but not limited to:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes;
   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under or within, use of or repair
of the public rights-of-way, including standard relating to free standing
towers and other structures upon the public right-of-way, as provided;
   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under or within,
use of or repair of the public rights-of-way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses or structures not located on, over or within the right-of-way.
(2000 Code, § 113.59) (Ord. 1692, passed 11-17-1997)
§ 113.065 EXISTING FRANCHISE AND LICENSES.
   Any franchises, license or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the village entered into before the effective date of this
subchapter regarding the use of public rights-of-way shall remain valid
according to and for their stated terms, except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived.
(2000 Code, § 113.60) (Ord. 1692, passed 11-17-1997)
§ 113.066 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 113.61) (Ord. 1692, passed 11-17-1997)
§ 113.067 VIOLATIONS.
   Any telecommunication provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this subchapter shall be
subject to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this code.
(2000 Code, § 113.62) (Ord. 1692, passed 11-17-1997) Penalty, see §
113.999
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
§ 113.080 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder’s cable service or video service area within
the village.
      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;
         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment;
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation and
repair charges;
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges;
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments;
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement;
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder’s network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder’s network,
such as a “home shopping” or similar channel, subject to division (1)(i) below;
         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities or applications,
the portion of the holder’s revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities or applications shall be included in the GROSS REVENUE unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business; and
         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(l)(vi);
         (b)   Refunds, discounts or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service;
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to non-
cable service or non-video service in accordance with the holder’s books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards or orders;
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser’s subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service;
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes;
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to home shopping or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of GROSS REVENUES to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be
paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-
401.
   PEG. Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and 220 ILCS
5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE. The provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this subchapter and 220 ILCS 5/
21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail or other services offered over the
public Internet.
(2000 Code, § 113.70) (Ord. 3041, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 113.081 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of the
holder’s gross revenues. However, the fee paid to the village by an incumbent
cable operator providing cable service, on the effective date of this
subchapter, shall not be greater than that fee presently being paid to the
village by the incumbent cable operator.
   (C)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at least
ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
   (D)   Holder’s liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder’s liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this subchapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
subchapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder’s application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the
village.
   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit
for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such
credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B) above.
(2000 Code, § 113.71) (Ord. 3041, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 113.082 PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to §
113.081.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be 1% of the holder’s gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of
gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its
designee for PEG access support in the village.
   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder’s liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in division (D) below.
   (D)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (E)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at
the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that
would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been
terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable
operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees
that that operator owes under division (B) above.
(2000 Code, § 113.72) (Ord. 3041, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 113.083 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this subchapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(2000 Code, § 113.73) (Ord. 3041, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 113.084 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to exempt a holder
from any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax
that is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with
respect to cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall
not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
village’s simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it
applies to any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued
authorization shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to
payment of the local unit of government’s 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
(2000 Code, § 113.74) (Ord. 3041, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 113.085 AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder’s books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et
seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that
the amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the village’s submission of an invoice for the sum.
(2000 Code, § 113.75) (Ord. 3041, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 113.086 LATE FEES/PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers’ Bill of
Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
(2000 Code, § 113.76) (Ord. 3041, passed 2-19-2008)
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
§ 113.100 CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW.
   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of 220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq. are hereby
adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers
offering services within the village’s boundaries.
   (B)   Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection
Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this subchapter shall be
incorporated into this subchapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable
or video providers offering services within the municipality’s boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this subchapter by reference
without formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(2000 Code, § 113.85) (Ord. 3040, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 113.101 ENFORCEMENT.
   The village does hereby, pursuant to law, declare its intent to enforce all
of the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
village.
(2000 Code, § 113.86) (Ord. 3040, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 113.102 SCHEDULE OF PENALTIES.
   (A)   The village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq., does hereby
provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and
Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law.
   (B)   The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis
and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach, and shall not
exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
      (1)   MATERIAL BREACH means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
      (2)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice
of any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
      (3)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall
be deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in division (B)(2) above.
(2000 Code, § 113.87) (Ord. 3040, passed 2-19-2008) Penalty, see §
113.999
§ 113.103 CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/22-501
et seq. and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next
billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits
and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit.
(2000 Code, § 113.88) (Ord. 3040, passed 2-19-2008)
§ 113.999 PENALTY.
   For the violation of any of the following provisions of this chapter,
penalties shall be chargeable to the letter of credit as follows and the
village may determine the amount of the forfeiture for other violations which
are not specified in a sum not to exceed $750 for each violation, with each day
constituting a separate violation:
   (A)   Failure to furnish, maintain or offer all cable services to any
potential subscriber within the village upon order of the village: $100 per
day, per violation, for each day that such failure occurs or continues;
   (B)   Failure to obtain or file evidence of required insurance, construction
bond, performance bond or other required financial security: $200 per day, per
violation, for each day such failure occurs or continues;
   (C)   Failure to provide access to data, documents, records or reports to
the village as required by §§
113.020,
113.030,
113.031,
113.032 and
113.038: $100 per day, per violation, for each day such failure occurs or
continues;
   (D)   Failure to comply with applicable construction, operation or
maintenance standards: $200 per day, per violation;
   (E)   Failure to comply with a rate decision or refund order: $500 per day,
per violation, for each day such a violation occurs or continues;
   (F)   For any violations for noncompliance with the customer service
standards of §§
113.024 and
113.026 the grantee shall pay $500 per day for each day, or part thereof, that
such noncompliance continues; and
   (G)   For any other violations of a franchise agreement to be determined by
the grantor in a public hearing but not specifically noted in this section
shall not exceed $750 per day, per violation.
(2000 Code, § 113.99) (Ord. 1678, passed 7-21-1997)
CHAPTER 114: SERVICES
Section
Filling Stations
   
114.01   License required
   
114.02   License fee
   
114.03   Regulations
Motels and Hotels
   
114.15   Scope
   
114.16   Operating permit required
   
114.17   Application for operating permit
   
114.18   Investigation of applications
   
114.19   Development and operating requirements
   
114.20   Fees for operating permits
   
114.21   Permit to be displayed
   
114.22   Revocation of permit
   
114.23   Enforcement by Village Building Commissioner or his or her designee
Motor Vehicle Repair Shops
   
114.35   Definition
   
114.36   Motor vehicle repair shop
   
114.37   License required
   
114.38   License fee
   
114.39   Place of business, location
Public Garages
   
114.55   Definition
   
114.56   License required
   
114.57   License fee
FILLING STATIONS
§ 114.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain or operate gasoline filling
stations in the village without obtaining a license.
(2000 Code, § 114.20) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.02 LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   The annual license fee for a gasoline filling station shall be $250.
   (B)   Provided, however, filling stations operating in conjunction with
licensed garages and auto repair shops shall not be required to pay a license
fee pursuant to this section.
(2000 Code, § 114.21) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949; Ord. 1348, passed 4-18-1988;
Ord. 1659, passed 2-18-1997; Ord. 1905, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 4170, passed 10-
29-2012)
§ 114.03 REGULATIONS.
   All gasoline filling stations shall be maintained and operated in accordance
with the statutes of the state and the regulations of the State Fire Marshal
and Fire Inspector of the village.
(2000 Code, § 114.22) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
MOTELS AND HOTELS
§ 114.15 SCOPE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the “Motel and Hotel Operating
Subchapter”. Its purpose is to establish minimum standards for the operation of
motels and hotels in order to minimize contagion, provide safe and sanitary
facilities, and otherwise promote and protect the public health, safety,
comfort and general welfare.
(2000 Code, § 114.30) (Ord. 401, passed 10-1-1951; Ord. 1905, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 114.16 OPERATING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Within the village, no land or premises shall be occupied or shall continue
to be occupied by two or more connected cabins, cottages or multiple dwelling
units which are used by tourists and transients for sleeping or dwelling
purposes, herein termed a motel or hotel, unless the motel or hotel complies
with all the requirements of this subchapter, and unless an operating permit
has been issued therefor and has not been revoked.
(2000 Code, § 114.31) (Ord. 401, passed 10-1-1951; Ord. 1905, passed 4-21-2003)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.17 APPLICATION FOR OPERATING PERMIT.
   Each application for an operating permit shall be made on forms provided by
the Village Clerk, and shall be properly filled in and accompanied by such
descriptive material in drawn or written form as the form specifies. The
application shall describe the site, buildings and facilities of the motel and
hotel in sufficient detail and accuracy so that, on investigation, their
compliance with the provisions hereof may be judged.
(2000 Code, § 114.32) (Ord. 401, passed 10-1-1951; Ord. 1905, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 114.18 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATIONS.
   The Village Clerk shall refer such application to the Village Building
Commissioner or his or her designee for an investigation and inspection to
determine whether the application and the premises conform to the requirements
of this subchapter. The Village Building Commissioner or his or her designee
shall report the results of his or her investigation to the Clerk, and if such
report is favorable, the Clerk shall issue a license.
(2000 Code, § 114.33) (Ord. 401, passed 10-1-1951; Ord. 1024, passed 10-1-1979;
Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 114.19 DEVELOPMENT AND OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   To qualify and maintain in good standing an operating permit, a motel or
hotel shall be developed, equipped, managed and operated as follows.
   (A)   The building shall conform to all the requirements of the municipal
building code respecting multiple-use buildings.
   (B)   The motel or hotel shall be in the charge of a resident manager who
shall be of good moral character, and available and responsible at all times
for maintaining the grounds, building and facilities in a sanitary, safe,
orderly and usable condition.
   (C)   There shall be an office or room for the manager where incoming guests
will be registered and furnished copies of the motel or hotel rules, and where
the registration records of the motel or hotel shall be maintained in approved
form and kept available at all times for inspection by the Village Building
Commissioner or his or her designee.
   (D)   No person known to be suffering from a reportable disease, as defined
by the State Department of Public Health, shall be given accommodation at any
motel or hotel. The manager shall immediately report to the Health Officer any
illness in the motel or hotel which is believed to be reportable.
   (E)   The living quarters of the motel or hotel shall not contain any
facilities for cooking or preparing food, and cooking and preparing food shall
be prohibited therein.
   (F)   Each living quarter shall contain hot and cold running water, bathtub
or shower facilities, lavatory and flush toilet.
   (G)   Plumbing fixtures and floors shall be thoroughly cleaned at least once
daily.
   (H)   Rooms shall be furnished with beds and bedding which shall be in good
condition, clean and adequate to body comfort. Beds shall be made up with
clean, freshly laundered sheets and pillow cases as often as they are assigned
to different persons, and at least weekly when they are used by the same
person.
   (I)   Each occupant of a room shall be furnished with soap and at least one
clean, freshly laundered bath towel and hand towel daily.
   (J)   A comfortable temperature shall be maintained in all living quarters
when heated from a central plant. Where central heating is not provided, safe,
convenient and adequate heating facilities shall be furnished.
   (K)   The manager shall comply with such other health and sanitation rules
and regulations as may be adopted by the municipality.
   (L)   Occupation of house trailers or tents shall not be permitted on the
premises licensed as a motel or hotel.
(2000 Code, § 114.34) (Ord. 401, passed 10-1-1951; Ord. 1024, passed 10-1-1979;
Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1905, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 3053, passed 4-
7-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.20 FEES FOR OPERATING PERMITS.
   The annual fee for each operating hotel or motel shall be based upon the
total area utilized for the business operation or under the control of the
business, excluding loading docks and parking areas as provided in §
110.01(B) of this code.
(2000 Code, § 114.35) (Ord. 4170, passed 10-29-2012)
§ 114.21 PERMIT TO BE DISPLAYED.
   The permit shall be conspicuously displayed in the office of the manager.
(2000 Code, § 114.36) (Ord. 401, passed 10-1-1951) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.22 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   A permit may be revoked or suspended for a violation of any provision of
this subchapter, but only if notice has been given the manager and owner or
lessee setting forth in writing the violation and the time allowed for
abatement thereof.
(2000 Code, § 114.37) (Ord. 401, passed 10-1-1951)
§ 114.23 ENFORCEMENT BY VILLAGE BUILDING COMMISSIONER OR HIS OR HER DESIGNEE.
   This subchapter shall be administered and enforced by the Village Building
Commissioner or his or her designee who is authorized to make all inspections
and orders deemed necessary to assure compliance with the provisions hereof.
(2000 Code, § 114.38) (Ord. 401, passed 10-1-1951; Ord. 1024, passed 10-1-1979;
Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOPS
§ 114.35 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP. Any building, premises or enclosure where the
business of doing repair work on or for motor vehicles or any of the component
parts thereof, the replacing of or the addition of parts thereto, is carried
on.
(2000 Code, § 114.45) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949)
§ 114.36 MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP.
   The business of conducting a motor vehicle repair shop may also be conducted
in connection with and as a part of a public garage.
(2000 Code, § 114.46) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949)
§ 114.37 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of a motor vehicle repair shop
without having obtained a license.
(2000 Code, § 114.47) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.38 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for a motor vehicle repair shop shall be $250.
(2000 Code, § 114.48) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949; Ord. 1348, passed 4-18-1988;
Ord. 1659, passed 2-18-1997; Ord. 1905, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 4170, passed 10-
29-2012)
§ 114.39 PLACE OF BUSINESS, LOCATION.
   No motor vehicle repair shop shall be conducted or operated within 200 feet
of any building used as a hospital, church or public or parochial school, or
the grounds thereof.
(2000 Code, § 114.49) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
PUBLIC GARAGES
§ 114.55 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC GARAGE. Any building, structure or premises for hire where two or
more motor vehicles are stored or parked in a condition ready for use, or where
rent is paid to the owner for the using, storing or keeping of such motor
vehicles.
(2000 Code, § 114.60) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949)
§ 114.56 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in the business of public garage without having
obtained a license.
(2000 Code, § 114.61) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.57 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual license fee shall be based upon the area utilized for the
business operation in the amounts as set forth in §
110.01(B) of this code.
(2000 Code, § 114.62) (Ord. 4170, passed 10-29-2012)
CHAPTER 115: RETAIL
Section
Secondhand and Precious Metal Dealers
   
115.01   Statute adopted by reference
Solicitors
   
115.20   Definitions
   
115.21   Certificate of registration
   
115.22   Application for certificate of registration
   
115.23   Issuance and revocation of certificate
   
115.24   Village policy on soliciting
   
115.25   Notice regulating soliciting
   
115.26   Duty of solicitors
   
115.27   Uninvited soliciting prohibited
   
115.28   Fee for certificate of registration
   
115.29   Soliciting contributions on highways
Scavengers
   
115.45   License required
   
115.46   License fee
   
115.47   Application for license
   
115.48   Limit on number
   
115.49   Vehicle requirements
   
115.50   Storage and disposal of refuse
   
115.51   Hours of operation
 
   
115.99   Penalty
SECONDHAND AND PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS
§ 115.01 STATUTE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The village adopts by reference, the Resale Dealers Act, 815 ILCS 398, which
addresses secondhand dealers and precious metals dealers.
SOLICITORS
§ 115.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   REGISTERED SOLICITOR. Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of
registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is in the
possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.
   RESIDENCE. Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by
one or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
   SOLICITING. Any one or more of the following activities:
      (1)   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares,
merchandise, foodstuffs or services of any kind, character or description
whatever, for any kind of consideration whatever;
      (2)   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purpose
of insurance of any type, kind or character;
      (3)   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publication; or
      (4)   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or non-profit
association, organization, corporation or project.
(2000 Code, § 115.25) (Ord. 794, passed 4-17-1972)
§ 115.21 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   Every person desiring to engage in soliciting from persons in residences
within this village is required to make written application for a certificate
of registration as hereinafter provided.
(2000 Code, § 115.26) (Ord. 794, passed 4-17-1972)
§ 115.22 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Application for a certificate of registration shall be made on a form
provided by the Village Clerk of this village and filed with him or her. The
applicant shall truthfully state in full the following information requested on
the application:
      (1)   Name, age and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at such address; business address if other than residence address;
and Social Security number;
      (2)   Physical description of the applicant;
      (3)   Name and address of the person, firm, corporation or association
with whom the applicant is employed or represents; and the length of time of
such employment or representation;
      (4)   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting in which the applicant will engage in;
      (5)   Period of time for which the certificate is applied;
      (6)   The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application
for certificate under this subchapter, if any;
      (7)   Whether a certificate of registration issued to the applicant under
this subchapter has ever been revoked;
      (8)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of any
of the provisions of this subchapter, or the ordinance of any other Illinois
municipality regulating soliciting; and
      (9)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of the commission of
a felony under the laws of the State of Illinois or any other state, or under
the federal law of the United States.
   (B)   All statements made by the applicant on the application or in
connection therewith shall be under oath.
   (C)   The Village Clerk shall cause to be kept in that office an accurate
record of every application received and acted on, together with all other
information and data pertaining thereto, of all certificates of registration
issued under the provisions of this subchapter, and of the denial of
applications. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive
order as filed, and every certificate issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be
identified with the duplicate number of the application on which it was issued.
   (D)   No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has
been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the State of
Illinois or any other state or under the federal law of the United States
within five years of the date of the application.
(2000 Code, § 115.27) (Ord. 794, passed 4-17-1972; Ord. 1134, passed 3-15-1982)
§ 115.23 ISSUANCE AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   (1)   The Village Clerk, after consideration of the application and
all information obtained relative thereto, shall deny the application if the
applicant does not possess the qualifications for such certificate as herein
required, or the issuance of a certificate of registration to the applicant
would not be in accord with the intent and purpose of this subchapter.
      (2)   When the applicant is found to be fully qualified, the certificate
of registration shall be issued forthwith. All applications not expressly
approved or rejected within five days of application shall be deemed approved,
and the certificate of registration shall be issued forthwith.
      (3)   If an application is denied, the applicant may submit a written
appeal to the Clerk for review.
   (B)   Any certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be revoked by
the Village Clerk if the holder of the certificate, prior to the expiration of
the certificate, is convicted of a violation of any kind of the provisions of
this subchapter; has made a false material statement in the application; or
otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of
registration under the terms of this subchapter. Immediately on such
revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the Village Clerk to the
holder of the certificate in person or by certified United States mail
addressed to his or her other residence address set forth in the application.
   (C)   Immediately on giving notice, the certificate of registration shall
become null and void.
   (D)   The certificate of registration shall state the expiration date
thereof.
(2000 Code, § 115.28) (Ord. 1134, passed 3-15-1982)
§ 115.24 VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is declared to be the policy of the governing body of this village that
the occupant or occupants of residences in this village shall make the
determination of whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their
respective residence. It shall be the duty of every holder of a certificate of
registration, and a condition of holding the certificate, to acknowledge and
abide by any notice regulating soliciting as provided in §
115.29.
(2000 Code, § 115.29) (Ord. 794, passed 4-17-1972; Ord. 1134, passed 3-15-1982)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.25 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   Every village resident who wishes to restrict solicitation shall do so in
the following manner.
   (A)   Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to
solicitors, or the refusal of invitation or any condition on solicitation shall
be contained in a weatherproof card, posted in a conspicuous manner on or near
the main entrance door to the residence containing a message qualifying the
solicitation in words consisting of letters not less than one-third inch in
height.
   (B)   Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(2000 Code, § 115.30) (Ord. 794, passed 4-17-1972; Ord. 1134, passed 3-15-1982)
§ 115.26 DUTY OF SOLICITORS.
   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or
not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested
to do so by the occupant.
(2000 Code, § 115.31) (Ord. 794, passed 4-17-1972; Ord. 1134, passed 3-15-1982)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.27 UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
   It is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person
to go on any premises and ring the door bell on or near any door, or create any
sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such
residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof
and engage in soliciting as herein defined, in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
115.25.
(2000 Code, § 115.32) (Ord. 794, passed 4-17-1972; Ord. 1134, passed 3-15-1982)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.28 FEE FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   Before a certificate of registration shall be issued to any applicant, he or
she shall pay to the Village Clerk a fee of $10 for each certificate of
registration issued to him or her, and each such certificate of registration
shall expire on April 30 after its issuance.
(2000 Code, § 115.34) (Ord. 794, passed 4-17-1972)
§ 115.29 SOLICITING CONTRIBUTIONS ON HIGHWAYS.
   Soliciting contributions from the occupants of any vehicle as described in
625 ILCS 5/11-1006(c) is hereby allowed and permitted within the village limits
of the village, subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   Solicitation on highways within the village shall be allowed only at
intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop.
   (B)   The soliciting agent shall be:
      (1)   Registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization
as provided by “An Act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for
charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making an
appropriation therefor”, as provided in 225 ILCS 460/1 et seq.;
      (2)   Engaged in a statewide fund raising activity; and
      (3)   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
   (C)   Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age
or more and shall be wearing a high visibility vest.
   (D)   A minimum on one solicitor shall be required at each entrance to the
highway intersection at which solicitations are being sought.
(2000 Code, § 115.35) (Ord. 1411, passed 10-16-1989) Penalty, see §
115.99
SCAVENGERS
§ 115.45 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger,
for the collection or disposal of animal, human or vegetable refuse or offal,
without having first obtained a license.
(2000 Code, § 115.45) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949; Ord. 1298, passed 6-16-1986)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.46 LICENSE FEE.
   The annual fee for a license to operate as a scavenger is $150 for operators
not under contract with the inhabitant of any dwelling unit, property owner or
business located within village boundaries and $1,000 for any scavenger under
contract with any inhabitant of a dwelling unit, property owner or business
within village boundaries or governmental unit or agency.
(2000 Code, § 115.46) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949; Ord. 1298, passed 6-16-1986;
Ord. 4170, passed 10-29-2012) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.47 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   The application for a license required by this subchapter shall be made to
the Village Clerk.
(2000 Code, § 115.47) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949; Ord. 1298, passed 6-16-1986)
§ 115.48 LIMIT ON NUMBER.
   There shall not be more than seven licenses for scavengers issued or in
effect at any one time.
(2000 Code, § 115.48) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949; Ord. 1298, passed 6-16-1986;
Ord. 1356, passed 7-5-1988)
§ 115.49 VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All public or private vehicles used for the collection or disposal of
refuse shall have enclosed bodies, or suitable provisions for covering the
body.
   (B)   Vehicles used for the collection and disposal of garbage or of refuse
containing garbage, shall have water-tight, enclosed metal bodies of easily
cleanable construction, shall be cleaned at sufficient frequency to prevent
nuisance or insect breeding, and shall be maintained in good repair. The
vehicles shall not at any time be overloaded so as to cause spillage.
(2000 Code, § 115.49) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949; Ord. 1298, passed 6-16-1986)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.50 STORAGE AND DISPOSAL OF REFUSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or store any refuse in
any place within the village limits or within one mile therefrom, except with
the express permission of the Village Board of Trustees.
(2000 Code, § 115.50) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949; Ord. 1298, passed 6-16-1986)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.51 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of scavenger,
within the village, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the day
following.
(2000 Code, § 115.51) (Ord. 381, passed 8-1-1949; Ord. 1298, passed 6-16-1986)
Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty
is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
10.99.
CHAPTER 116: FOOD DEALERS AND ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
116.01   Purpose
   
116.02   Permits, licenses, inspections
   
116.03   Compliance procedures; general
   
116.04   Issuance of permit, license or certificate
   
116.05   Suspension of permit, license or certificate
   
116.06   Revocation of permit, license or certificate
   
116.07   Service of notices
   
116.08   Means of appeal
   
116.09   Application after revocation
   
116.10   Inspection frequency
   
116.11   Access
   
116.12   Report of inspections
   
116.13   Correction of violations
   
116.14   Cessation of food operations
   
116.15   Resumption of operations
   
116.16   Inspection report form
   
116.17   Examination and condemnation of food
   
116.18   Pre-operational inspection
   
116.19   Procedure when infection is suspected
   
116.20   Reinspection costs
   
116.21   Conditional permit, license or certificate
   
116.22   Injunctions
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 PURPOSE.
   A chapter defining food, potentially hazardous food, retail food
establishment (the term RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT as used in this chapter shall
mean either a food service establishment or a retail food store); also defining
mobile food unit, temporary food service establishment, regulatory authority,
utensils, equipment and the like; providing for the sale of only sound,
properly labeled food; regulating the source of food; establishing sanitation
standards for food, food protection, food personnel, food operations, food
equipment and utensils, sanitary facilities and controls, and other facilities;
requiring permits, licenses or certificates for the operation of the food
service establishments and retail food stores; regulating the inspection of
such establishments; providing for compliance procedures; providing for the
incorporation by reference (65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq.) of the 1996 and all
subsequent editions of, or amendments to, the Illinois Department of Public
Health’s publication currently titled, Food Service Sanitation Code, that are
on file with the Secretary of State; providing for the incorporation by
reference of the 1992 and all subsequent editions of, or amendments to, the
Illinois Department of Public Health’s publication currently titled, Retail
Food Store Sanitation Code, that are on file with the Secretary of State; and
providing for the enforcement of this chapter including the filing of action
for injunctive relief; and the fixing of penalties for violation.
(2000 Code, § 116.01) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 116.02 PERMITS, LICENSES, INSPECTIONS.
   The issuance, suspension and revocation of permits, licenses or certificates
to operate retail food establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of unsound
or mislabeled food or drink; and the enforcement of this chapter shall be
regulated in accordance with §
116.03 concerning the compliance procedures. The inspection of food service
establishments shall be regulated in accordance with the 1996 and all
subsequent editions of, or amendments to, the Illinois Department of Public
Health’s publication currently titled, Food Service Sanitation Code, that are
on file with the Secretary of State. The inspection of retail food stores shall
be regulated in accordance with the 1992 and all subsequent editions of, or
amendments to, the Illinois Department of Public Health’s publication currently
titled, Retail Food Store Sanitation Code, that are on file with the Secretary
of State. The village or its duly authorized agent shall be the authority
having jurisdiction for the enforcement of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 116.02) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1903, passed 4-21-
2003)
§ 116.03 COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES; GENERAL.
   No person shall operate a food establishment who does not have a valid
permit, license or certificate issued to him or her by the village. Only a
person who complies with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to
receive or retain such a permit, license or certificate. Permits, licenses or
certificates are not transferable. A valid permit, license or certificate shall
be posted in every food establishment.
(2000 Code, § 116.03) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.04 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to operate a food establishment shall make written
application to the Village Clerk on or before December 1 of each year for a
license on forms provided by the Village Clerk and pay an annual fee in the
amount set forth in §
110.01 based upon the area utilized for the business operation or the area
under the control of the business, excluding loading docks and parking area.
   (B)   Such application shall include the name and address of each applicant,
the location and type of the proposed food establishment, and the signature of
each applicant.
      (1)   Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license or
certificate, the village shall inspect the proposed food establishment to
determine compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The village shall issue a permit, license or certificate to the
applicant if its inspection reveals that the proposed food establishment
complies with the requirements of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 116.04) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1903, passed 4-21-
2003; Ord. 4170, passed 10-29-2012)
§ 116.05 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The village may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend any
permit, license or certificate to operate a food establishment if the holder of
the permit, license or certificate does not comply with the requirements of
this chapter, or if the operation of the establishment does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter, or if the operation of the food establishment
otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health including failure
to reimburse the village for inspection or reinspection fees within 45 days of
the date of the original invoice. Suspension is effective upon service of the
notice required by §
116.06. When a permit, license or certificate is suspended, food operations
shall immediately cease.
   (B)   Whenever a permit, license or certificate is suspended, the holder of
the permit, license or certificate, or the person in charge shall be notified
in writing that the permit, license or certificate is, upon service of the
notice, immediately suspended. The village may end the suspension at any time
if reasons for the suspension no longer exist.
(2000 Code, § 116.05) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1759, passed 4-17-
2000)
§ 116.06 REVOCATION OF PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The village may revoke the permit, license or certificate for serious
or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this chapter or for the
interference with the village in the performance of duty.
   (B)   Prior to revocation, the village shall notify, in writing, the holder
of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in charge, of the specific
reason(s) for which the permit, license or certificate is to be revoked.
(2000 Code, § 116.06) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1903, passed 4-21-
2003)
§ 116.07 SERVICE OF NOTICES.
   A notice provided for in this chapter is properly served when it is
delivered to the holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the person in
charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit, license or
certificate. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the village.
(2000 Code, § 116.07) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 116.08 MEANS OF APPEAL.
   Any person shall have the right to appeal a decision of the code official to
the Board of Appeals. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that
the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been
incorrectly interpreted or the provisions of this code do not fully apply. The
appeal process shall be governed by the provisions described in the
International Building Code, 2012 Edition.
(2000 Code, § 116.08) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 116.09 APPLICATION AFTER REVOCATION.
   Whenever a permit, license or certificate has been revoked, the holder of
the revoked permit, license or certificate may make written application for a
new permit, license or certificate.
(2000 Code, § 116.09) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 116.10 INSPECTION FREQUENCY.
   (A)   Inspections of food establishments shall be performed at a frequency
necessary to protect the public health and at a minimum shall be performed in
accordance with the following schedule:
 
Category                   Inspection Frequency
Food service establishment Quarterly
Retail food store          Semiannually
 
   (B)   The category of a food establishment shall be determined in accordance
with the definitions of RETAIL FOOD STORE and FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT as
contained in the Illinois Department of Public Health’s publications titled
Retail Food Store Sanitation Code and Food Service Sanitation Code,
respectively.
(2000 Code, § 116.10) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1903, passed 4-21-
2003)
§ 116.11 ACCESS.
   The village upon proof of identity shall be permitted to enter any food
establishment at any reasonable time to perform inspections.
(2000 Code, § 116.11) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1903, passed 4-21-
2003)
§ 116.12 REPORT OF INSPECTIONS.
   Whenever an inspection of a food establishment is made, the findings shall
be recorded on the inspection report form set out in §
116.16. The inspection report form shall summarize the requirements of this
chapter and shall set forth a weighted point value for each requirement.
Inspectional remarks should be written to reference, by item number, the item
violated and should state the correction to be made. The rating score of the
establishment shall be the total of the weighted point values for all
violations, subtracted from 100. A copy of the completed inspection report form
shall be furnished to the person in charge of the establishment at the
conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection report form is a public
document that shall be made available for public disclosure to any person who
requests it according to law.
(2000 Code, § 116.12) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 116.13 CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable period of
time for the correction of the violations found; and correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance
with the following provisions.
   (A)   (1)   If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of
refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall
immediately cease food operations.
      (2)   Operations shall not be resumed until authorized by the village.
   (B)   (1)   All violations of four or five point weighted items shall be
corrected as soon as possible, but in any event, within ten days following
inspection.
      (2)   A follow-up inspection to confirm correction may be conducted at
the discretion of the village.
   (C)   All one or two point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection.
   (D)   When the rating score of the establishment is less than 60, the
establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations
within 48 hours. One or more reinspections may be conducted at reasonable time
intervals to assure correction.
   (E)   In the case of temporary food establishments, all violations shall be
corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected within 24 hours, the
establishment shall immediately cease food operations until authorized to
resume by the village.
(2000 Code, § 116.13) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1903, passed 4-21-
2003) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.14 CESSATION OF FOOD OPERATIONS.
   The inspection report shall state that failure to comply with any time
limits for corrections may result in cessation of food operations.
(2000 Code, § 116.14) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 116.15 RESUMPTION OF OPERATIONS.
   Whenever a food establishment is required under the provisions of §
116.14 to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is shown on
reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease operations no
longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered within a reasonable
time.
(2000 Code, § 116.15) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 116.16 INSPECTION REPORT FORM.
   The inspection report form approved and used by the County Department of
Public Health shall be used for all inspections as initiated under this
chapter.
(2000 Code, § 116.16) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 116.17 EXAMINATION AND CONDEMNATION OF FOOD.
   (A)   Food may be examined or sampled by the village as often as necessary
for enforcement of this chapter. Upon written notice to the owner or person in
charge, the village may place a hold order on any food which it believes is in
violation of this chapter. The notice shall specify the reasons for the hold
order. The village shall tag, label or otherwise identify any food subject to
the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served,
destroyed or moved from the establishment until such time that the hold order
is lifted by the village.
   (B)   Food found to be in violation of this chapter or a risk to public
health shall be immediately destroyed upon notice from the village.
(2000 Code, § 116.17) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1903, passed 4-21-
2003)
§ 116.18 PRE-OPERATIONAL INSPECTION.
   Prior to the start of operations of a new or remodeled food establishment,
the village shall perform an inspection to determine compliance with this
chapter.
(2000 Code, § 116.19) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1903, passed 4-21-
2003)
§ 116.19 PROCEDURE WHEN INFECTION IS SUSPECTED.
   (A)   When the village has reasonable cause to suspect possible disease
transmission by an employee of a food establishment, it may secure a morbidity
history of the suspected employee or make any other investigation as indicated.
   (B)   The village may require any or all of the following measures:
      (1)   The immediate exclusion of this employee from employment in food
establishments;
      (2)   The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until no
further danger of disease outbreak exists;
      (3)   Restriction of the employee’s services to some area of the food
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease; and/or
      (4)   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and
other employees and of his, her and their body discharges.
(2000 Code, § 116.20) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1903, passed 4-21-
2003)
§ 116.20 REINSPECTION COSTS.
   In the event a reinspection is deemed necessary by the inspector, the cost
of any and all subsequent reinspections shall be borne by the holder of the
permit, license or certificate. The cost for any reinspection shall be $40.
(2000 Code, § 116.21) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997; Ord. 1759, passed 4-17-
2000; Ord. 1903, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 116.21 CONDITIONAL PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   When structural, plumbing, electrical, ventilation or similar such
defects exist in an established food facility that may require significant
expenditures to correct, but are not considered to be imminent health hazards,
a conditional permit, license or certificate may be granted at the discretion
of the village. Under no circumstance will a conditional permit, license or
certificate be issued for more than two consecutive 12-month periods.
   (B)   The purpose of the conditional license or permit is to allow a
reasonable period of time for correction of existing defects.
(2000 Code, § 116.22) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 116.22 INJUNCTIONS.
   The village shall have the right to apply to a court of law to enjoin any
person or establishment in the event violations occur on a continuing basis.
(2000 Code, § 116.23) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more
than $750 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation continues.
(2000 Code, § 116.99) (Ord. 1680, passed 8-18-1997)
CHAPTER 117: SOUND AMPLIFYING DEVICES
Section
   
117.01   Certain activities exempted
   
117.02   License required
   
117.03   Application for license; contents
   
117.04   License fee; exemption from fee
   
117.05   Issuance and contents of license
   
117.06   Restrictions on place of use
   
117.07   Hours of use
   
117.08   Disturbing peace and quiet of neighborhood
§ 117.01 CERTAIN ACTIVITIES EXEMPTED.
   This chapter shall not be deemed to apply to radios in private vehicles when
operated in such a manner as not to be audible at a distance of 50 feet or more
from the vehicle, or to noise devices, bands or other musical devices used in
any public parade or procession which is operated under a permit issued by the
village.
(2000 Code, § 117.01) (Ord. 985, passed 10-2-1978)
§ 117.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any loudspeaker, amplifier or
any other similar device connected with any radio, phonograph, microphone or
other device by which sounds are amplified and enabled to be heard over any
public street or public place without having first obtained a license therefor.
(2000 Code, § 117.02) (Ord. 985, passed 10-2-1978) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS.
   Application for a license required hereunder shall be made to the Village
Clerk, on a form provided by him or her, and shall set forth the name and
address of the applicant, the name of the owner of the sound amplifying device,
the date on which it is intended to be used, and such other information as may
be required.
(2000 Code, § 117.03) (Ord. 985, passed 10-2-1978)
§ 117.04 LICENSE FEE; EXEMPTION FROM FEE.
   (A)   The fee for a license required hereunder shall be $10 per day.
   (B)   The daily license fee required by division (A) above shall not apply
to any business whose principal operation is licensed by the village to allow
the use of amplifiers and loudspeakers in the normal conduct of the business.
(2000 Code, § 117.04) (Ord. 985, passed 10-2-1978)
§ 117.05 ISSUANCE AND CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   A license shall be issued on payment of the required license fee, and shall
permit the use of any such device, subject to the terms and conditions of this
chapter, only on the date specified in the license.
(2000 Code, § 117.05) (Ord. 985, passed 10-2-1978)
§ 117.06 RESTRICTIONS ON PLACE OF USE.
   No person shall use, operate or employ any device regulated by this chapter
within a radius of two blocks from any hospital, or within a radius of two
blocks from any place of worship while services are being held in the place of
worship.
(2000 Code, § 117.06) (Ord. 985, passed 10-2-1978) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.07 HOURS OF USE.
   No person shall use, operate or employ any device regulated by this chapter
on Sundays or between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. of any other day.
(2000 Code, § 117.07) (Ord. 985, passed 10-2-1978) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.08 DISTURBING PEACE AND QUIET OF NEIGHBORHOOD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate sound amplification equipment
in a manner which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood.
(2000 Code, § 117.09) (Ord. 985, passed 10-2-1978) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 118: VENDING MACHINES
Section
   
118.01   Licenses required for vending machines
§ 118.01 LICENSES REQUIRED FOR VENDING MACHINES.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate or have on any premises,
any product vending machine, without having first obtained a license.
   (B)   The annual license fee for vending machines shall be $50 per vending
machine.
(2000 Code, § 119.01) (Ord. 1139, passed 4-5-1982; Ord. 1172, passed 4-4-1983;
Ord. 1265, passed 8-5-1985; Ord. 4556, passed 3-20-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 119: TOBACCO
Section
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   Jurisdiction
   
119.03   Prohibitions on sale or distribution of tobacco products
   
119.04   Licensing of tobacco products retailers
   
119.05   Enforcement
 
   
119.99   Penalty
§ 119.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT. A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means. Alternative nicotine product does not include:
cigarettes as defined in § 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act (35 ILCS 130/1) and
tobacco products as defined in § 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995
(35 ILCS 143/10-5); tobacco product and electronic cigarette as defined in the
section; or any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for the sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes and is being marketed and
sold solely for that approved purpose.
   BIDI CIGARETTE. A product that contains tobacco that is wrapped in tembumi
or tendu leaf or that is wrapped in any other material identified by rules of
the Department of Public Health that is similar in appearance or
characteristics to the tembumi or tendu leaf.
   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE. (a) A device that employs a battery or other mechanism
to heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for
inhalation; (b) any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended
to be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or (c) any solution
or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for use in the
device. Electronic cigarette includes, but is not limited to, any electronic
nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic
pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and any
components or parts that can be used to build the product or device. Electronic
cigarette does not include; cigarettes as defined in § 1 of the Cigarette Tax
Act (35 ILCS 130/1) and tobacco products as defined in § 10-5 of the Tobacco
Products Tax Act of 1995 (35 ILCS 143/10-5); tobacco product and alternative
nicotine product as defined in the section; any product approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for sale as tobacco cessation product, as a
tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; any asthma inhaler
prescribed by a physician for that condition and is being marketed and sold for
that approved purpose; or any therapeutic product approved for use under the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Act.
   SMOKELESS TOBACCO. Any tobacco products that are suitable for dipping or
chewing.
   SMOKING HERBS. All substances of plant origin and their derivatives,
including, but not limited to, broom, calea, California poppy, damiana, hops,
ginseng, lobelia, jimson weed and other members of the Datura genus, passion
flower and wild lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily for use as
smoking materials.
   TOBACCO ACCESSORIES. Cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials
of all types, cigarette rolling machines and other items, designed primarily
for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products or of substances made illegal
under any statute or of substances whose sale, gift, barter or exchange is made
unlawful under this chapter.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT. Any product containing or made from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product
which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and
intended to be placed in the oral cavity. TOBACCO PRODUCT includes any
component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold
separately. TOBACCO PRODUCT does not include: an electronic cigarette and
alternative nicotine product as defined in this section; or any product that
has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
(2000 Code, § 120.01) (Ord. 1721, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 4444, passed 2-16-
2021)
§ 119.02 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter applies to retailers of tobacco products in the village,
including any person who sells tobacco products to individuals for personal
consumption or who operates a facility containing vending machines which
dispense tobacco products or self-service displays of tobacco products.
(2000 Code, § 120.02) (Ord. 1721, passed 12-7-1998)
§ 119.03 PROHIBITIONS ON SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   (A)   General. No person shall knowingly sell, barter, exchange, deliver or
give away or cause or permit or procure to be sold, bartered, exchanged,
delivered or given away any tobacco accessories, tobacco products, alternative
nicotine products, electronic cigarettes, or smoking herbs to any person under
21 years of age.
   (B)   Sale of bidi cigarettes. No person shall knowingly sell, barter,
exchange, deliver or give away a bidi cigarette to another person, nor shall a
person cause or permit or procure a bidi cigarette to be sold, bartered,
exchanged, delivered or given away to another person.
   (C)   Sale of cigarette paper. No person shall knowingly offer, sell,
barter, exchange, deliver or give away cigarette paper or cause, permit or
procure cigarette paper to be sold, offered, bartered, exchanged, delivered or
given away, except from premises or an establishment where other tobacco
products are sold.
   (D)   Sale of tobacco products other than in sealed packages. No retailer
may break or otherwise open any cigarette or smokeless tobacco package to sell
or distribute individual cigarettes or a number of unpackaged cigarettes that
is smaller than the minimum cigarette package size of 20 cigarettes or any
quantity of cigarette tobacco or smokeless tobacco that is smaller than the
smallest package distributed by the manufacturer for individual consumer use.
   (E)   Distribution of tobacco product samples prohibited. No person shall
give away, barter, exchange, distribute or in any way dispense free of charge
or at nominal cost any tobacco product samples and/or any coupon redeemable for
any tobacco products, on any public street, alley, sidewalk or in any public
park, ground or playground, or in areas open to the public in any publicly
owned or operated building or at any place located within 500 feet of any
building or other location used primarily as a school, child care facility, or
for the education or recreation for children under 18 years of age.
   (F)   Sale of cigarette paper from vending machines. No person shall
knowingly offer, sell, barter, exchange, deliver or give away cigarette paper
or cause, permit or procure cigarette paper to be sold, offered, bartered,
exchanged, delivered or given away by use of a vending or coin-operated machine
or device. For purposes of this section, cigarette paper shall not include any
paper that is incorporated into a product to which a tax stamp must be affixed
under the Cigarette Tax Act (35 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) or the Cigarette Use Tax
Act (35 ILCS 135/1 et seq.).
   (G)   Use of identification cards. No person, in the furtherance or
facilitation of obtaining any tobacco product, tobacco accessories, alternative
nicotine products, electronic cigarettes and smoking herbs, shall display or
use a false or forged identification card or transfer, alter or deface an
identification card.
   (H)   Warning to minors.
      (1)   Any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation operating a
place of business where tobacco products, tobacco accessories, alternative
nicotine products, electronic cigarettes, and smoking herbs are sold or offered
for sale shall post in a conspicuous place upon the premises a sign upon which
there shall be imprinted the following statement:
THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED
BYLAW UNDER PENALTY OF FINES OF UP TO FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($500.00). PERSONS
UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE WHO MISREPRESENT THEIR AGE BY ANY MEANS WHATSOEVER ARE
SUBJECT TO ASSESSMENT OF FINES OF NOT LESS THAN FIFTY DOLLARS ($50,00) NOR MORE
THAN SEVENTY-FIVE DOLLARS ($75.00) FOR THE FIRST OFFENSE AND NOT LESS THAN ONE
HUNDRED DOLLARS ($100,00) NOR MORE THAN FIVE HUNDRED DOLLARS ($500.00) FOR EACH
SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE.
      (2)   The sign shall be printed on a white card in red letters at least
one inch in height.
(2000 Code, § 120.03) (Ord. 1721, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 4444, passed 2-16-
2021) Penalty, see §
119.99
§ 119.04 LICENSING OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS RETAILERS.
   (A)   License requirement. No person shall engage in the retail sale of
tobacco products or operate a facility containing vending machines that
dispense tobacco products unless the person is authorized to do so by a license
issued pursuant to this chapter, or is an employee or agent of a person who has
been issued a license pursuant to this chapter. A separate license must be
obtained for each point of sale maintained by the retailer. The license to sell
tobacco products shall be displayed prominently at the point of sale for which
it is issued.
   (B)   License administration. The Village President, or his or her designee,
shall administer the licensing of retailers of tobacco products and shall
approve or deny all applications for licenses and revoke existing licenses
pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   License - application.
      (1)   An application for a tobacco retailer’s license shall be filed in
writing with the Village Clerk, or his or her designee, on a form provided by
the village. Each application for a license shall contain the following:
         (a)   The applicant’s full name, the address and telephone number
where the applicant is engaged in the business of the retail sale of tobacco
products and the name, address and telephone number of the person authorized to
receive notices issued pursuant to this chapter;
         (b)   If the applicant is a corporation, the corporate name, the
address and telephone number of the principal place of business; the date and
state of incorporation; the names of the corporate officers and the name,
address and telephone number of the person authorized to receive notices issued
pursuant to this chapter; and
         (c)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name, address and
telephone number of the principal place of business; the names of all partners;
the name, address and telephone number of a person authorized to receive
notices issued pursuant to the chapter.
      (2)   Any retailer whose license is revoked for violating this chapter
shall be prohibited from obtaining a tobacco retailer’s license for one year.
   (D)   License - term. Every retailer’s license shall be issued for an annual
period beginning January 1 and ending December 31. Each license shall expire on
the last day of the license year for which the license was issued.
   (E)   License - fee. The annual license fee for a retailer shall be $125 per
license. If a licensee operates more than one vending machine at the same
premises, the licensee shall pay the annual license fee of $125 for the first
vending machine license and $25 for each additional vending machine license.
   (F)   License - transfer prohibited. The transfer of any license issue
hereunder is prohibited. Any such purported transfer is void.
   (G)   Number of licenses. There shall not be more than two licenses for
retail tobacco stores as defined by §
96.15 of the village code issued or in effect at any one time. This limit shall
not apply to retailers that do not qualify as retail tobacco stores.
(2000 Code, § 120.04) (Ord. 1721, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 1826, passed 10-15-
2001; Ord. 4454, passed 6-21-2021; Ord. 4557, passed 3-20-2023) Penalty, see §
119.99
Cross-reference:
   License required for vending machines, see §
118.01
§ 119.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   An alleged violation of §
119.03 shall be evidenced by issuance of a violation notice and shall be
subject to administrative adjudication pursuant to the provisions of §
119.99.
(Ord. 4444, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 119.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, corporation or business who violates any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined as follows:
      (1)   For a first violation, an administrative penalty of $250;
      (2)   For a second violation, occurring after a final determination of
liability for a first violation, and within a 12-month period, an
administrative penalty of $500, and a suspension of the license of the retail
tobacco dealer for 30 days; and
      (3)   For a third violation, occurring after a final determination of
liability for a second violation and within a 12-month period, an
administrative penalty of $1,000, and a revocation of the license of the retail
tobacco dealer for one year.
   (B)   In addition to imposing the fines and other penalties provided by this
chapter, the village may request the County State’s Attorney to make
application on behalf of the village to the Circuit Court of the county for an
injunction requiring compliance with the provisions of this chapter or for such
order as the Court may deem necessary and appropriate to secure such
compliance.
   (C)   In addition to imposing the fines and other penalties provided by this
chapter, the Building Department may request the State’s Attorney to make
application on behalf of the village to the Circuit Court of the county for an
injunction requiring compliance with the provisions of this chapter or for such
order as the Court may deem necessary or appropriate to secure such compliance.
(2000 Code, § 120.99) (Ord. 1721, passed 12-7-1998)
CHAPTER 120: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Massage business license required
   
120.03   Massage therapist required
   
120.04   Exemptions
   
120.05   Application for massage business license
   
120.06   Terms of license; license fees; license renewal
   
120.07   Sanitation and safety requirements
   
120.08   Issuance and denial of licenses
   
120.09   Display of licenses
   
120.10   Register and regulation of employees
   
120.11   Conditions and restrictions of licenses
   
120.12   Sale, transfer or change of location
   
120.13   Prohibited acts and conditions
   
120.14   Enforcement
   
120.15   Complaint of violation
   
120.16   Notice
   
120.17   Revocation or suspension of licenses
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person over 18 years of age, other than a massage therapist,
who renders any service in connection with operation of a massage establishment
and receives compensation from the owner or operation of the establishment or
from its patrons.
   LICENSEE. The owner and/or operator of a massage establishment.
   MASSAGE or PRACTICE OF MASSAGE. Any method of applying pressure on or
friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating,
touching or stimulating, the external parts of the body, by another individual,
with the hands, any body part, or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical
apparatus or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing
alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or
similar preparations.
   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any establishment having a fixed place of business
where any person, firm, association or corporation engages in, or carries on,
or permits to be engaged in or carried on, any of the acts of massage as
defined herein.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST.
      (1)   Any person who, for any consideration, engages in the practice of
massage as defined herein and provides proof of one of the following:
         (a)   Active member status in a professional massage therapy
organization whose minimum standards require graduation from a recognized
school, as defined herein, or the passing of a competency test for active
membership;
         (b)   Graduation and completion of a professional level entry program
which consists of 500 hours or more of in-classroom study and 100 hours or more
of clinical experience in a recognized school;
         (c)   Passage of the national certification examination in therapeutic
massage and bodywork (NCETMB) administered by the National Certification Board
for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork, which is approved by the National
Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA), the accrediting arm of the National
Organization for Competency Assurance (NOCA) or any other examination
exhibiting proficiency in massage therapy/bodywork approved by the state or a
federal certifying agency; or
         (d)   Evidence of a professional license issued by the state
authorizing the practice of massage therapy.
      (2)   The following persons shall not be considered to be MASSAGE
THERAPISTS for purposes of this chapter, when practicing massage within the
scope of their vocation, employment, course of study or volunteer services:
         (a)   Physicians, physicians’ assistants, surgeons, podiatrists,
chiropodists, osteopaths, chiropractors, registered nurses, practical nurses,
certified nurses’ assistants, physical therapists, barbers and cosmetologists
licensed, registered or certified to practice in the state;
         (b)   Athletic trainers for any athletic program of a private or
public school, college or university or for any athletic team regularly
organized and engaging in competition;
         (c)   Any person enrolled in a school or program licensed by the state
or accredited by a national accrediting association in medicine, osteopathy,
chiropractic, podiatry, nursing, physical therapy, barbering or cosmetology, or
massage therapy; and
         (d)   Any person employed or working under the direction and
supervision of a massage therapist as defined herein.
   MASSEUR. Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the
practice of massage as defined herein.
   OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE. Any business, the function of which is to engage in
or carry on massages for compensation at a location designation by the customer
or client rather than at a massage establishment.
   PATRON. Any person who receives a massage under such circumstances that is
reasonably expected that he or she would pay money or give any other form of
consideration therefor.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, limited liability
company, joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of
whatever form or character.
   RECOGNIZED SCHOOL. A state-approved school operating according to state
regulations which has a current license, approval, accreditation and/or
certification from the state in which it is located and provides an entry level
massage training program requiring a minimum of 500 hours of in-class work in
clinical training, which program shall include anatomy and physiology,
kinesthetics, ethics, pathology, contraindication and clinical experience, or a
massage school program accredited/approved by the Commission of Massage
Training/Approval and Accreditation (COMTAA) or by the International Massage
and Somatic Therapies Accreditation Council (IMSTAC) or by a similar
nationally-recognized professional accrediting entity.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA. The genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any
person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
(2000 Code, § 121.01) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2012, passed 12-20-
2004)
§ 120.02 MASSAGE BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on, the business of massage, or otherwise provide a
massage in return for compensation, in the village, without first having
obtained a massage business license issued by the village pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter for each and every premises used for the business of
conducting a massage business or otherwise providing massages for compensation
by such person. The applicant for such business license must be at least 18
years of age.
(2000 Code, § 121.02) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.03 MASSAGE THERAPIST REQUIRED.
   No person shall provide a massage to another person as a masseur, employee
or otherwise, on the premises for which a business license has been issued or
is required under §
120.02 unless he or she is a massage therapist.
(2000 Code, § 121.03) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.04 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following
individuals while engaged in the performance of the duties of their respective
professions, and to the following businesses and entities:
      (1)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, podiatrists or
physical therapists who are duly licensed to practice their respective
professions in the state;
      (2)   State-licensed practical nurses and registered nurses while
administering massages in the normal course of their medical duties;
      (3)   Barbers and cosmetologists who are duly licensed under the laws of
this state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of
the neck, back, face, scalp, hair and hands of the customer or client for
cosmetic or beautifying purposes;
      (4)   Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing homes, home health agencies,
hospice programs and other such programs as defined and licensed by the state
under 210 ILCS;
      (5)   Masseurs who administer massages only to the back and/or shoulder
region of fully-clothed patrons when such patrons sit in upright massage
chairs;
      (6)   Massages provided in the course of not-for-profit special events,
such as corporate health and wellness days, fundraisers and athletic events;
and
      (7)   Massages provided by massage therapy students enrolled in a
recognized school during the course of clinical externships, practicums or
community services, provided that such massage services are part of the
curricular requirements of the recognized school and are conducted under the
supervision of the school’s faculty and/or a massage therapist who is licensed
under this chapter.
   (B)   No provision contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to
any person, business or conduct regulated by the provisions of the State
Physical Therapy Registration Act, 225 ILCS 90/1 et seq.
(2000 Code, § 121.04) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 120.05 APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE BUSINESS LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for a massage business license shall be filed with the
village. The application shall be made upon a form provided by the Village
Clerk and shall be completed in full and signed by the applicant, if an
individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if not an individual,
verified by oath or affidavit, and shall set forth:
      (1)   The type of ownership of the business, i.e., individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise;
      (2)   The name under which the business is to be conducted;
      (3)   A description of the services to be provided on the premises;
      (4)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under such license:
         (a)   If a leased premises, a copy of the lease shall be provided. The
term of such lease must not end until after the expiration date of the license
for which application is being made; and
         (b)   The name and address of the owner of the premises, and, if the
premises are held in trust, the names and addresses of all the owners of the
beneficial interest of the trust.
      (5)   All telephone numbers and Internet addresses of the business;
      (6)   In case of an individual, the full name, home address with zip
code, Social Security number, driver’s license number, date of birth, sex and a
physical description of the applicant (including his or her height and weight
and the color of his or her hair and eyes);
      (7)   In case of a partnership, the full name, home address with zip
code, Social Security number, driver’s license number, date of birth, sex and a
physical description (including the height and weight and the color of hair and
eyes) of all partners and any other persons entitled to share in the profits
thereof;
      (8)   In case of a corporation, the object for which the corporation as
organized, the names, home addresses with zip codes, driver’s license numbers,
dates of birth, Social Security numbers, sex and physical descriptions
(including height and weight and the color of hair and eyes) of all officers,
directors, and all persons owning directly or beneficially more than 10% of the
stock of such corporation and the persons acting as managers or assistant
managers or other persons principally in charge of the operation of the
business;
      (9)   The date of formation of the partnership, if a partnership, the
date of incorporation, if a state corporation, or the date of becoming
qualified under the State Business Corporation Act, 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq., to
transact business in the state, if a foreign corporation;
      (10)   A complete list of the names (and any aliases) and residence
addresses of all massage therapists and employees employed by the business and
the names (and any aliases) and residence addresses of all managers, assistant
managers or other persons principally in charge of the operation of the
business;
      (11)   The business, occupation and employment history of the applicant
for the three years preceding the date of application;
      (12)   Whether the applicant ever made an application for license under
this chapter, or a massage business license or similar license to a state,
county, city, village or other unit of local government, and if so, where and
when, and if such application was granted or denied, and if such application
was denied, the reasons for the denial;
      (13)   Whether a license was ever issued to the applicant under this
chapter or a massage business license or similar license was ever issued by any
state, county, city or village or other unit of local government, and if so,
where and when, and if such license has ever been suspended or revoked and the
reasons for the suspension or revocation;
      (14)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a violation of
any of the provisions of this chapter or any ordinance of any other state
municipality which regulates massage parlors or the provisions of massages, or
any state statute regulating massage establishments;
      (15)   Proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; and
      (16)   Proof that the applicant currently carries professional liability
insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence.
   (B)   The applicant shall submit a written authorization for the village,
its agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into
the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications
of the applicant for a license.
   (C)   The applicant shall submit such other information, documentation and
identification of the applicant as the Village President and/or the Chief of
Police shall deem necessary to determine the identity of the applicant or to
process the application.
   (D)   The applicant shall notify the Village President of each change in any
data required to be furnished by this section within ten days after such change
occurs.
(2000 Code, § 121.05) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.06 TERMS OF LICENSE; LICENSE FEES; LICENSE RENEWAL.
   (A)   The term of licenses issued under this chapter is for one year
beginning January 1, as provided by §
110.08(A).
   (B)   All license fees shall be paid as provided in §
110.07. The license application fee and the annual license renewal fee for a
massage business license shall be $500. In addition to that annual fee, the
applicant shall provide evidence to the village that a qualified massage
therapist, as defined in §
120.01, will be present on the premises to comply with the requirements of §
120.03. All applicable license fees and any other required fees, including
costs of fingerprinting, shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license.
   (C)   A license may be revoked for failure to pay the license fee and for
those grounds stated in §
110.13.
(2000 Code, § 121.06) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001; Ord. 2012, passed 12-20-
2004; Ord. 4170, passed 10-29-2012)
§ 120.07 SANITATION AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All licensed premises shall be periodically inspected by the Building
Commissioner or his or her duly authorized representative for safety of the
structure and adequacy of plumbing ventilation, heating, illumination and fire
protection.
   (B)   In addition, the premises shall comply with the following regulations.
      (1)   The walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold-resistant
paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given.
      (2)   Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse.
      (3)   All equipment used in the massage establishment shall be maintained
in a clean and sanitary condition.
      (4)   Soaps, towels, linens and laundered sheets must be provided. All
such towels, linens and items for the personal use of operators and patrons
shall be clean and freshly laundered after each use thereof and stored in a
sanitary manner.
      (5)   Towels, linens and sheets shall not be used for more than one
patron. However, heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets, provided that
such paper is changed for every patron.
      (6)   All massage services or practices are prohibited in any cubicle,
room, booth or other area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a
door capable of being locked.
      (7)   Toilets, dressing room facilities, lockers, steam baths, tubs or
showers, if provided shall be provided separately for each sex.
(2000 Code, § 121.07) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 120.08 ISSUANCE AND DENIAL OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The Village President shall act to approve or deny an application for
a license under this chapter within a reasonable period of time, and in no
event shall the Village President act to approve or deny the fully completed
license later than 90 days from the date that the application was accepted by
the village.
   (B)   In the case of an application for a massage business license, the
Building Commissioner shall cause the premises to be licensed to be inspected
to assure that the proposed operation complies with all applicable laws,
including the building, electrical, plumbing, health, housing, zoning and fire
codes of the village, and any other regulations of the village relating to the
public health, safety and welfare. The Building Commissioner shall make written
verification to the Village President concerning compliance with the codes and
ordinances of the village.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a properly completed application for a massage
business license, the Village President shall submit the completed application
to the Chief of Police for an investigation into the applicant’s personal and
criminal history.
   (D)   The Village President shall either issue a license, or notify the
applicant in writing that the application has been denied. The license shall be
denied if the applicant fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter
or with the requirements of any other provision of this code which is
applicable to the business and/or activities of the applicant. In addition, no
license shall be issued to any applicant if:
      (1)   The proposed operation does not comply with all applicable laws,
including, but not limited to, the building, electrical, plumbing, health,
housing, zoning and fire codes of the village;
      (2)   The applicant, if an individual; or any of the officers, directors
or any other person owning directly or beneficially more than 10% of the stock
of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners,
including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager,
assistant manager or any other person principally in charge of the operation of
the business; has been:
         (a)   Convicted of a felony under the laws of the state or any other
state, or under the federal laws of the United States, within five years of the
date of the application;
         (b)   Convicted of a sex offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-5 to 720
ILCS 5/11-22, or any equivalent law of any state, within five years of the date
of the application; or
         (c)   Convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter.
      (3)   The applicant has had a massage business, masseur or similar
license denied, suspended or revoked by the village, by a state or by a unit of
local government within five years of the date of the application; or
      (4)   The applicant has knowingly made false, misleading or fraudulent
statements of fact in the license application or in any document required by
the village in conjunction with the license application.
   (E)   In the event that the license is denied for failure to comply with the
requirements of this chapter, the Village President shall immediately notify
the applicant in writing or by telephone of the reasons for the proposed
denial. If the failure is not cured within ten days after the date on which the
Village President denies the issuance of the license, the denial shall become
final.
   (F)   The Village President is authorized to make any rules and regulations
necessary to implement this chapter which are not inconsistent with or
prohibited by this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 121.08) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 120.09 DISPLAY OF LICENSES.
   Every person licensed as a massage business under this chapter shall display
such license in a prominent place in the public reception area of the massage
establishment.
(2000 Code, § 121.09) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 120.10 REGISTER AND REGULATION OF EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The licensee or a person designated by the licensee of a licensed
massage establishment shall maintain a register of the names and addresses of
all persons employed at any time as massage therapists or other employees. Such
registers shall be available at the massage establishment for inspection by
representatives of the village during regular business hours.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for such a business to allow a massage therapist
to practice other than as permitted by this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 121.10) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.11 CONDITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS OF LICENSES.
   (A)   Supervision. A licensee of a licensed massage establishment shall have
the premises supervised at all times when open for business. Any business
rendering massage services shall have at least one person who is a valid
massage therapist on the premises at all times while the establishment is open.
The licensee shall personally supervise the business, or shall delegate such
supervisory responsibility to a manager whose name is listed on the massage
business license and shall not violate, or permit others to violate, any
applicable provisions of this chapter. The violation of any provision of this
chapter by any agent or employee of the licensee shall constitute a violation
by the licensee.
   (B)   Sanitary conditions. Every portion of the massage establishment,
including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a
sanitary condition as required by §
120.07.
   (C)   Price rates. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted
on a framed placard no smaller than eight by ten inches in the reception area
in a location visible and available to all prospective customers. This placard
must also state the following: “No services other than those listed shall be
provided for any compensation whatsoever. There shall be no bargaining or
solicitation for services between patrons, massage therapists or employees.”
   (D)   Employee dress code. All employees, including massage therapists,
shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering at least
the entire torso and the sexual and genital areas as defined herein.
   (E)   Separate license for each premises. Licenses shall apply only to the
premises described in the application, and in the license issued thereon, and
only one location shall be so described in each license.
   (F)   Transfer of license. A license shall be a purely personal privilege,
effective for a period not to exceed one year after issuance unless sooner
revoked as provided in this chapter, and shall not constitute property. No
massage business license is transferrable, separate or divisible, and such
authority as a license confers shall be conferred only on the licensee named
therein.
   (G)   Minors prohibited. No person licensed under the provisions of this
chapter shall permit any person under the age of 18 to come or remain on the
premises of any massage establishment as a masseur or employee.
   (H)   Alcoholic beverages prohibited. No person shall sell, give, dispense,
provide, keep or consume, or cause to be sold, given dispensed, provided, kept
or consumed, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage
establishment.
   (I)   Solicitations prohibited. No massage establishment shall place,
publish or distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any
advertisement, picture or statement which is known to be false, deceptive or
misleading in order to induce any person to purchase or utilize any massage
services.
   (J)   Hours of operation. No portion of any business premises used in any
way for or by a massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.
   (K)   Inspections. The Village President or his or her authorized
representative shall from time to time make inspection of each massage
establishment for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this
chapter are fully complied with. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail
to allow any such inspection officer access to the premises or hinder such
officer in any manner.
(2000 Code, § 121.11) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.12 SALE, TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   Upon the sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the
license therefore shall be null and void and a new license shall be required.
Upon the death or incapacity of the licensee or any co-licensee of the massage
establishment, any heir or beneficiary of a deceased licensee, or any guardian
of an heir or beneficiary of a deceased licensee, may continue the business of
the massage establishment for a reasonable period of time not to exceed 60 days
to allow for an orderly transfer of the license.
(2000 Code, § 121.12) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 120.13 PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall conduct or operate a massage business without first
obtaining and maintaining a massage business license as required by this
chapter.
   (B)   No person shall operate or conduct any massage establishment which
does not conform to the sanitary provisions required by this chapter.
   (C)   No person having a license under this chapter shall operate under any
name or conduct business under any designation not specified in that license or
permit.
   (D)   No person shall advertise, promote or refer to himself or herself as a
massage therapist as herein defined without being a massage therapist as
provided in this chapter.
   (E)   A patron’s sexual and genital areas, as defined herein, must be
covered by towels, cloths or similar nontransparent garments, including
undergarments, when in the presence of a massage therapist or employee.
   (F)   No person, knowingly, in a massage establishment, shall expose or fail
to conceal his or her sexual and genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any
other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person, knowingly, in a massage
establishment, to expose the sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof,
of any other person.
   (G)   No person, knowingly, in a massage establishment, shall place his or
her hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any
manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area of another person.
   (H)   No massage therapist or employee shall perform or offer or agree to
perform any act, whether or not for compensation of any form, which would
require the touching of the patron’s sexual or genital area.
   (I)   No massage therapist shall administer a massage to a patron exhibiting
any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin eruption, unless a
physician duly licensed by the state certifies in writing that such person may
be safely massaged and prescribes the conditions thereof.
   (J)   No person, owning, operating or managing a massage establishment,
shall knowingly cause, allow or permit in or about such massage establishment,
any agent, employee, or any other person under his or her control or
supervision to perform any acts prohibited by this chapter.
   (K)   No person shall operate or conduct an outcall massage service as
defined in this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 121.13) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 120.14 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Village President shall have the duty to enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(2000 Code, § 121.14) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 120.15 COMPLAINT OF VIOLATION.
   Any complaint that any person, corporate or private, or any licensee, has
been or is violating the provisions of this chapter shall be made to the
Village President or the Village Clerk. Complaints may be made by any person,
including employees and representatives of the village.
(2000 Code, § 121.15) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 120.16 NOTICE.
   Whenever the village is required to give notice under this chapter of
denial, suspension, revocation or cancellation of a license, such notice shall
be given as required by § 202.11 of the Ill. Adm. Code.
(2000 Code, § 121.16) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 120.17 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSES.
   (A)   The village may suspend or revoke a massage business license after
notice and public hearing, as provided in § 202.11 of the Ill. Adm. Code, and
upon the additional basis set forth below.
   (B)   A massage business license may be revoked or suspended after a public
hearing if it is found that:
      (1)   The licensee has violated any provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Any employee of the licensee, including a massage therapist, has
engaged in any conduct at the licensee’s premises which violates any provision
of this chapter and the licensee knew or by due diligence should have known of
such conduct;
      (3)   Any applicant for a massage business license has made a false
statement on the application;
      (4)   A licensee has refused to allow any duly authorized police officer
or county enforcement officer or health inspector to inspect the massage
establishment premises;
      (5)   The premises of the massage establishment are at any time not in
compliance with the village building, health or fire codes; or
      (6)   The premises of the massage establishment are not in compliance
with any of the conditions and restrictions set forth in §
120.13.
   (C)   If a massage business license is revoked for any cause, no such
license shall be granted to such person for a period of one year after the date
of the revocation that will allow a massage establishment to be operated on the
premises described in the revoked license unless the revocation order has been
vacated by court order.
(2000 Code, § 121.17) (Ord. 1827, passed 11-19-2001)
CHAPTER 121: ADULT USE LICENSING AND REGULATION
Section
   
121.01   Purpose
   
121.02   Definitions
   
121.03   License required
   
121.04   Issuance of license
   
121.05   Fees
   
121.06   Inspection
   
121.07   Expiration of license
   
121.08   Suspension
   
121.09   Revocation
   
121.10   Transfer of license
   
121.11   Business records
   
121.12   Adult entertainment cabarets - restrictions
   
121.13   Video viewing booths - restrictions
   
121.14   Hours of operation
§ 121.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate adult uses, to protect the
community from the many types of criminal activity frequently associated with
such uses. The village recognizes that such regulations cannot in effect
prohibit such uses. This chapter has balanced the competing interest of the
community in reducing criminal activity and protecting property values versus
the protected rights of the owners, operators, employees and patrons of adult
uses.
(2000 Code, § 122.01) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 121.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having as a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or for
viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by coin operated means,
and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, or
specified anatomical areas; or an establishment with a segment or section
devoted to the sale or display of such materials; or an establishment that
holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such materials based upon its
signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence of video preview or coin
operated booths, exclusion of minors from the establishment’s premises or any
other factors showing the establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. A public or private establishment which:
      (1)   Features topless dancers, strippers, go-go dancers, male or female
impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows;
      (2)   Not infrequently features entertainers who display specified
anatomical areas; or
      (3)   Features entertainers who by reason of their appearance or conduct
perform in a manner which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient
interest of the patron or features entertainers who engage in, or are engaged
in explicit simulation of, specified sexual activities.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or area used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein.
   ADULT NOVELTY STORE. An establishment having a substantial or significant
portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices, clothing
novelties, lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on or use for specialized sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of
such materials based upon its signage, advertising displays, actual sales,
exclusion of minors from the establishment’s premises or any other factors
showing the establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey such material.
   ADULT USE. Adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult
entertainment cabarets and other similar uses.
   EMPLOYEE. Employees, independent contractors or any other person who is
retained by the licensee are subject to dismissal from working at the licensed
premises.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. For the purpose of this chapter, specified
anatomical areas means:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         (a)   Human genitals;
         (b)   Pubic region;
         (c)   Buttock; and
         (d)   Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTIVITY. Any of the following offenses:
      (1)   Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of
obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual
performance by a minor; possession or distribution of child pornography; public
lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaged in organized
criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or
distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those
described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
      (2)   For which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction which is the
later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for conviction whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is a felony offense; or
         (c)   Less than five years has elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement from the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offense or combination of misdemeanor offense occurred within any 24-month
period.
      (3)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the disqualification of the applicant.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in the state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock or female breast.
(2000 Code, § 122.02) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 121.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult use without a
valid adult use business license issued by the village pursuant to this
chapter;
   (B)   An application for a license shall be made on a form provided by the
village;
   (C)   All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such
information (including fingerprints) as are needed to enable the village to
determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
chapter;
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate an adult use is an individual, the
person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who
wishes to operate an adult use is other than an individual, each individual who
has a 20% or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a
license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following
section and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if the license is
granted;
   (E)   The completed application for an adult use business license shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his
or her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he or she is 18 years
of age;
      (2)   If a partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name and
the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a
copy of the partnership agreement, if any; and
      (3)   If a corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name,
the date of incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing
under the laws of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all
officers, directors and principal shareholders, and the name and address of the
registered corporate agent.
   (F)   If the applicant intends to operate the adult use business under a
name other than that of the applicant, he or she must state:
      (1)   The business’ fictitious name; and
      (2)   Submit any required registration documents.
   (G)   Whether the applicant has been convicted of any specified criminal
activity as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified criminal activity
involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each;
   (H)   Whether the applicant has had a previous license under this chapter or
similar ordinances from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the business which the permit was denied,
suspended or revoked as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation. If the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or similar
ordinance in another jurisdiction or an officer, director or principal
stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under this chapter and a
license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, include the name and
location of the business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked
as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation;
   (I)   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter or
other similar ordinance from another city or county and if so the names and
locations of such other licensed businesses; and
   (J)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises
including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business. This sketch
or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises.
(2000 Code, § 122.03) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 121.04 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Within 90 days after receipt of a completed adult use business license
application, the village shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an
applicant. The village shall approve the issuance of a license unless it
determines by a preponderance of the evidence any one or more of the following:
      (1)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (2)   The applicant is overdue in payment to the village of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him or her in relation to
any business;
      (3)   The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for the issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or
request for information on the application form;
      (4)   The applicant has been denied a license by the village to operate
an adult use business within the preceding 12 months or whose license to
operate an adult use business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;
      (5)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity
defined in this chapter;
      (6)   The premises to be used for the adult use business has not been
approved by the Fire and Building Departments as being in compliance with
applicable laws and chapters;
      (7)   The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; and
      (8)   The applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or
is not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address
of the adult use business. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the entrance to the business so that they may be easily read at any
time.
   (C)   No adult use business license shall be issued unless the premises at
which the adult use will operate is in conformance with the restrictions set
forth in the village zoning chapter.
(2000 Code, § 122.04) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 121.05 FEES.
   Every application for an adult use business license (whether a new license
or for renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by a $500 non-
refundable application and investigation fee.
(2000 Code, § 122.05) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002; Ord. 4170, passed 10-29-
2012)
§ 121.06 INSPECTION.
   (A)   An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Fire and Building Departments or other village or village
designated departments or agencies to inspect the premises of the adult use for
the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any time it is occupied or
open for business.
   (B)   A person who operates an adult use or his or her agent or employee
violates this chapter if he or she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of
the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.
(2000 Code, § 122.06) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 121.07 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license shall expire on the January 1 after it was issued and may
be renewed only by making application as provided in §
121.04. Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the
expiration date and when made less than 30 days from the expiration date, the
expiration of the license will not be affected.
   (B)   (1)   If the village denies renewal of a license, the application
shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial.
      (2)   If, subsequent to denial, the village finds that the basis for
denial of the license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be
granted a license.
(2000 Code, § 122.07) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 121.08 SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The village may suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days
if, after a hearing, it determines that a licensee or an employee of a
licensee:
      (1)   Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
      (2)   Refused to allow an inspection of the adult use business premises
as authorized by this chapter; or
      (3)   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the adult use
business premises.
   (B)   If the licensee or an employee of the licensee has been found guilty
in a court of law of a violation of this chapter, no hearing is necessary prior
to suspension of the license.
(2000 Code, § 122.08) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 121.09 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The village shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
121.08 above occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months or if the licensee is convicted of any specified criminal activity.
   (B)   The village shall revoke a license if it determines, after a hearing
that:
      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process;
      (2)   A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use or sale of alcohol
or controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises;
      (4)   A licensee knowingly operated the adult use business during a
period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
      (5)   A licensee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or other sex act to occur in or on the
premises;
      (6)   A licensee is delinquent in payment to the village, county or state
for any taxes or fees past due; or
      (7)   A licensee has knowingly or intentionally facilitated another
commission of the offense of public indecency.
   (C)   If the village revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for
one year and the licensee shall not be issued an adult use business license for
one year from the date the revocation becomes effective. If subsequent to
revocation, the village finds that the factual basis for the revocation did not
occur, the applicant may be granted a license.
   (D)   After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an
application, or suspension or a revocation of any license, the applicant or
licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2000 Code, § 122.09) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 121.10 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another nor shall a
licensee operate an adult use business under the authority of a license at any
place other than the address on the license.
(2000 Code, § 122.10) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 121.11 BUSINESS RECORDS.
   All adult uses shall file a verified report with the village showing the
licensee’s gross receipts and amounts paid to employees during the preceding
calendar year. In addition, all adult uses shall maintain and retain for a
period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed,
including independent contractors, by the licensee.
(2000 Code, § 122.11) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 121.12 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARETS - RESTRICTIONS.
   All dancing and other performances shall occur on a stage intended for that
purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. No
dancing or other performances shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron.
In addition, no performer shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any patron
and no patron shall fondle, caress or otherwise touch any performer. No patron
shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer and no performer shall
solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. Gratuities may be indirectly given
to performers by placing the gratuity on the stage.
(2000 Code, § 122.12) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 121.13 VIDEO VIEWING BOOTHS - RESTRICTIONS.
   No booths, stalls or partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms used
for the viewing of motion pictures or other forms of entertainment shall have
doors, curtains or portal partitions, but all such booths, stalls or
partitioned portions of a room or individual rooms so used shall have at least
one side open to an adjacent public room so that the area inside is visible to
persons in the adjacent public room. All such described areas shall be lighted
in such a manner that the person in the areas used for viewing motion pictures
or other forms of entertainment are visible from the adjacent public rooms, but
such lighting shall not be of such intensity as to prevent the viewing of the
motion pictures or other offered entertainment.
(2000 Code, § 122.13) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 121.14 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No adult use shall be open prior to 10:00 a.m. or after 12:00 a.m.
(2000 Code, § 122.14) (Ord. 1877, passed 10-21-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 122: CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
122.01   Purpose and applicability
   
122.02   Definitions
   
122.03   Business license required
   
122.04   Application
   
122.05   Investigation
   
122.06   Issuance of a cannabis business license
   
122.07   Revocation or suspension of cannabis business license
   
122.08   Notice and hearing; appeal
Business Regulations
   
122.20   Cannabis business regulations
   
122.21   Cannabis dispensaries
   
122.22   Cannabis transporters
   
122.23   On-site consumption prohibited
   
122.24   Hours of operation
   
122.25   Advertising and signage
 
   
122.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 122.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to identify and provide
regulations regarding the dispensing of recreational cannabis occurring within
the corporate limits of the village. Such facilities shall comply with all
regulations provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1 et.
seq. (the "Act") as it may be amended from time to time, the regulations
promulgated thereunder, and the regulations provided below. In the event the
act is amended, the more restrictive of the state or local regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act of Illinois and any subsequent
amendments, 410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
   ADVERTISE. To engage in promotional activities including, but not limited
to, newspaper, radio, internet and electronic media, and television
advertising, the distribution of fliers and circulars. billboard advertising
and the display of window and interior signs. ADVERTISE does not mean exterior
signage displaying only the name of the licensed cannabis business
establishment.
   AGENT IN CHARGE. As required by the Act, a full-time agent or principal
officer of the cannabis business that is responsible for opening and closing
the business, delivery acceptance, oversight of sales and agents,
recordkeeping, inventory, training, and compliance with state and local law.
   APPLICANT. An individual or business seeking a cannabis business license
from the village or a renewal of said license.
   CANNABIS. Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including derivatives or
subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not;
the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
naturally produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or
indirectly by extraction; however, "cannabis" does not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted from it),
fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination. CANNABIS does not include industrial hemp as defined and
authorized under the Industrial Hemp Act. CANNABIS also means cannabis flower,
concentrate and cannabis infused products.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS. A facility operated by an organization or business that
is licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional Regulation
to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business establishments for the
purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis
seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to purchasers or to qualified
registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers, per the Act, as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS LICENSE. An authorization licensing the cannabis business
to operate within the village.
   CANNABIS CONCENTRATE. A product derived from cannabis that is produced by
extracting cannabinoids, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), from the plant
through the use of propylene glycol, glycerin, butter, olive oil or other
typical cooking fats: water, ice, or dry ice; or butane, propane, CO2,ethanol,
or isopropanol and with the intended use of smoking or making a cannabis-
infused product. The use of any other solvent is expressly prohibited unless
and until it is approved by the Department of Agriculture.
   CANNABIS CONTAINER: A sealed, traceable, container, or package used for the
purpose of containment of cannabis or cannabis-infused product during
transportation.
   CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or business
that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry,
cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization, per the Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS FLOWER. Marijuana, hashish, and other substances that are
identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis sativa and including
derivatives or subspecies, such as indica, of all strains of cannabis;
including raw kief, leaves and buds, but not resin that has been extracted from
any part of such plant; nor any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin.
   CANNABIS-INFUSED PRODUCT. A beverage, food, oil, ointment, tincture, topical
formulation or another product.
   CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Act, as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS PARAPHERNALIA. Equipment, products and materials which are intended
to be used for planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting,
manufacturing, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging,
repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, ingesting or otherwise
introducing cannabis into the human body.
   CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Act, as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Act, as it may be amended from time-to-time,
and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CLONE. A plant section from a female cannabis plant not yet rootbound,
growing in a water solution or other propagation matric, that is capable of
developing into a new plant.
   LIMITED ACCESS AREA. A building, room, or other area under the control of a
cannabis dispensing organization licensed under the Act and upon the licensed
premises with access limited to purchasers, dispensing organization owners and
other dispensing organization agents, or service professionals conducting
business with the dispensing organization.
   MINOR. Any individual under the age of 21 years old.
   ORDINARY PUBLIC VIEW. Within the sight line with normal visual range of a
person, unassisted by visual aids, from a public street or sidewalk adjacent to
real property or from within an adjacent property.
   PERSON. A natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint venture, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
   PROHIBITED CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cannabis craft grower,
cannabis cultivation center, cannabis infuser, cannabis processor and cannabis
transporter as herein defined.
   TINCTURE. A cannabis infused solution, typically comprised of alcohol
glycerin, or vegetable oils, derived either directly from the cannabis plant or
from a processed cannabis extract. A tincture is not an alcoholic liquor as
defined in the Liquor Control Act of 1934. A tincture shall include a
calibrated dropper or other similar device capable of accurately measuring
servings.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.03 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in, conduct or carry on, or license to be engaged in,
conducted or carried on, a cannabis business as herein defined, without first
having obtained a cannabis business license issued by the village pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.04 APPLICATION.
   Each cannabis business shall complete a written application, provided by the
Village Clerk, which must contain the following:
   (A)   Applicant information.
      (1)   If the applicant is an individual: the name, date of birth, home
address, telephone number, email address, and a copy of a valid state
identification of the person registering the business and anyone with a
financial interest in the cannabis business.
      (2)   If the applicant is a partnership/noncorporate entity: the name,
date of birth, home address, telephone number, email address, and a copy of a
valid state identification for each partner, principal, member thereof and
anyone with a financial interest in the cannabis business.
      (3)   If the applicant is a corporation: the name, date of birth, home
address, telephone number, email address, and a copy of a valid state
identification of each principal officer, registered agent thereof, and anyone
with a financial interest in the cannabis business, a copy of the corporation
or LLC's certificate of good standing issued by the Illinois Secretary of
State.
   (B)   The legal name of the cannabis business and any other names it may
operate under.
   (C)   The physical location, telephone number and internet address of the
cannabis business.
   (D)   A copy of all documents submitted to the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation or the Illinois Department of Agriculture
for issuance of a state license.
   (E)   A copy of the cannabis business's state issued license and a statement
as to whether the cannabis business is a qualified social equity applicant by
the State of Illinois.
   (F)   A copy of the special use license issued by the Village Board of
Trustees.
   (G)   A copy of the site plan as submitted to the Plan Commission.
   (H)   The hours of operation for the cannabis business.
   (I)   The name, address, date of birth, and copy of state issued agent
identification for the designated agent in charge and all other dispensing
agents.
   (J)   The property owner's name, address, telephone number and email address
and a valid copy of the lease agreement if applicable.
   (K)   Proof of adequate insurance coverage for liability, worker's
compensation, tenant or owner's insurance for the premises and equipment.
   (L)   A copy of the cannabis business's security plan that describes the
cannabis business's plans to: (a) prevent diversion, theft, or loss of cannabis
and monetary funds; (b) monitor the activities in and around the cannabis
business; and (c) restrict access to limited access areas and restricted access
areas. The Chief of Police shall have the right to review the security plan.
   (M)   Nonrefundable application fee of $500.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.05 INVESTIGATION.
   Once the Village Clerk has determined that the business license application
is complete, he or she shall forward the application to the Building
Commissioner and the Chief of Police for investigation.
   (A)   The Building Commissioner shall cause an inspection of the premises
for compliance with all applicable laws, including the building, electrical,
plumbing, health, housing, zoning and fire codes of the village, and any other
regulations of the village relating to the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the applicant's personal and
criminal history and review the security plan.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.06 ISSUANCE OF A CANNABIS BUSINESS LICENSE.
   The application materials, inspectional reports, background information and
any other relevant information shall be forwarded to the Mayor, or his or her
designee, who shall issue a business license if the cannabis business complies
with all applicable provisions of this chapter. If the Mayor denies the
cannabis business license, he or she must notify the applicant in writing
within 14 days.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.07 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF CANNABIS BUSINESS LICENSE.
   The Mayor may deny, refuse to renew, suspend or revoke a cannabis business
license for any of the following reasons.
   (A)   Fraud, misrepresentation of material fact, or false statement on the
application for a cannabis business license or any subsequent renewal.
   (B)   Failure to inform the village of any changes to the information
contained in the application for a cannabis business license.
   (C)   Any outstanding debt owed to the village by the cannabis business
establishment or any of its owners, partners, officers, or board members,
including any taxes, fees or penalties.
   (D)   Any violation of the laws of the State of Illinois or any village
ordinance.
   (E)   Revocation or suspension of the cannabis business's state issued
license.
   (F)   Any violation of the terms of the cannabis business's special use
permit.
   (G)   Operating without a cannabis business license.
   (H)   A pattern of conduct that demonstrates incompetence or that the
cannabis business has engaged in conduct or actions that would constitute
grounds for discipline under the Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Taxation
Act.
   (I)   Refusing to allow the Mayor, his or her designee, or any member of law
enforcement or building department to enter and inspect the cannabis business
or refusing to cooperate in an investigation.
   (J)   Any fact or condition that, if had existed at the time of the original
completion of the application for a cannabis business license, would have
warranted the denial of the business license.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 112.08 NOTICE AND HEARING; APPEAL.
   (A)   Prior to taking any adverse action against a cannabis business
license, and at least 14 days prior to hearing, the Mayor shall issue by
regular and electronic mail to the addresses listed on the application for a
cannabis business license, a written notice of hearing. The written notice
shall contain the charges made, date, time and location of the hearing.
   (B)   The Mayor has the authority to subpoena and administer oaths to
witnesses, hear the charges, agree to negotiated consent orders and issue a
written order within 14 days.
   (C)   Any cannabis business that is denied a cannabis business license or
whose cannabis business license was declined to be renewed, suspended or
revoked has the right to appeal to the Village Board.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
§ 122.20 CANNABIS BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance with law. All cannabis businesses must comply with all
state and local laws, including the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, 410 ILCS
705/1 et seq., building, electrical, plumbing, health, housing, zoning and fire
codes.
   (B)   Report to police. Every cannabis business must promptly, within 24
hours, document and report any loss, theft, security breach or criminal
activity to village police.
   (C)   Inspections. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to refuse
entry or otherwise refuse inspection by the Mayor, his or her designee, any
member of law enforcement or building services.
   (D)   Employee identification. It shall be unlawful for an employee of a
cannabis business to engage in employment activities for the cannabis business
unless he or she displays a valid agent identification card, as required by
state law. A copy of all agent identification cards shall be forwarded to the
Village Clerk and updated as the card is renewed, suspended, revoked or the
employee is terminated.
   (E)   Sanitary conditions. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to
maintain any building or equipment in an unclean or unsanitary state. All
buildings and equipment shall be free from infestation by insects, rodents or
pests.
   (F)   Deliveries. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to accept
cannabis deliveries through public or limited access areas. All deliveries must
be accepted into a restricted access area with adequate security.
   (G)   Odor control. Sufficient measures and means of preventing smoke,
odors, debris, dust, fluids and other substances from exiting a cannabis
business establishment must be provided at all times.
   (H)   Lighting. No portion of the exterior of the cannabis business shall
utilize or contain any flashing lights, search lights or spot lights or any
similar lighting system.
   (I)   Minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to
allow any person under the age of 21 years old to enter or loiter about any
cannabis business. Cannabis dispensaries authorized to sell medical cannabis
may allow qualified patients pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act over the age of 18 years old with proper identification to
enter the cannabis dispensary.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.21 CANNABIS DISPENSARIES.
   (A)   Inoperable equipment. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis dispensary
to operate if its security system, point of sale system or inventory system are
inoperable.
   (B)   Sale to minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any cannabis
dispensary to give, sell, or deliver to any minor, directly or indirectly, any
cannabis. Cannabis businesses authorized to sell medical cannabis may allow
qualified patients pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Program Act over the age of 18 years old to purchase medical cannabis.
   (C)   Minimum employees. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis dispensary to
operate if less than two licensed employees are present.
   (D)   Prohibited dispensing. It shall be unlawful for a cannabis dispensary
to dispense cannabis through vending machines, drive through windows or
delivery services.
   (E)   Visibility of products. It shall be unlawful for any retail cannabis,
cannabis products, or cannabis paraphernalia to be displayed or kept so as to
be visible outside the cannabis dispensary by ordinary public view.
   (F)   Storage. During hours of operation, all cannabis shall be stored in an
enclosed locked room or cabinet accessible only to authorized business agents.
When the business is closed, all cannabis and currency shall be stored in a
reinforced vault room in the restricted access area in a manner as to prevent
diversion, theft or loss.
   (G)   Packaging. Any product containing cannabis shall be pre-packaged in a
sealed, odor-proof and child-resistant cannabis container consistent with all
regulations contained in the Act.
   (H)   Food. Other than cannabis-infused food products, no cannabis business
shall also sell prepared food for consumption on the premises in the same
tenant space.
   (I)   Prohibited products. It shall be unlawful for any cannabis business to
sell:
      (1)   Cannabis seeds, except to those individuals showing valid
identification as a qualifying patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act;
      (2)   Clones or other live plant material;
      (3)   Any products containing alcohol, with the exception of tinctures as
allowed by state law; or
      (4)   Cannabis, cannabis concentrate, or cannabis-infused products in
combination or bundled with each other or any other items for one price.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.22 CANNABIS TRANSPORTERS.
   (A)   A cannabis transporting organization agent must keep his or her
identification card visible at all times when on the property of a cannabis
business establishment and during the transportation of cannabis when acting
under his or her duties as a cannabis transporting organization agent and must
provide the identification card upon request to any law enforcement officer
engaged in his or her official duties.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or individual who is not a
licensed cannabis transporting organization agent to be present in a commercial
vehicle or trailer engaged in the transportation of cannabis for a cannabis
transporter.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of 21 years old to be
present in a commercial vehicle or trailer engaged in the transportation of
cannabis as a cannabis transporter.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to transport cannabis anywhere other than to a
cultivation center, craft grower, infuser organization, dispensing
organization, testing facility, or otherwise authorized by law.
   (E)   lt shall be unlawful for an adult-use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to use a commercial motor vehicle with a weight
rating over 10,001 pounds.
   (F)   lt shall be unlawful for an adult-use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to operate as a cannabis transporter without a
copy of the registration and manifest for the cannabis delivery in the vehicle.
   (G)   lt shall be unlawful for an adult-use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to transport cannabis, so it is visible or
recognizable from outside the vehicle.
   (H)   lt shall be unlawful for a vehicle transporting cannabis to bear any
markings to indicate the vehicle contains cannabis or bear the name or logo of
the cannabis business establishment.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for an adult-use cannabis transporter or cannabis
transporting organization agent to transport cannabis unless it is stored in an
enclosed, locked, storage compartment that is secured or affixed to the
vehicle.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.23 ON-SITE CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED.
   The on-site consumption of cannabis is prohibited within a cannabis business
and on the adjacent premises. The business shall be responsible for enforcing
the prohibition of on-site consumption of cannabis under all circumstances
inside and outside the business and adjacent premises.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.24 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to open earlier than 6:00
a.m.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business to close later than 10:00
p.m. No cannabis business shall allow any person other than himself or
employees to remain in the premises where cannabis is offered for sale longer
than 30 minutes after the closing hour.
   (C)   Hours of operation shall apply to all sales, delivery and dispensing
activities of the business.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.25 ADVERTISING AND SIGNAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business or any other person or
entity to engage in advertising that is false or misleading, promotes
overconsumption of cannabis or cannabis products, depicts the actual
consumption of cannabis or cannabis products, depicts a person under 21 years
of age consuming cannabis, makes any health, medicinal, or therapeutic claims
about cannabis or cannabis infused products, includes the image of a cannabis
leaf or bud, includes any image designed or likely to appeal to minors,
including cartoons, toys, animals, or children or any other likeness to images,
characters, or phrases that is designed in any manner to be appealing to or
encourage consumption by persons under 21 years of age.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a cannabis business or any other person or
entity to place or maintain an advertisement of cannabis or a cannabis-infused
product in any form or through any medium:
      (1)   Within 1,000 feet of the perimeter of school grounds, a playground,
a recreation center or facility, a childcare center, a public park or public
library or a game arcade;
      (2)   On or in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter; or
      (3)   On or in publicly owned or publicly operated property.
   (C)   Electronic message board and temporary signs are not permitted in
connection with cannabis businesses.
   (D)   All signage must comply with the Act.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
§ 122.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed an ordinance violation
and subject to a minimum fine of $100 and a maximum fine of $500. Each day a
violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
violation.
   (B)   Every act or omission constituting a violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager, agent or
employee of any cannabis business shall be deemed and held to be the act of
such employer or owner and the employer or owner shall be subject to punishment
in the same manner as if the act or omission had been done or omitted by him
personally.
(Ord. 4412, passed 3-16-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
134.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
135.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
      
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
137.   WEAPONS
      
138.   PUBLIC MORALS NUISANCE VIOLATION
      
139.   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
      
140.   CRIME-FREE HOUSING
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Intent
   
130.03   Knowledge
   
130.04   Recklessness
   
130.05   Negligence
   
130.06   Attempt
   
130.07   Throwing, depositing and distributing handbills
Criminal Code Adopted
   
130.20   Adoption of sections of the Illinois Criminal Code
 
   
130.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The taking of action or a failure or omission to take action.
(720 ILCS 5/2-2)
   ANOTHER. A person or persons other than the offender.
(720 ILCS 5/2-3)
   CONDUCT. An act or a series of acts, and the accompanying mental state.
(720 ILCS 5/2-4)
   OFFENSE. A violation of a penal statute of this village or state.
(720 ILCS 5/2-12)
(2000 Code, § 130.01)
§ 130.02 INTENT.
   A person intends, or acts intentionally or with intent, to accomplish a
result or engage in conduct described by the section defining the offense, when
his or her conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish that result or
engage in that conduct.
(720 ILCS 5/4-4) (2000 Code, § 130.02)
§ 130.03 KNOWLEDGE.
   (A)   A person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:
      (1)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her conduct,
described by the section defining the offense, when he or she is consciously
aware that his or her conduct is of such nature or that such circumstances
exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial
probability that the fact exists; and
      (2)   The result of his or her conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that such result is
practically certain to be caused by his or her conduct.
   (B)   Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed willfully,
within the meaning of a statute using the latter term, unless the section
clearly requires another meaning.
   (C)   When the law provides that acting knowingly suffices to establish an
element of an offense, that element also is established if a person acts
intentionally.
(720 ILCS 5/4-5) (2000 Code, § 130.03)
§ 130.04 RECKLESSNESS.
   (A)   A person is reckless or acts recklessly, when he or she consciously
disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or
that a result will follow, described by the section defining the offense; and
such disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
   (B)   An act performed recklessly is performed wantonly, within the meaning
of a section using the latter term, unless the statute clearly requires another
meaning.
(720 ILCS 5/4-6) (2000 Code, § 130.04)
§ 130.05 NEGLIGENCE.
   A person is negligent, or acts negligently, when he or she fails to be aware
of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a result
will follow, described by the statute defining the offense; and such failure
constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care which a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
(720 ILCS 5/4-7) (2000 Code, § 130.05)
§ 130.06 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits an attempt when, with intent
to commit a specific offense, he or she does any act which constitutes a
substantial step toward the commission of that offense.
   (B)   Impossibility. It shall not be a defense to a charge of attempt that
because of a misapprehension of the circumstances it would have been impossible
for the accused to commit the offense attempted.
   (C)   Enforcement. A person convicted of an attempt may be fined not to
exceed the maximum provided for the offense attempted. If such fine exceeds
that set forth in §
130.99, however, the village shall enforce said offense under the provisions of
state law.
(720 ILCS 5/8-4) (2000 Code, § 130.06) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.07 THROWING, DEPOSITING AND DISTRIBUTING HANDBILLS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the
village, or hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any
public place.
      (2)   It shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public
place within the village for any person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person
willing to accept it.
   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or on any vehicle, provided that it shall not be unlawful in any
public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the
receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is
willing to accept it.
   (C)   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or on any private premises which are temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant.
(2000 Code, § 130.07) (Ord. 1431, passed 6-4-1990) Penalty, see §
130.99
CRIMINAL CODE ADOPTED
§ 130.20 ADOPTION OF SECTIONS OF THE ILLINOIS CRIMINAL CODE.
   (A)   The following sections of the Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, (720
ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.) are hereby adopted by reference as ordinance violations of
the village:
      (1)   Assault, 720 ILCS 5/12-1(a);
      (2)   Battery, 720 ILCS 5/12-3(a);
      (3)   Criminal trespass to vehicles, 720 ILCS 5/21-2;
      (4)   Theft, 720 ILCS 5/16-1(a);
      (5)   Contributing to the criminal delinquency of a juvenile, 720 ILCS 5/
12C-30(a);
      (6)   Criminal defacement of property, 720 ILCS 5/21-1.3(a);
      (7)   Harassment by telephone, 720 ILCS 5/26.5-0.1 et seq.;
      (8)   Retail theft, 720 ILCS 5/16-25;
      (9)   Theft of labor or services, 720 ILCS 5/16-3(a) and 720 ILCS 5/16-3
(b);
      (10)   Attempt, 720 ILCS 5/8-4; and
      (11)   Possession of stolen property, 720 ILCS 5/16-1(a)(4).
   (B)   Citation of the local ordinance violation shall be to
Chapter 138 with the same section number as cited in the Criminal Code of 1961,
720 ILCS 5, as amended, in division (A) above.
(Ord. 4127, passed 11-21-2011)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this title for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be fined not less than $25 nor more
than $750.
   (B)   A person convicted for a violation of §
133.01 whose violation was the proximate cause of an injury to a peace officer
is guilty of a Class 4 felony.
(720 ILCS 5/31-1) (2000 Code, § 130.99)
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Damage of firefighting apparatus, hydrants or equipment
   
131.02   Trespass to land
   
131.03   Damaging village property
   
131.04   Jackrocks
§ 131.01 DAMAGE OF FIREFIGHTING APPARATUS, HYDRANTS OR EQUIPMENT.
   Knowingly, without proper authorization, cuts, injures, damages, defaces,
destroys, or tampers with any fire hydrant or any public or private fire
fighting equipment, or any apparatus appertaining to fire fighting equipment.
(720 ILCS 5/21-1(a)(8)) (2000 Code, § 131.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.02 TRESPASS TO LAND.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B) below, whoever commits any of
the following commits a Class B misdemeanor:
         (a)   Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains within
or on a building;
         (b)   Enters upon the land of another, after receiving, prior to such
entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden;
         (c)   Remains upon the land of another, after receiving notice from
the owner or occupant to depart; or
         (d)   Presents false documents or falsely represents his or her
identity orally to the owner or occupant of a building or land in order to
obtain permission from the owner or occupant to enter or remain in the building
or on the land.
      (2)   For purposes of division (A)(1)(a) above, this section shall not
apply to being in a building which is open to the public while the building is
open to the public during its normal hours of operation; nor shall this section
apply to a person who enters a public building under the reasonable belief that
the building is still open to the public.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever enters upon
any of the following areas in or on a motor vehicle (including an off-road
vehicle, motorcycle, moped or any other powered two-wheel vehicle) after
receiving, prior to that entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the
entry is forbidden or remains upon or in the area after receiving notice from
the owner or occupant to depart commits a Class A misdemeanor:
      (1)   A field that is used for growing crops or that is capable of being
used for growing crops;
      (2)   An enclosed area containing livestock;
      (3)   An orchard; and
      (4)   A barn or other agricultural building containing livestock.
   (C)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the
meaning of division (A) above if he or she has been notified personally, either
orally or in writing including a valid court order as defined by 725 ILCS 5/
112A-3(7) granting remedy 725 ILCS 5/112A-14(b)(2), or if a printed or written
notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the
main entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or
otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of his or her
agent having apparent authority to hire workers on such land and assign them
living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon, nor to anyone
living on such land at the request of, or by occupancy, leasing or other
agreement or arrangement with the owner or his or her agent, nor to anyone
invited by such migrant worker or other person so living on such land to visit
him or her at the place he or she is so living upon the land.
   (E)   A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section if he or
she beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial properties
located within any municipality. For the purpose of this division (E),
UNOCCUPIED AND ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY means any real
estate in which the taxes have not been paid for a period of at least two
years; and which has been left unoccupied and abandoned for a period of at
least one year; and BEAUTIFIES means to landscape, clean up litter or to repair
dilapidated conditions on or to board up windows and doors.
   (F)   No person shall be liable in any civil action for money damages to the
owner of unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial property which
that person beautifies pursuant to division (E) above.
   (G)   This section does not prohibit a person from entering a building or
upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of this division
(G), EMERGENCY means a condition or circumstance in which an individual is or
is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent danger of serious bodily
harm or in which property is or is reasonably believed to be in imminent danger
of damage or destruction.
   (H)   Division (A)(1)(d) above does not apply to a peace officer or other
official of a unit of government who enters a building or land in the
performance of his or her official duties.
   (I)   A person may be liable in any civil action for money damages to the
owner of the land he or she entered upon with a motor vehicle as prohibited
under division (B) above. A person may also be liable to the owner for court
costs and reasonable attorney fees. The measure of damages shall be: the actual
damages, but not less than $250, if the vehicle is operated in a nature
preserve or registered area as defined in 525 ILCS 30/3.11 and 525 ILCS 30/3.14
of the Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act; twice the actual damages if the
owner has previously notified the person to cease trespassing; or in any other
case, the actual damages, but not less than $50. If the person operating the
vehicle is under the age of 16, the owner of the vehicle and the parent or
legal guardian of the minor are jointly and severally liable. For the purposes
of this division (I), the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   LAND. Includes, but is not limited to, land used for crop land,
fallow land, orchard, pasture, feed lot, timber land, prairie land, mine spoil
nature preserves and registered areas. LAND does not include driveways or
private roadways upon which the owner allows the public to drive.
      (2)   OWNER. The person who has the right to possession of the land,
including the owner, operator or tenant.
      (3)   VEHICLE. The same meaning as provided under 625 ILCS 5/1-217.
(720 ILCS 5/21-3) (2000 Code, § 131.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.03 DAMAGING VILLAGE PROPERTY.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful to:
         (a)   Knowingly damage any property of another;
         (b)   Recklessly by means of fire or explosive damage property of
another;
         (c)   Knowingly start a fire on the land of another;
         (d)   Knowingly injure a domestic animal of another without his or her
consent;
         (e)   Knowingly deposit on the land or in the building of another any
stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and thereby intend to interfere
with the use by another of the land or building;
         (f)   Damage any property, other than as described in 720 ILCS 5/20-1
(b), with intent to defraud an insurer; or
         (g)   Knowingly shoot a firearm at any portion of a railroad train.
      (2)   When the charge of criminal damage to property exceeding a
specified value is brought, the extent of the damage is an element of the
offense to be resolved by the trier of fact as either exceeding or not
exceeding the specified value.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of divisions (A)(1)(a),
(A)(1)(c) or (A)(1)(e) above that the owner of the property or land damaged
consented to such damage.
(720 ILCS 5/21-1(1))
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, PROPERTY means anything of value
including, but not limited to, real estate, money, commercial instruments,
written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of
value, labor or services, things affixed to or found on land or part of or
affixed to any building, electricity, gas or water.
(2000 Code, § 131.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.04 JACKROCKS.
   (A)   A person who knowingly sells, gives away, manufactures, purchases or
possesses a jackrock or who knowingly places, tosses or throws a jackrock on
public or private property commits a Class A misdemeanor.
   (B)   As used in this section, JACKROCK means a caltrop or other object
manufactured with one or more rounded or sharpened points, which when placed or
thrown present at least one point at such an angle that it is peculiar to and
designed for use in puncturing or damaging vehicle tires. It does not include a
device designed to puncture or damage the tires of a vehicle driven over it in
a particular direction, if a conspicuous and clearly visible warning is posted
at the device’s location, alerting persons to its presence.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the possession, transfer or use of
jackrocks by any law enforcement officer in the course of his or her official
duties.
(720 ILCS 5/21-1.4) (2000 Code, § 131.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
   
132.01   Disorderly conduct
   
132.02   Curfew for minors
   
132.03   Truancy
   
132.04   Obstruction or interference of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
   
132.05   Laser pointers
   
132.06   Noise nuisances
   
132.07   Hunting activities
 
   
132.99   Penalty
§ 132.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   A person commits disorderly conduct when he or she knowingly:
      (1)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace;
      (2)   Enters upon the property of another, and for a lewd or unlawful
purpose deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window
or other opening in it;
      (3)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the
Department of Children and Family Services under the Abused and Neglected Child
Reporting Act, 325 ILCS 5/4;
      (4)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
to the Department of Public Health under the Nursing Home Care Act, 210 ILCS
45/1-101 et seq.;
      (5)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to the Police
Department or Fire Department or any privately-owned and operated ambulance
service, a false request for an ambulance, emergency medical technician-
ambulance, or emergency medical technician-paramedic knowing at the time there
is no reasonable ground for believing that such assistance is required;
      (6)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
under 320 ILCS 20/1 et seq.;
      (7)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner a false report
to any public safety agency without the reasonable grounds necessary to believe
that transmitting such a report is necessary for the safety and welfare of the
public;
      (8)   Calls or texts the number “911” or transmits or causes to be
transmitted in any manner to a public safety agency or public safety answering
point for the purpose of making or transmitting a false alarm or complaint and
reporting information when, at the time the call, text, or transmission is
made, the person knows there is no reasonable ground for making the call or
transmission and further knows that the call, text, or transmission could
result in the emergency response of any public safety agency; or
      (9)   Transmits or causes to be transmitted in any manner to another a
false alarm to the effect that a bomb or other explosive of any nature or a
container holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or
radioactive substance is concealed in such place that its explosion or release
would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission that there
is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb, explosive or a container
holding poison gas, a deadly biological or chemical contaminant, or radioactive
substance is concealed in such place.
   (B)   In addition to any penalty imposed as set forth in §
132.99, any person convicted of disorderly conduct shall be ordered by the
court to perform community service, as set forth under the provisions of 720
ILCS 5/26-1.
(720 ILCS 5/26-1) (2000 Code, § 132.01) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.02 CURFEW FOR MINORS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CURFEW HOURS.
         (a)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday;
         (b)   Between 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
         (c)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00
a.m. on the following day.
      EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
      ESTABLISHMENT. Any privately-owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
      GUARDIAN. 
         (a)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person
of a minor; or
         (b)   A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by
a court.
      MINOR. Any person under 17 years of age.
      PARENT. A person who is:
         (a)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another
person; or
         (b)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian
to have the care and custody of a minor.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, and shops.
      REMAIN. To:
         (a)   Linger or stay; or
         (b)   Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police
officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises.
      SERIOUS BODILY INJURY. Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   (B)   Curfew offenses.
      (1)   A minor commits a curfew offense when he or she remains in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment during curfew hours.
      (2)   A parent or guardian of a minor or other person in custody or
control of a minor commits a curfew offense when he or she knowingly permits
the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment
during curfew hours.
    (C)   Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under division (B) that the
minor was:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or other person in
custody or control of the minor;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor's presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental
agency, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any
detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity
supervised by adults and sponsored by a government or governmental agency, a
civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Minors Act.
   (D)   Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this Section,
a law enforcement officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for
being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an
arrest under this Section unless the officer reasonably believes that an
offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances,
no defense in division (C) is present.
   (E)   Sentence. A violation of this section is a petty offense with a fine
of not less than $10 nor more than $500, except that neither a person who has
been made a ward of the court under the Juvenile Court Act of 1987, nor that
person's legal guardian, shall be subject to any fine. In addition to or
instead of the fine imposed by this Section, the court may order a parent,
legal guardian, or other person convicted of a violation of division (B) to
perform community service as determined by the court, except that the legal
guardian of a person who has been made a ward of the court under the Juvenile
Court Act of 1987 may not be ordered to perform community service. The dates
and times established for the performance of community service by the parent,
legal guardian, or other person convicted of a violation of division (B) shall
not conflict with the dates and times that the person is employed in his or her
regular occupation.
   (F)   Local laws and regulations. County, municipal and other local boards
and bodies authorized to adopt local police laws and regulations under the
constitution and laws of this state may exercise legislative or regulatory
authority over this subject matter by ordinance or resolution incorporating the
substance of this section or increasing the requirements thereof or otherwise
not in conflict with this section.
§ 132.03 TRUANCY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN. Any foster parent, or any person appointed guardian, or
otherwise awarded custody of a minor by a court of law in this state, or
pursuant to the Illinois Juvenile Court Act, 705 ILCS 405, that shall not
include any person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor.
      PARENT. The father or mother of a minor child, whether by birth or
adoption. The word PARENT as used in this section shall also be deemed to mean
LEGAL GUARDIAN. In the event that the minor’s parents are divorced or separated
within the meaning of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act,
750 ILCS 5, the parent having lawful physical custody of the minor shall be
deemed to be the parent authorized to give consent as required by this section.
      VALID CAUSE FOR ABSENCE. Illness, observation of a religious holiday,
death in the immediately family, family emergency and other situations beyond
the control of the minor as determined by the Board of Education in each
District or such other circumstances which cause reasonable concern to the
parent for the health or safety of the minor.
   (B)   Truancy prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person between the
ages of seven and 16 years inclusive enrolled in a public, private or parochial
school within the corporate limits of the village to absent himself or herself
from attendance at school without the permission of his or her parent or legal
guardian for absences for valid cause as determined herein, or by the school in
which the minor is enrolled. Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or
other causes beyond the control of the person so absenting himself or herself
from school without parental permission shall not constitute truancy if
permission for such absences has substantially been obtained from the parent or
lawful guardian, provided that such permission is submitted in writing to the
proper school authorities within 24 hours of the next regularly scheduled
school day after such absence.
   (C)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal
guardian to permit his or her minor child or ward to violate this section.
(2000 Code, § 132.03) (Ord. 1718, passed 12-7-1998) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.04 OBSTRUCTION OR INTERFERENCE OF VEHICULAR AND PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC.
   No person or persons shall at any time assemble in or upon any public
street, alley or sidewalk of the village in such a manner as to obstruct or
interfere with the free passage of vehicles in and along such street or alley
or with the free passage of persons along said street or sidewalk, or in any
manner harass or intimidate any person seeking to use said public street, alley
or sidewalk. Any person who refuses to obey an order of a police officer to
disperse or to cease such act shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(2000 Code, § 132.04) (Ord. 1715, passed 12-7-1998) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.05 LASER POINTERS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, LASER POINTER shall be any
helium neon (HeNe) laser which typically operates at a wavelength of 832.8 nMe
with the mandated power limit of 5mW of power. Said lasers are considered Class
2 lasers with the potential for eye injury; and a diode laser which typically
operates at a wavelength of 670 nMe (although others are possible) with a power
source providing 5mW. Said lasers are considered Class 3a lasers, with the
potential for eye injury.
   (B)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
have in his or her possession at any private or public place, except as
provided herein, a laser pointer.
      (2)   No person, firm or corporation shall sell to or provide a minor
with a laser pointer as described in this section unless the minor is
accompanied by a parent or legal guardian at the time of purchase or transfer.
No minor shall, at the time of purchase of such laser pointer, furnish
fraudulent evidence of majority. No minor shall, except while accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian, possess a laser pointer as described herein on any
public property or on any private property, without the express permission of
the lawful owner or manager of the private property.
   (C)   Under parental or guardian supervision. It shall not be a violation of
this section for a person under the age of 18 years, to possess a laser pointer
as described herein, while under the direct supervision of the parent or
guardian of such person, when such possession is limited to the privacy of the
parents or guardians home.
(2000 Code, § 132.05) (Ord. 1716, passed 12-7-1998) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.06 NOISE NUISANCES.
   (A)   Purpose. This section is enacted to protect, preserve and promote the
health, safety, welfare, peace and quiet of the citizens of the village through
the reduction, control and prevention of unreasonably loud and raucous noise,
or any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensitivity.
   (B)   Scope. This section applies to the control of all sound originating
within the jurisdictional limits of the village.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage demanding immediate attention.
      EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating physical trauma or property damage, whether actually caused or
threatened by an emergency, or work by private or public utilities when
restoring utility service.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, joint venture or
corporation.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk,
alley or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or
controlled by a government entity.
      PUBLIC SPACE. Any real property or structures on real property, owned by
a government entity and normally accessible to the public, including, but not
limited to, parks and other recreational areas.
      RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any real property which contains a structure or
building in which one or more persons reside, provided that the structure or
building is properly zoned or is legally nonconforming for residential use in
accordance with the terms and maps of the village’s zoning code.
   (D)   General prohibition.
      (1)   No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued the
following:
         (a)   Any unreasonably loud or raucous noise;
         (b)   Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensitivity, within the jurisdictional limits of the village; or
         (c)   Any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural or unusual in
time or place as to occasion unreasonable, discomfort to any persons within the
neighborhood from which said noises emanate, or as to unreasonably interfere
with the peace and comfort of neighbors or their guests, or operators or
customers in places of business, or as to detrimentally or adversely affect
such residences or places of business.
      (2)   Factors for determining whether a sound is unreasonably loud and
raucous include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The volume of the sound;
         (b)   The intensity of the sound;
         (c)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
         (d)   The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether
residential or commercial;
         (e)   The land use, nature and zoning of the area from which the sound
emanates and the area where it is received or perceived;
         (f)   The time of day or night the sound occurs;
         (g)   The duration of the sound; and
         (h)   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
   (E)   Specific prohibitions. The following acts are declared to be per se
violations of this section. This list does not constitute an exclusive list:
      (1)   Radios, televisions, boomboxes, phonographs, stereos, musical
instruments and similar devices: the using, operating or permitting to be
played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
television receiving set, phonograph or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to be plainly audible at
a distance of 50 feet from the building or structure in which it is located;
      (2)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising: the using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated any radio, musical instrument,
phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, mobile sound vehicle or similar
device for amplifying or reproducing of sound on the public right-of-way or
public space for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the
attention of the public to any building or structure;
      (3)   Vehicular noise from audio systems: no person shall play, use,
operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio, tape recorder,
cassette player or other device for receiving broadcast or reproducing recorded
sound, or any other sound amplification system if the device is located in any
motor vehicle, and if the sound generated by the device is audible to a person
at a distance 50 feet or greater;
      (4)   Landscaping power equipment and similar devices: no person shall
use or operate any landscaping power equipment including any mechanically-
powered saw, leaf blower, lawn mower, hedge trimmer, grass trimmer, edger or
any other similar tool or device, but not including snowblowers in the village
prior to 7:00 a.m. and after dusk;
      (5)   Emergency signaling devices: the intentional sounding or permitting
the sounding outdoors of any emergency signaling device including fire and
burglar alarms, siren, whistle or similar emergency signaling device, except in
an emergency or except as in divisions (E)(5)(a) and (E)(5)(b) below. Local,
state and federal governments are exempt from this prohibition.
         (a)   Testing of an emergency signaling device shall occur between 7:
00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Any testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time.
In no case shall such test time exceed five minutes or more than once in a
calendar month.
         (b)   Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or
fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm, shall terminate within 15
minutes of activation unless an emergency exists. If a false or accidental
activation of an alarm occurs more than twice in a calendar month, the owner or
person responsible for the alarm shall be in violation of this section.
      (6)   Yelling, shouting and similar activities: yelling, shouting,
hooting, whistling or singing in residential areas or in public places, between
the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (F)   Exemptions. Sounds caused by the following are exempt from the
prohibitions set out in divisions (D) and (E) above:
      (1)   Government service: sounds generated from the provision of
authorized services of the United States, the State of Illinois or a unit of
local government;
      (2)   Repairs of utility structures, which are damaged, in disrepair or
out of service and such conditions, pose a clear and immediate danger to life,
health or significant loss of property;
      (3)   Sirens, whistles or bells lawfully used by emergency vehicles, or
other alarm systems used in case of fire, collision, civil defense, police
activity or imminent danger;
      (4)   Repairs or excavations of bridges, streets or highways by or on
behalf of the village, the state or the federal government;
      (5)   Outdoor school and playground activities: reasonable activities
conducted on public or private playgrounds and school grounds, which are
conducted in accordance with the manner in which such spaces are generally
used, including, but not limited to, school athletic and school entertainment
events;
      (6)   Other outdoor events: outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows,
parades, festivals and other similar outdoor events, provided that a permit has
been obtained from the village;
      (7)   Any event that is sponsored by or sanctioned by the village or its
designee;
      (8)   Bells, chimes or carillons: sounds generated by bells, chimes or
carillons or like devices, while being used for religious purposes, or in
conjunction with religious services, for national celebrations, seasonal
contribution solicitors or public holidays; and
      (9)   Protected expression: any other lawful activity which constitutes
protected expression pursuant to the first amendment of the United States
Constitution, but not amplified expression.
(2000 Code, § 132.06) (Ord. 1719, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 4128, passed 11-21-
2011) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.07 HUNTING ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the term FIREARM shall
mean and include any shotgun, rifle, revolver, B-B gun, air gun, CO2 gun, bow
and arrow, crossbow, slingshot or other similar stringed weapons.
   (B)   Prohibitive acts.
      (1)   Kill, take or wound, or attempt to kill, take or wound any animal
within the village with any firearm; and
      (2)   Hunt, pursue, harass or disturb in any manner, any bird, game or
animal within the village with any firearm with the intent to use the firearm
within the village.
   (C)   Exemptions.
      (1)   The acts prohibited in division (B) above shall not apply to any
officer of the law, while in the performance of his or her duty, or to persons
lawfully summoned by any officer to assist in making arrests or preserving the
peace, while so engaged in assisting such officer, or to any citizen
discharging a firearm when lawfully defending his or her person or property.
      (2)   The acts prohibited in division (B) above shall not apply to any
individual engaged in act of hunting solely by use of a bow and arrow, cross
bow or other stringed weapon while doing so not less than 1,000 feet from any
residence, designated street or highway located within the village.
(2000 Code, § 132.07) (Ord. 1720, passed 12-7-1998) Penalty, see §
132.99
§ 132.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
130.99.
   (B)   (1)   The initial incident of truancy (violation of §
132.03) shall be handled by the policy and procedure of the school and by the
school authorities in which the minor is enrolled. The incident shall be
documented and retained by the school district to be supplied to the court at
any subsequent hearings for violations of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent violations will result in the minor and/or parent or
legal guardian being appropriately cited and brought before the court.
Conviction for said offense shall result in a fine of not less than $75, nor
more than $500 for violation. In addition to, or in lieu of, the violator may
be required by the court or administrative Hearing Officer to serve a period of
community service.
      (3)   Any person that shall violate any of the provisions of §
132.03 may be required, in addition to or in lieu of a fine, to perform a
period of community service not to exceed 50 hours per violation. Such
community service may consist of any labor assigned by a church, not-for-profit
corporation, library or public agency that is deemed suitable to help cause a
positive behavioral change. The person so required to perform such community
service shall return to the court or administrative Hearing Officer, after
completion of the community service, with written proof verifying the
completion thereof.
(2000 Code, § 132.03)
   (C)   Any person who violates §
132.04 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $100 for each offense.
(2000 Code, § 132.04)
   (D)   Any person who found guilty of an offense under §
132.05 shall be fined not less than $75 nor more than $500 for each offense.
(2000 Code, § 132.05)
   (E)   (1)   Any police officer shall seize any firearm, ammunition or other
weapon in violation of §
132.07 and upon a conviction of a violation of §
132.07 the firearm, ammunition or weapon shall be confiscated and destroyed as
provided by law.
      (2)   In addition to the sanctions imposed by division (F)(1) above, any
person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of §
132.07 shall be fined not less than $75 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(2000 Code, § 132.07)
(Ord. 1715, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 1716, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 1718, passed
12-7-1998; Ord. 1720, passed 12-7-1998; Ord. 1971, passed 4-19-2004)
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
133.01   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer or correctional institution
employee
   
133.02   Refusing to aid an officer
   
133.03   Tampering with public notice
   
133.04   Attempt to solicit drugs
   
133.05   Vehicle impoundment
§ 133.01 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER OR CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION
EMPLOYEE.
   (A)   (1)   A person who knowingly;
         (a)   Resists arrest; or
         (b)   Obstructs the performance by one known to the person to be a
peace officer, firefighter or correctional institution employee of any
authorized act within his or her official capacity commits a Class A
misdemeanor.
      (2)   In addition to any other sentence that may be imposed, a court
shall order any person convicted of resisting or obstructing a peace officer,
firefighter or correctional institution employee to be sentenced to a minimum
of 48 consecutive hours of imprisonment or ordered to perform community service
for not less than 100 hours as may be determined by the court. The person shall
not be eligible for probation in order to reduce the sentence of imprisonment
or community service.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE means
any person employed to supervise and control inmates incarcerated in a
penitentiary, state farm, reformatory, prison, jail, house of correction,
police detention area, half-way house or other institution or place for the
incarceration or custody of persons under sentence for offenses or awaiting
trial or sentence for offenses, under arrest for an offense, a violation of
probation, a violation of parole, or a violation of mandatory supervised
release, or awaiting a hearing or preliminary hearing on setting the conditions
of pretrial release, or who are sexually dangerous persons or who are sexually
violent persons; and FIREFIGHTER means any individual, either as an employee or
volunteer, of a regularly constituted fire department of a municipality or fire
protection district who performs firefighting duties, including, but not
limited to, the fire chief, assistant fire chief, captain, engineer, driver,
ladder person, hose person, pipe person and any other member of a regularly
constituted fire department. FIREFIGHTER also means a person employed by the
office of the State Fire Marshal to conduct arson investigations.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if a
person resists or obstructs the performance of one known by the person to be a
firefighter by returning to or remaining in a dwelling, residence, building or
other structure to rescue or to attempt to rescue any person.
   (D)   A person shall not be subject to arrest for resisting arrest under
this section unless there is an underlying offense for which the person was
initially subject to arrest.
(720 ILCS 5/31-1) (2000 Code, § 133.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.02 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.
   No person, upon command, shall refuse or knowingly reasonably fail to aid a
person known by him or her to be a police officer in:
   (A)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
   (B)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(720 ILCS 5/31-8) (2000 Code, § 133.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.03 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.
   No person shall knowingly and without lawful authority alter, destroy,
deface, remove or conceal any public notice posted according to law, during the
time for which the notice was to remain posted.
(720 ILCS 5/32-9) (2000 Code, § 133.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.04 ATTEMPT TO SOLICIT DRUGS.
   It is unlawful for any person to solicit or to attempt to obtain cannabis as
defined in the Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550, or a controlled
substance, counterfeit substance, controlled substance analog or a look-a-like
substance as defined by the Illinois Controlled Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570,
with an intent to possess by request, contract, agreement, command or
understanding unless otherwise authorized by valid registration pursuant to
said Act.
(2000 Code, § 133.04) (Ord. 1952, passed 1-20-2004) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.05 VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   The owner of record of any motor vehicle which is used in connection
with a violation of §
133.04, or that contains cannabis as defined by the Illinois Cannabis Act, 720
ILCS 550, or a controlled substance counterfeit substance, controlled substance
analog, or a look-alike substance as defined by the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570, unless otherwise authorized by a valid
registration under said Act, or a motor vehicle transporting firearms in
violation of §
137.03, shall be subject to seizure and impoundment and liable to the village
for an administrative penalty not to exceed $500 plus any towing and storage
fees as hereinafter provided. This division (A) shall not apply:
      (1)   If the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at that time and
the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours
after the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; or
      (2)   If the vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violations
occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the village or its agents. Before or at the time the vehicle is towed, the
police officer shall notify any person identifying himself or herself as the
owner of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle
at the time of the alleged violation, of the fact of the seizure and of the
vehicle owner’s right to request a vehicle impoundment hearing to be conducted
under this section.
   (C)   Whenever the owner of record of a vehicle seized pursuant to this
section makes a request of the Police Department in person and in writing for a
vehicle impoundment hearing after the seizure, a Hearing Officer shall conduct
the vehicle impoundment hearing within 24 hours after such request is made,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays. All interested persons shall
be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the vehicle impoundment
hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay
evidence shall be admissible. If, after the hearing, the Hearing Officer
determines that there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle is subject
to seizure and impoundment under division (A) above, the Hearing Officer shall
order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this section
unless the owner of the vehicle posts with the Department of Revenue a cash
bond in the amount to exceed $500 plus any applicable towing and storage fees.
   (D)   Unless a hearing is held pursuant to division (C) above, within ten
days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to this section, the
village shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of
record of the date, time and location of a hearing that will be conducted
pursuant to this section. The hearing shall be schedule and held, unless
continued by order of the Hearing Officer, no later than 30 days after the
vehicle was seized. The hearing shall be conducted by a Hearing Officer
appointed by that Village President. All interested persons shall be give a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. If, after the hearing, the
Hearing Officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that the vehicle was
used in connection with a violation of §§
133.04 or
137.03, and that none of the exceptions described in divisions (A)(1) and (A)
(2) applies, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the owner of
record of the vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative
penalty in the amount not to exceed $500. If the owner of record fails to
appear at the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall enter default order in favor
of the village requiring the payment to the village of an administrative
penalty in an amount not to exceed $500. If the Hearing Officer finds that no
such violation occurred, the Hearing Officer shall order the immediate return
of the owner’s vehicle or cash bond.
   (E)   (1)   If an administrative penalty is imposed pursuant to this
section, such penalty shall constitute a debt due and owing to the village. If
a cash bond has been posted pursuant to this section, the bond shall be applied
to the penalty. If a vehicle has been impounded when such a penalty is imposed
the village may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such judgment
against the vehicle as provided by law. Except as provided otherwise in this
section, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until:
         (a)   The penalty, plus any applicable towing and storage fees, is
paid to the village, in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given to
the person who is legally entitled to posses the vehicle; or
         (b)   The vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a
judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law.
      (2)   If the administrative penalty and applicable fees are not paid
within 30 days after an administrative penalty is imposed under division (D)
above against an owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the
hearing, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the
manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles. In all other
cases, if the administrative penalty and applicable fees are not paid within 30
days after the expiration of time at which administrative review of the Hearing
Officer’s determination may be sought, or within 30 days after an action
seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor of the village,
whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed
vehicles under the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/4-208.
      (3)   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner,
lienholder or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a
vehicle impounded under this section until the civil penalty and fees
applicable under this section have been paid. However, whenever a person with a
lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure
proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he or
she agrees in writing to refund to the village the amount of the net proceeds
of any foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay all lienholders of
record, not to exceed $500 plus the applicable fees.
   (F)   For purposes of this section, the OWNER OF RECORD of a vehicle is the
record title holder.
(2000 Code, § 133.05) (Ord. 1952, passed 1-20-2004)
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
   
134.01   Public indecency
   
134.02   Obscenity
§ 134.01 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct as defined in 720
ILCS 5/11-0.1; or
      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PUBLIC PLACE. For purposes of this section, any place where the conduct
may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
   (C)   Breast-feeding of infants is not an act of public indecency.
(720 ILCS 5/11-30) (2000 Code, § 134.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.02 OBSCENITY.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he or she:
      (1)   Sells, delivers or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver,
or provide any obscene writing, picture, record or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene;
      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
      (3)   Publishes, exhibits or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his or her body for gain;
      (5)   Creates, buys, procures or possesses obscene matter or material
with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal
laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented
or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (B)   Obscene defined. Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:
      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest;
      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd
exhibition of the genitals; and
      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.
      (1)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults except
that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience.
      (2)   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic, political
or scientific value.
      (3)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence
shall be admissible to show:
         (a)   The character of the audience for which the material was
designed or to which it was directed;
         (b)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for
ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would
probably have on the behavior of such people;
         (c)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational or other merits
of the material, or absence thereof;
         (d)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
state;
         (e)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising
or other promotion of the material; and
         (f)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher or disseminator.
   (D)   Prima facie evidence. The creation, purchase, procurement or
possession of a mold, engraved plate or other embodiment of obscenity specially
adapted for reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more than three
copies of obscene material shall be prima facie evidence of an intent to
disseminate.
   (E)   Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      (1)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under 18 years of age; and
      (2)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.
(720 ILCS 5/11-20) (2000 Code, § 134.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 135: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Gambling
   
135.03   Keeping a gambling place
   
135.04   Seizure of gambling devices and gambling funds
   
135.05   Video gaming
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS. The same meaning ascribed in 720 ILCS 5/17-50.
   COMPUTER. The same meaning ascribed in 720 ILCS 5/17-50.
   GAMBLING DEVICE.
      (1)   Any clock, tape machine, slot machine or other machines or device
for the reception of money or other thing of value on chance or skill or upon
the action of which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded, bet,
won, or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment or other device
designed primarily for use in a gambling place.
      (2)   A GAMBLING DEVICE does not include:
         (a)   A coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical device played for
amusement which rewards the player with the right to replay such mechanical
device, which device is so constructed or devised as to make such result of the
operation thereof depend in part upon the skill of the player and which returns
to the player thereof no money, property or right to receive money or property;
         (b)   Vending machines by which full and adequate return is made for
the money invested and in which there is no element of chance or hazard;
         (c)   A crane game. For the purposes of this division (2)(c), a CRANE
GAME is an amusement device involving skill, if it rewards the player
exclusively with merchandise contained within the amusement device proper and
limited to toys, novelties, and prizes other than currency, each having a
wholesale value which is not more than $25; or
         (d)   A redemption machine. For the purposes of this division (2)(d),
a REDEMPTION MACHINE is a single-player or multi-player amusement device
involving a game, the object of which is throwing, rolling, bowling, shooting,
placing or propelling a ball or other object into, upon or against a hole or
other target, provided that all of the following conditions are met:
            1.   The outcome of the game is predominantly determined by the
skill of the player;
            2.   The award of the prize is based solely upon the player’s
achieving the object of the game or otherwise upon the player’s score;
            3.   Only merchandise prizes are awarded;
            4.   The wholesale value of prizes awarded in lieu of tickets or
tokens for single play of the device does not exceed $25; and
            5.   The redemption value of tickets, tokens and other
representations of value, which may be accumulated by players to redeem prizes
of greater value, does not exceed the amount charged for a single play of the
device.
   INTERNET. An interactive computer service or system or an information
service, or access software provider that provides or enables computer access
multiple users to a computer server, and includes, but is not limited to, an
information service, system or access software provider that provides access to
a network system commonly known as the Internet, or any comparable system or
service and also includes, but is not limited to, a World Wide Web page,
newsgroup, message board, mailing list or chat area on any interactive computer
service or system or online service.
   LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed
by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to
win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle,
gift, sale or some other name.
   POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees
by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token or other device that any
particular number, character, ticket or certificate shall in the event of any
contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser or holder to
receive money, property, or evidence of debt.
(720 ILCS 5/28-2) (2000 Code, § 135.01)
§ 135.02 GAMBLING.
   (A)   A person commits gambling when, within the corporate limits of the
village, he or she:
      (1)   Plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of value,
unless excepted in division (B) below;
      (2)   Makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest or any political
nomination, appointment or election;
      (3)   Operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents, sells,
bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures or distributes any gambling
device;
      (4)   Contracts to have or give himself, herself or another the option to
buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or other
commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, as described in
720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(4);
      (5)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he or she has received in the courses of a
bet or wager;
      (6)   Sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of skill or
chance, political nomination, appointment or election;
      (7)   Sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell or
transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;
      (8)   Sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to sell or
knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record, document or
other similar device;
      (9)   Knowingly drafts, prints or publishes any lottery ticket or share,
or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of the state or any other state or
foreign government;
      (10)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state;
      (11)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such information; except that nothing in this division (A)(11)
prohibits transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting
of sporting events or contests; or
      (12)   Knowingly establishes, maintains or operates an Internet site that
permits a person to play a game of chance or skill for money or other thing of
value by means of the Internet or to make a wager upon the result of any game,
contest, political nomination, appointment or election by means of the
Internet.
   (B)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted
of gambling:
      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of
chance, including without limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and
life or health or accident insurance;
      (2)   Offers of prizes, awards or compensation to the actual contestants
in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest;
      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this state;
      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this state when such
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law;
      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo,” when conducted in accordance
with 230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.;
      (6)   Lotteries when conducted by the state in accordance with 20 ILCS
1605/1 et seq.;
      (7)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this division (B)(7), an ANTIQUE
SLOT MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier;
      (8)   Raffles when conducted in accordance with 230 ILCS 15/1 et seq.;
      (9)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with 230 ILCS 30/1 et
seq.;
      (10)   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under 230 ILCS 20/1 et
seq.;
      (11)   Gambling games conducted on riverboats when authorized under 230
ILCS 10/1 et seq.; and
      (12)   Video gaming when conducted as authorized by the Illinois Video
Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.) and §
135.05 of this chapter.
   (C)   Circumstantial evidence. In prosecutions under division (A) above,
circumstantial evidence shall have the same validity and weight as in any
criminal prosecution.
(720 ILCS 5/28-1) (2000 Code, § 135.02) (Ord. 4164, passed 9-4-2012) Penalty,
see §
130.99
§ 135.03 KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a GAMBLING PLACE is any real estate,
vehicle, boat, or any other property whatsoever used for the purposes of
gambling. No person shall knowingly permit any premises or property owned or
occupied by him or her or under his or her control to be used as a gambling
place.
   (B)   When any premises is determined by the Circuit Court to be a gambling
place:
      (1)   The premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
proceeded against as such; and
      (2)   The premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a
violation of any section of this chapter shall be held liable for and may be
sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any unsatisfied
fine that may be levied under any section of this chapter.
(720 ILCS 5/28-3) (2000 Code, § 135.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.04 SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.
   (A)   Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use or
every device used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a gambling device
and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation and destruction by village
authorities. As used in this section, a GAMBLING DEVICE includes any slot
machine and includes any machine or device constructed for the reception of
money or other thing of value and so constructed as to return or cause someone
to return on chance to the player thereof money, property or a right to receive
money or property. With the exception of any device designed for gambling which
is incapable of lawful use, no gambling device shall be forfeited or destroyed
unless an individual with a property interest in the device knows of the
unlawful use thereof.
   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to
the county wherein the seizure occurs. Any money or other thing of value
integrally related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited as
contraband to the county wherein the seizure occurs.
(720 ILCS 5/28-5(a),(b)) (2000 Code, § 135.04)
§ 135.05 VIDEO GAMING.
   (A)   Any establishment within the village which holds a liquor license and
has obtained a license to operate a video gaming terminal from the Illinois
Gaming Board at such premises shall be required to apply for and obtain a
license and video gaming sticker from the village.
   (B)   No establishment shall operate a video gaming terminal without having
obtained a license and video gaming sticker from the village pursuant to the
application procedures of
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   The fee for operation of a video gaming terminal shall be $250 per
terminal annually. The cost of this fee shall be shared equally between the
terminal operator and the applicable licensed establishment.
   (D)   Video gaming terminals may not be operated on any premises that is:
      (1)   Located within 1,000 feet of a horseracing or riverboat gambling
facility; or
      (2)   Located within 100 feet of a school or a place of worship.
   (E)   There shall not be more than six video gaming terminals on any
premises.
   (F)   Video gaming terminals must be located in an area that is restricted
to persons over 21 years of age. The entrance to such area must be within the
view of at least one employee.
   (G)   No licensee may cause or permit any person under the age of 21 years
to use or play a video gaming terminal.
   (H)   Each establishment that desires to operate a video gaming terminal
must possess a valid liquor license issued by the Illinois Liquor Control
Commission and the village.
   (I)   Those establishments that are licensed establishments, licensed
fraternal establishments and licensed veterans establishments, all pursuant to
the Illinois Video Gaming Act, may operate video gaming terminals only during
the hours of operation for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at that
establishment.
   (J)   Annual fees to be paid shall be for a fiscal year without proration
should the video gaming terminal operate for any portion of any fiscal year.
   (K)   Any licensee must also follow any rules and further restrictions
imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board.
(Ord. 4164, passed 9-4-2012; Ord. 4408, passed 3-16-2020; Ord. 4499, passed 4-
18-2022) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Litter
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Dumping or depositing of litter prohibited; exemptions
   
136.03   Dumping or depositing litter from motor vehicle prohibited
   
136.04   Accumulation of litter prohibited
   
136.05   Presumption of violation by operator throwing litter from motor
vehicle
   
136.06   Receptacles required in public areas
   
136.07   Power of court to order removal of litter
Possession of Drugs and Drug Paraphernalia
   
136.20   Paraphernalia used with cannabis
   
136.21   Prohibiting the sale and possession of items designed or marketed for
use with illegal cannabis or drugs
   
136.22   Possession of cannabis prohibited
Fireworks
   
136.35   Possession of fireworks
 
   
136.99   Penalty
LITTER
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LITTER. Any discarded, used or unconsumed substance or waste. LITTER may
include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish,
grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste; newspaper, magazines, glass,
metal, plastic or paper containers, or other packaging construction material,
abandoned vehicle, as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., motor vehicle parts,
furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal, any nauseous or offensive matter of
any kind; any object likely to injure any person or create a traffic hazard;
potentially infectious medical waste as defined in 415 ILCS 5/3.360; or
anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature, which has been discarded,
abandoned or otherwise disposed of improperly.
(415 ILCS 105/3)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in Chapter 70 of this code of ordinances.
(2000 Code, § 136.01)
§ 136.02 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS.
   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause or permit
the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding or leaving of litter
upon any public or private property in this village, or upon or into any river,
lake, pond or other stream or body of water in this village unless:
   (A)   The property has been designated by the village or any of its agencies
for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that property in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the state Pollution
Control Board;
   (B)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended by
the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of
litter;
   (C)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property
or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession,
or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant
and does not create a public health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, or a
fire hazard;
   (D)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public officials
during special cleanup days; and/or
   (E)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency situation
where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly disposes of any
litter, including, but not limited to, potentially infectious medical waste as
defined in 415 ILCS 5/3.360, when the emergency situation no longer exists.
(415 ILCS 105/4; 415 ILCS 105/8) (2000 Code, § 136.02) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.03 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard or otherwise dispose of
litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any public or
private property or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream or body of water
in this village except as permitted under §
136.02(A) through (E). Nor shall any person transport, by any means, garbage or
refuse from any dwelling, residence, place of business, farm or other site to
and deposit the material in, around or on top of trash barrels or other
receptacles placed along public highways or at roadside rest areas.
(415 ILCS 105/5; 415 ILCS 105/8) (2000 Code, § 136.03) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.04 ACCUMULATION OF LITTER PROHIBITED.
   No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of which the
person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as to
constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be blown
or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real property of another
person.
(415 ILCS 105/6; 415 ILCS 105/8) (2000 Code, § 136.04) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.05 PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION BY OPERATOR THROWING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor
vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the
operator of that motor vehicle has violated §
136.03, but that presumption may be rebutted.
(415 ILCS 105/9) (2000 Code, § 136.05)
§ 136.06 RECEPTACLES REQUIRED IN PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   In order to assist the public in complying with this subchapter, the
owner or person in control of any property which is held out to the public as a
place for assemblage, the transaction of business, recreation or as a public
way shall cause to be placed and maintained receptacles for the deposit of
litter of sufficient volume and in sufficient numbers to meet the needs of the
numbers of people customarily coming on or using the property.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE
TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS includes, but is not limited to, commercially operated
parks, campgrounds, drive-in restaurants, automobile service stations, business
parking lots, car washes, shopping centers, marinas, boat launching areas,
industrial parking lots, boat moorage and fueling stations, piers, beaches and
bathing areas, airports, roadside rest stops, drive-in movies and shopping
malls; and PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR ASSEMBLAGE, RECREATION, OR AS A
PUBLIC WAY includes, but is not limited to, any property that is publicly owned
or operated for any of the purposes stated in the definition in this division
(B) for PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS, but
excludes state highway rights-of-way and rest areas located thereon.
(415 ILCS 105/10) (2000 Code, § 136.06) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.07 POWER OF COURT TO ORDER REMOVAL OF LITTER.
   (A)   Any person convicted of a violation of §§
136.02,
136.03 and
136.04 is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. A second conviction for an offense
committed after the first conviction is a Class A misdemeanor. A third or
subsequent violation, committed after a second conviction is a Class 4 felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (B)   In addition to any fine imposed under this section, the court may
order that the person convicted of such a violation remove and properly dispose
of the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such removal and
disposal, and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs against the person
so convicted.
   (C)   The penalties prescribed in this section are in addition to, and not
in lieu of, any penalties, rights, remedies, duties or liabilities otherwise
imposed or conferred by law.
   (D)   An individual convicted of violating §§
136.02,
136.03 and
136.04 by disposing of litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any
other penalty, be required to maintain litter control for 30 days over a
designated portion of that highway, including, at the discretion of the agency
having jurisdiction over the section of highway in question, the site where the
offense occurred, as provided in § 50 of the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act, 605
ILCS 120/50.
(415 ILCS 105/8) (2000 Code, § 136.07) Penalty, see §
136.99
POSSESSION OF DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 136.20 PARAPHERNALIA USED WITH CANNABIS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or deliver, or possess
with intent to sell or deliver, or possess with intent to sell or deliver, any
equipment of any kind which is used, or intended for use, as a container of
cannabis or as an instrument for the use of cannabis as defined in this
section.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CANNABIS. Marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not, the
seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plant, and any
compound, manufacturer, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant,
its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis, but shall not include the mature stalks of the plant,
fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of
the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil or cake, or
the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
      INSTRUMENT FOR THE USE OF CANNABIS. Any equipment or property which is
substantially and instrumentally connected with the use of cannabis.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any person who has been authorized by the Department of Mental
Health and Developmental Disabilities, with the approval of the Department of
Law Enforcement, to possess and deliver substances containing cannabis; and
      (2)   Persons registered under federal law to conduct research with
cannabis.
(2000 Code, § 136.20) (Ord. 1025, passed 10-1-1979) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.21 PROHIBITING THE SALE AND POSSESSION OF ITEMS DESIGNED OR MARKETED FOR
USE WITH ILLEGAL CANNABIS OR DRUGS.
   (A)   Jurisdiction. Pursuant to the police powers vested in the village by
the State Constitution, this section shall be in effect within the village to
prohibit the sale and possession of items intended for use or designed for use
with illegal cannabis or drugs.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
         (a)   All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are
used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the
Cannabis Control Act and 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.
         (b)   It includes but is not limited to:
            1.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
            2.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
            3.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for
use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
            4.   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use
in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
            5.   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
            6.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances;
            7.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining
marijuana;
            8.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
            9.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
            10.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or
designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
            11.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body;
            12.   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:
               a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured
metal bowls;
               b.   Water pipes;
               c.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
               d.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
               e.   Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand;
               f.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
               g.   Chamber pipes;
               h.   Carburetor pipes;
               i.   Electric pipes;
               j.   Air-driven pipes;
               k.   Chillums;
               l.   Bongs; and
               m.   Ice pipes or chillers.
            13.   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a
court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
               a.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use;
               b.   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance;
               c.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this subchapter;
               d.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
               e.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on
the object;
               f.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he
or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate
a violation of this subchapter. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, as to a direct violation of this subchapter shall not
prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as
drug paraphernalia;
               g.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;
               h.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain
or depict its use;
               i.   National and local advertising concerning its use;
               j.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
               k.   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
               l.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of
the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
               m.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object
in the community; and
               n.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (C)   Possession of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of this subchapter.
   (D)   Manufacture or delivery of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any
person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture, with intent
to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one
reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate,
grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test,
analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or
otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
this subchapter.
   (E)   Delivery of drug paraphernalia to a minor. Any person 18 years of age
or over who violates division (D) above by delivering drug paraphernalia to a
person under 18 years of age who is at least three years his or her junior,
upon conviction, may be subject to a penalty.
   (F)   Advertisement of drug paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person to
place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any
advertisement, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know,
that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the
sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (G)   Civil forfeiture. All drug paraphernalia manufactured, delivered,
possessed, intended for use or designed for use defined in division (B) above
shall be seized without a warrant by a peace officer and the paraphernalia
shall be subject to forfeiture.
(2000 Code, § 136.21) (Ord. 1150, passed 7-19-1982) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.22 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CANNABIS. Marijuana, hashish and other substances which are identified as
including any parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not, the
seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of the plants; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant,
its seeds, resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks of the plant,
fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of
the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil or cake, or
the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to possess 30 grams or
less of any substance containing cannabis.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any person who has been authorized by the Department of Mental
Health and Developmental Disabilities with the approval of the Department of
Law Enforcement to possess and deliver substances containing cannabis; or
      (2)   Persons registered under federal law to conduct research with
cannabis.
(2000 Code, § 136.22) (Ord. 1242, passed 1-7-1985) Penalty, see §
136.99
FIREWORKS
§ 136.35 POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FIREWORKS.
         (a)   Any combustible or explosive composition, substance or
combination of substances, or any article prepared for the purpose of producing
a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or
detonation and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in which explosives
are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the
same, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, bombs or other
fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any explosive
compound; or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or
containing combustible substances producing visual effects.
         (b)   The term FIREWORKS shall not include snake or glow worm pellets;
smoke devices; sparklers; trick noisemakers known as “party poppers”, “booby
traps”, “snappers”, “trick matches”, “cigarette loads” and “auto burglar
alarms”; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices in which paper or
plastic caps containing twenty-five hundredths grain or less explosive compound
are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact
with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic
caps which contain less than twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive
mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
   (B)   Possession of fireworks prohibited. No person shall possess, use,
discharge or ignite fireworks within the village subject to the exceptions set
forth in division (D) below.
   (C)   Seizure. A peace officer shall seize, remove or cause to be removed,
at expense of the owner, all fireworks or combustibles offered or exposed for
sale, stored or possessed within the village.
   (D)   Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a public display
and discharge of fireworks, providing such individual, firm, partnership or
corporation planning to make a public display and discharge of fireworks, shall
first secure a written permit from the Chief of the Fire Department upon proper
written application.
(Ord. 4275, passed 7-20-2015) Penalty, see §
136.99
§ 136.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
130.99.
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
136.02 is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. A second conviction for an offense
committed after the first conviction is a Class A misdemeanor. A third or
subsequent violation, committed after a second conviction is a Class 4 felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   In addition to any fine imposed under this division (B), the court
may order that the person convicted of such a violation remove and properly
dispose of the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such removal
and disposal, and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs against the
person so convicted.
      (3)   The penalties prescribed in this division (B) are in addition to,
and not in lieu of, any penalties, rights, remedies, duties or liabilities
otherwise imposed or conferred by law.
      (4)   An individual convicted of violating §
136.02 by disposing of litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any
other penalty, be required to maintain litter control for 30 days over a
designated portion of that highway, including, at the discretion of the agency
having jurisdiction over the section of highway in question, the site where the
offense occurred, as provided in § 50 of the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act, 605
ILCS 120/50.
(415 ILCS 105/4, 415 ILCS 105/8) (2000 Code, § 136.02)
   (C)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
136.03 is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. A second conviction for an offense
committed after the first conviction is a Class A misdemeanor. A third or
subsequent violation, committed after a second conviction is a Class 4 felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   In addition to any fine imposed under this division (C), the court
may order that the person convicted of such a violation remove and properly
dispose of the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such removal
and disposal, and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs against the
person so convicted.
      (3)   The penalties prescribed in this division (C) are in addition to,
and not in lieu of, any penalties, rights, remedies, duties or liabilities
otherwise imposed or conferred by law.
      (4)   An individual convicted of violating §
136.03 by disposing of litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any
other penalty, be required to maintain litter control for 30 days over a
designated portion of that highway, including, at the discretion of the agency
having jurisdiction over the section of highway in question, the site where the
offense occurred, as provided in § 50 of the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act.
(415 ILCS 105/5, 415 ILCS 105/8) (2000 Code, § 136.03)
   (D)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of §
136.04 is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. A second conviction for an offense
committed after the first conviction is a Class A misdemeanor. A third or
subsequent violation, committed after a second conviction is a Class 4 felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   In addition to any fine imposed under this division (D), the court
may order that the person convicted of such a violation remove and properly
dispose of the litter, may employ special bailiffs to supervise such removal
and disposal, and may tax the costs of such supervision as costs against the
person so convicted.
      (3)   The penalties prescribed in this division (D) are in addition to,
and not in lieu of, any penalties, rights, remedies, duties or liabilities
otherwise imposed or conferred by law.
      (4)   An individual convicted of violating §
136.04 by disposing of litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any
other penalty, be required to maintain litter control for 30 days over a
designated portion of that highway, including, at the discretion of the agency
having jurisdiction over the section of highway in question, the site where the
offense occurred, as provided in § 50 of the Illinois Adopt-A-Highway Act.
(415 ILCS 105/6, 415 ILCS 105/8) (2000 Code, § 136.04)
   (E)   If no litter receptacles are placed on property described in §
136.06, the owner or person in control of the property shall be fined $100 for
violating §
136.06. If the owner or person in control of the property has placed litter
receptacles on his or her property but the number or size of the receptacles
has proved inadequate to meet the needs of the numbers of people coming on or
using his or her property as indicated by the condition and appearance of that
property, and the owner or person in control has failed to provide sufficient
or adequate receptacles within ten days after being made aware of that fact by
written notice from the police, he or she shall be fined $25 for each
receptacle not so provided and maintained.
(415 ILCS 105/10) (2000 Code, § 136.06)
   (F)   Any person violating the provisions of §
136.20 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense.
(2000 Code, § 136.20)
   (G)   (1)   Any person who violates §
136.21(C) may be fined up to $750.
      (2)   Any person who violates §
136.21(D), upon conviction, may be imprisoned for not more than three months or
fined $750, or both.
      (3)   Any person who violates §
136.21(E), upon conviction, may be imprisoned for not more than six months or
fined $750, or both.
      (4)   Any person who violates §
136.21(F), upon conviction, may be imprisoned for not more than 30 days or
fined $750, or both.
(2000 Code, § 136.21)
   (H)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of §
136.22 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense.
      (2)   The court may impose a sentence of supervision upon any person if,
having regard to the nature and circumstances of the offense and the history,
character and condition of the person, the court is of the opinion that a
formal conviction under this division (H) is inappropriate.
         (a)   When a person is placed on supervision, the court shall enter an
order for supervision specifying the period of the supervision, and shall defer
further proceedings in the case until the conclusion of the period.
         (b)   The period of supervision shall be reasonable under all the
circumstances of the case, but may not be longer than one year.
         (c)   The court may, in addition to the other considerations, require
the person to:
            1.   Make a report to, appear in person before, or participate with
the court or such persons or social agency as directed by the court in the
order of supervision;
            2.   Work or pursue a course of study or vocational training;
            3.   Undergo medical or psychiatric treatment; or treatment for
drug addiction or alcoholism;
            4.   In the case of a minor, reside with his or her parents or in a
foster home;
            5.   In the case of a minor, attend school; and/or
            6.   In the case of a minor, attend a nonresidential program for
youth.
         (d)   The court shall defer entering any judgment on the charges until
a conclusion of the supervision.
         (e)   At the conclusion of the period of supervision, if the court
determines that the person has successfully complied with all the conditions of
supervision, the court shall discharge the person and enter a judgment
dismissing the charges.
         (f)   Discharge and dismissal upon a successful conclusion of a
disposition of supervision shall be deemed without adjudication of guilt and
shall not be termed a conviction for purposes of disqualification or disability
imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. That person may have his or her
record of arrest expunged as may be provided by law.
(2000 Code, § 136.22)
   (I)   Any person violating the provisions of §
136.35 shall be fined not less than $50 or more than $750 for each offense.
(Ord. 1025, passed 10-1-1979; Ord. 1150, passed 7-19-1982; Ord. 1242, passed 1-
7-1985; Ord. 4275, passed 7-20-2015)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS
Section
Deadly Weapons
   
137.01   Unlawful possession of weapons
   
137.02   Exemptions
   
137.03   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition
   
137.04   Confiscation and disposition of weapons
Air Rifles
   
137.15   Definitions
   
137.16   Selling, renting or transferring to children; prohibition
   
137.17   Carrying or discharging on public streets
   
137.18   Permissive possession
   
137.19   Permissive sales
   
137.20   Seizure and removal
Statutory reference:
   Boarding aircraft with weapons, 720 ILCS 545/0.01 through 7
   Firearms and ammunition registration, 430 ILCS 65/0.01 through 16.3
DEADLY WEAPONS
§ 137.01 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly:
      (1)   Sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry any bludgeon, black-
jack, slung-shot, sand-club, sand-bag, metal knuckles or other knuckle weapon
regardless of its composition, throwing star or any knife, commonly referred to
as a switch-blade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand
pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the
knife; or a ballistic knife, which is a device that propels a knifelike blade
as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material or compressed gas,
but which shall not be deemed to include crossbows, common or compound bows
and/or underwater spearguns;
      (2)   Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle
or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser, or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon or instrument of like character;
      (3)   Carry on or about his or her person or in any vehicle, a tear gas
gun projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance,
other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious liquid gas or substance
designed solely for personal defense carried by a person 18 years of age or
older;
      (4)   Carry or possess in any vehicle or concealed on or about his or her
person except when on his or her land or in his or her own abode or fixed place
of business any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or other firearm, except
that this division (A)(4) does not apply to or affect transportation of weapons
that meet one of the following conditions:
         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;
         (b)   Are not immediately accessible; or
         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box,
shipping box or other container by a person who has been issued a currently
valid firearm owner’s identification card.
      (5)   Set a spring gun;
      (6)   Carry or possess any firearm, stun gun or taser or other deadly
weapon in any place which is licensed to sell intoxicating beverages, or at any
public gathering held pursuant to a license issued by any governmental body or
any public gathering at which an admission is charged, excluding a place where
a showing, demonstration or lecture involving the exhibition of unloaded
firearms is conducted. This division (A)(6) does not apply to any auction or
raffle of a firearm held pursuant to a license or permit issued by a
governmental body, nor does it apply to persons engaged in firearm safety
training courses;
      (7)   Carry or possess on or about his or her person, upon any public
street, alley or other public lands within the corporate limits of the village,
except when an invitee thereon or therein, for the purpose of the display of
such weapon or the lawful commerce in weapons, or except when on his or her
land or in his or her own abode or fixed place of business, any pistol,
revolver, stun gun or taser or other firearm, except that this division (A)(7)
does not apply to or affect transportation of weapons that meet one of the
following conditions:
         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;
         (b)   Are not immediately accessible; or
         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box,
shipping box or other container by a person who has been issued a currently
valid firearm owner’s identification card.
      (8)   Sell, manufacture, deliver, import, possess, or purchase any
assault weapon attachment or .50 caliber cartridge in violation of 720 ILCS 5/
24-1.9 or any explosive bullet. EXPLOSIVE BULLET shall mean the projectile
portion of an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries an explosive
charge which will explode upon contact with the flesh of a human or an animal.
CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal case having a projectile affixed at the front
thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end thereof, with the propellant
contained in the tube between the projectile and the cap; or
      (9)   Carries or possesses on or about his or her person while in a
building occupied by a unit of government, a billy club, other weapon of like
character or other instrument of like character intended for use as a weapon.
For the purposes of this section, BILLY CLUB means a short stick or club
commonly carried by police officers which is either telescopic or constructed
of a solid piece of wood or other human-made material.
      (10)   Manufacture, possess, sell, or offer to sell, purchase,
manufacture, import, transfer, or use any device, part, kit, tool, accessory,
or combination of parts that is designed to and functions to increase the rate
of fire of a semiautomatic firearm above the standard rate of fire for
semiautomatic firearms that is not equipped with that device, part, or
combination of parts; or
      (11)   Carry or possess any assault weapon or .50 caliber rifle in
violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-1.9; or
      (12)   Manufacture, sell, deliver, import, or purchase any assault weapon
or .50 caliber rifle in violation of 720 ILCS 5/24-1.9.
   (B)   A STUN GUN or TASER, as used in division (A), means:
      (1)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a length of wire
and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting
the person’s nervous system in such a manner as to render him or her incapable
of normal functioning; or
      (2)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing worn by a human,
can send out a current capable of disrupting the person’s nervous system in
such a manner as to render him or her incapable of normal functioning.
(720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)) (2000 Code, § 137.01) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Silencers on guns; machine guns; possession of weapon while hooded, robed
and/or masked; or possession of weapons on school or university grounds (all of
which are felonies), see 720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(6), 720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(7) and 720
ILCS 5/24-1(a)(9) and 720 ILCS 5/24-1(c)(2)
§ 137.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)    Except as otherwise authorized by the Firearm Concealed Carry Act,
430 ILCS 66/1 et seq., §
137.01(A)(3), (A)(4) and (A)(7) do not apply to or affect any of the following:
      (1)   Peace officers, and any person summoned by a peace officer to
assist in making arrests or preserving the peace, while actually engaged in
assisting such officer;
      (2)   Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted
of an offense, while in the performance of their official duty, or while
commuting between their homes and places of employment;
      (3)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard or the Reserve Officers Training Corps,
while in the performance of their official duty;
      (4)   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public utility to
perform police functions, and guards of armored car companies, while actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or commuting
between their homes and places of employment; and watchmen while actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment;
      (5)   Persons licensed as private security contractors, private
detectives or private alarm contractors, or employed by an agency certified by
the Department of Professional Regulation, if their duties include the carrying
of a weapon under the provisions of the Private Detective, Private Alarm,
Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor and Locksmith Act of 2004, 225 ILCS 447/5-
5 et seq., while actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their
employment or commuting between their homes and places of employment, provided
that such commuting is accomplished within one hour from departure from home or
place of employment, as the case may be. Persons exempted under this division
(A)(5) shall be required to have completed a course of study in firearms
handling and training approved and supervised by the Department of Professional
Regulation as prescribed by § 28 of the Private Detective, Private Alarm,
Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor and Locksmith Act of 2004, 225 ILCS 447/5-
5 et seq., prior to becoming eligible for this exemption. The Department of
Professional Regulation shall provide suitable documentation demonstrating the
successful completion of the prescribed firearms training. Such documentation
shall be carried at all times when such persons are in possession of a
concealable weapon;
      (6)   Any person regularly employed in a commercial or industrial
operation as a security guard for the protection of persons employed and
private property related to such commercial or industrial operation, while
actually engaged in the performance of his or her duty or traveling between
sites or properties belonging to the employer, and who, as a security guard, is
a member of a security force of at least five persons registered with the
Department of Professional Regulation; provided that such security guard has
successfully completed a course of study, approved by and supervised by the
Department of Professional Regulation, consisting of not less than 48 hours of
training that includes the theory of law enforcement, liability for acts, and
the handling of weapons. A person shall be considered eligible for this
exemption if he or she has completed the required 20 hours of training for a
security officer and 28 hours of required firearm training, and has been issued
a firearm control card by the Department of Professional Regulation. Conditions
for the renewal of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of this
section shall be the same as for those cards issued under the provisions of the
Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor and
Locksmith Act of 2004, 225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq. Such firearm control card shall
be carried by the security guard at all times when he or she is in possession
of a concealable weapon;
      (7)   Agents and investigators of the Illinois Legislative Investigating
Commission authorized by the Commission to carry the weapons specified in §
137.01(A)(3) and (A)(4), while on duty in the course of any investigation for
the Commission;
      (8)   Persons employed by a financial institution for the protection of
other employees and property related to such financial institution, while
actually engaged in the performance of their duties, commuting between their
homes and places of employment, or traveling between sites or properties owned
or operated by such financial institution, provided that any person so employed
has successfully completed a course of study, approved by and supervised by the
Department of Professional Regulation, consisting of not less than 48 hours of
training which includes theory of law enforcement, liability for acts, and the
handling of weapons. A person shall be considered to be eligible for this
exemption if he or she has completed the required 20 hours of training for a
security officer and 28 hours of required firearm training, and has been issued
a firearm control card by the Department of Professional Regulation. Conditions
for renewal of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of this
section shall be the same as for those issued under the provisions of the
Private Detective, Private Alarm, Private Security, Fingerprint Vendor and
Locksmith Act of 2004, 225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq. Such firearm control card shall
be carried by the person so trained at all times when such person is in
possession of a concealable weapon. For purposes of this division (A)(8),
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION means a bank, savings and loan association, credit union
or company providing armored car services;
      (9)   Any person employed by an armored car company to drive an armored
car, while actually engaged in the performance of his or her duties;
      (10)   Persons who have been classified as peace officers pursuant to the
Peace Officer Fire Investigation Act, 20 ILCS 2910/0.01 et seq.;
      (11)   Investigators of the office of the State’s Attorneys Appellate
Prosecutor authorized by the board of governors of the office of the State’s
Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor to carry weapons pursuant to the State’s
Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor’s Act, 725 ILCS 210/1 et seq.;
      (12)   Special investigators appointed by a State’s Attorney under 55
ILCS 5/3-9005;
      (13)   Probation officers while in the performance of their duties, or
while commuting between their homes, places of employment or specific locations
that are part of their assigned duties, with the consent of the chief judge of
the circuit for which they are employed;
      (14)   Court security officers while in the performance of their official
duties, or while commuting between their homes and places of employment, with
the consent of the Sheriff;
      (15)   A person employed as an armed security guard at a nuclear energy,
storage, weapons or development site or facility regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission who has completed the background screening and training
mandated by the rules and regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; and
      (16)   Manufacture, transportation or sale of weapons to persons
authorized under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(15) above to possess those
weapons.
   (B)   Section
137.01(A)(4) and (A)(7) do not apply to or affect any of the following:
      (1)   Members of any club or organization organized for the purpose of
practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges, whether public
or private, and patrons of such ranges, while such members or patrons are using
their firearms on those target ranges;
      (2)   Duly authorized military or civil organizations while parading,
with the special permission of the Governor;
      (3)   Hunters, trappers, or fishermen while engaged in lawful hunting,
trapping or fishing under the provisions of the Wildlife Code or the Fish and
Aquatic Life Code; and
      (4)   Transportation of weapons that are broken down in a non-functioning
state or are not immediately accessible.
   (C)   Section
137.01(A)(1) does not apply to the purchase, possession or carrying of a black-
jack or slung-shot by a peace officer.
   (D)   Section
137.01(A)(6) does not apply to any owner, manager or authorized employee of any
place specified in that division nor to any law enforcement officer.
   (E)   Section
137.01(A)(4) and (A)(7) do not apply to members of any club or organization
organized for the purpose of practicing shooting at targets upon established
target ranges, whether public or private, while using their firearms on those
target ranges.
   (F)   Section
137.01(A)(8) does not apply to:
      (1)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard, while in the performance of their
official duty;
      (2)   Bona fide collectors of antique or surplus military ordnance;
      (3)   Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics, or
specializing in the development of ammunition or explosive ordnance; and
      (4)   Commerce, preparation, assembly or possession of explosive bullets
by manufacturers of ammunition licensed by the federal government, in
connection with the supply of those organizations and persons exempted by
division (F)(1) above, or like organizations and persons outside this state, or
the transportation of explosive bullets to any organization or person exempted
in this section by a common carrier or by a vehicle owned or leased by an
exempted manufacturer.
   (G)   An information or indictment based upon a violation of any division of
this section need not negative any exemptions contained in this section. The
defendant shall have the burden of proving such an exemption.
   (H)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit, apply to or affect the
transportation, carrying or possession, of any pistol or revolver, stun gun,
taser or other firearm consigned to a common carrier operating under license of
the state or the federal government, where such transportation, carrying or
possession is incident to the lawful transportation in which such common
carrier is engaged; and nothing in this section shall prohibit, apply to or
affect the transportation, carrying or possession of any pistol, revolver, stun
gun, taser or other firearm, not the subject of and regulated by 720 ILCS 5/24-
1(a)(7) or 720 ILCS 5/24-2(c), which is unloaded and enclosed in a case,
firearm carrying box, shipping box or other container, by the possessor of a
valid firearm owner’s identification card.
(720 ILCS 5/24-2) (2000 Code, § 137.02) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.03 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION.
   (A)   A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of firearms or
firearm ammunition when:
      (1)   He or she is under 18 years of age and has in his or her possession
any firearm of a size which may be concealed upon the person;
      (2)   He or she is under 21 years of age, has been convicted of a
misdemeanor other than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent and has any
firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession;
      (3)   He or she is a narcotic addict and has any firearms or firearm
ammunition in his or her possession;
      (4)   He or she has been a patient in a mental hospital within the past
five years and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his or her possession;
      (5)   He or she is mentally retarded and has any firearms or firearm
ammunition in his or her possession; or
      (6)   He or she has in his or her possession any explosive bullet. For
purposes of this division (A)(6) EXPLOSIVE BULLET means the projectile portion
of an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries an explosive charge which
will explode upon contact with the flesh of a human or an animal. CARTRIDGE
means a tubular metal case having a projectile affixed at the front thereof and
a cap or primer at the rear end thereof, with the propellant contained in such
tube between the projectile and the cap.
   (B)   Unlawful possession of firearms, other than handguns and firearm
ammunition is a Class A misdemeanor. Unlawful possession of handguns is a Class
4 felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. The possession of each
firearm or firearm ammunition in violation of this section constitutes a single
and separate violation.
   (C)   Nothing in division (A)(1) above prohibits a person under 18 years of
age from participating in any lawful recreational activity with a firearm such
as, but not limited to, practice shooting at targets upon established public or
private target ranges or hunting, trapping or fishing in accordance with the
Wildlife Code, 520 ILCS 5, or the Fish and Aquatic Life Code, 515 ILCS 5.
(720 ILCS 5/24-3.1) (2000 Code, § 137.03) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.04 CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.
   Upon conviction of an offense in which a weapon was used or possessed by the
offender, any weapon seized may be confiscated by the trial court for further
disposition consistent with state law.
(720 ILCS 5/24-6) (2000 Code, § 137.04)
AIR RIFLES
§ 137.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR RIFLE. Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, B.B. gun,
pellet gun or any implement that is not a firearm, which impels a pellet
constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials with a force
that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.
   DEALER. Any person, copartnership, association or corporation engaged in the
business of selling at retail or renting any of the articles included in the
definition of AIR RIFLE.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 535, § 1) (2000 Code, § 137.10)
§ 137.16 SELLING, RENTING OR TRANSFERRING TO CHILDREN; PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any dealer to sell, lend, rent, give or otherwise
transfer an air rifle to any person under the age of 13 years where the dealer
knows or has cause to believe the person to be under 13 years of age or where
the dealer has failed to make reasonable inquiry relative to the age of the
person and the person is under 13 years of age.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to sell, give, lend or otherwise
transfer any air rifle to any person under 13 years of age except where the
relationship of parent and child, guardian and ward, or adult instructor and
pupil exists between the person and the person under 13 years of age, or where
the person stands in loco parentis to the person under 13 years of age.
(720 ILCS 535/2) (2000 Code, § 137.11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.17 CARRYING OR DISCHARGING ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person under 13 years of age to carry any air
rifle on the public streets, roads, highways or public lands within this
village, unless the person under 13 years of age carries the rifle unloaded.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle from or
across any street, sidewalk, road, highway or public land or any public place
except on a safely constructed target range.
(720 ILCS 535/3)
   (C)   Any person convicted of violating this section shall pay a fine not to
exceed $50.
(720 ILCS 535/7)
(2000 Code, § 137.12)
§ 137.18 PERMISSIVE POSSESSION.
   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, it is lawful for any person
under 13 years of age to have in his or her possession any air rifle if it is:
   (A)   Kept within his or her house of residence or other private enclosure;
   (B)   Used by the person under 13 years of age and he or she is a duly
enrolled member of any club, team or society organized for educational purposes
and maintaining as part of its facilities or having written permission to use
an indoor or outdoor rifle range under the supervision, guidance and
instruction of a responsible adult, and then only if the air rifle is actually
being used in connection with the activities of the club, team or society under
the supervision of a responsible adult; or
   (C)   Used in or on any private grounds or residence under circumstances
when the air rifle is fired, discharged or operated in a manner as not to
endanger persons or property and then only if it is used in a manner as to
prevent the projectile from passing over any grounds or space outside the
limits of such grounds or residence.
(720 ILCS 535/4) (2000 Code, § 137.13)
§ 137.19 PERMISSIVE SALES.
   The provisions of §§ 137.10 through 137.14 do not prohibit sales of air
rifles:
   (A)   By wholesale dealers or jobbers;
   (B)   To be shipped out of the state; or
   (C)   To be used at a target range operated in accordance with 720 ILCS 535/
4 or by members of the Armed Services of the United States or veterans’
organizations.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 535, § 5) (2000 Code, § 137.14)
§ 137.20 SEIZURE AND REMOVAL.
   Any police officer shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner, any air rifle sold or used in any manner in violation of
this chapter.
(720 ILCS 535/6) (2000 Code, § 137.15)
CHAPTER 138: PUBLIC MORALS NUISANCE VIOLATION
Section
   
138.01   Short title; purpose
   
138.02   Definitions
   
138.03   Street solicitation for prostitution
   
138.04   Pimping
   
138.05   Prostitution
   
138.06   Soliciting of a prostitute
   
138.07   Pandering
   
138.08   Solicitation by Internet, electronic communication device or print
media
   
138.09   Public morals nuisance violations; administrative adjudication
 
   
138.99   Penalty
§ 138.01 SHORT TITLE; PURPOSE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Public Morals Nuisance
Violation Ordinance”. The intent of this chapter is to abate prostitution and
the demand for prostitution by increasing fines for those individuals involved
in prostitution as well as those individuals patronizing persons in
prostitution.
(Ord. 4246, passed 11-17-2014)
§ 138.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PANDERING. Performing any of the following acts for any money, property,
token, object or article or anything of value:
      (1)   Compels a person to become a prostitute; or
      (2)   Arranges or offers to arrange a situation in which a person may
practice prostitution.
   PIMPING. Any person who receives any money, property, token, object or
article or anything of value from a prostitute, not for lawful consideration,
knowing it was earned in whole or in part from the practice of prostitution.
   PROSTITUTION. Performing, offering or agreeing to perform any act of sexual
penetration as defined below for any money, property, token, object or article
or anything of value, or any touching or fondling of the sex organs of one
person by another person, for any money, property, token, object or article or
anything of value, for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park,
driveway, parking lot or transportation facility or the doorways and entrance
ways to any building which fronts on any of the aforesaid places, or a motor
vehicle in or on any such place, or any other public way, within the Village of
Matteson.
   SEXUAL PENETRATION. Any contact, however slight, between the sex organ or
anus of one person by an object, the sex organ, mouth or anus of another
person, or any intrusion, however slight, of any part of the body of one person
or of any animal or object into the sex organ or anus of another person,
including, but not limited to, cunnilingus, fellatio or anal penetration.
Evidence of emission of semen is not required to prove SEXUAL PENETRATION.
   SOLICITING OF A PROSTITUTE. Performing any of the following acts:
      (1)   Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution;
      (2)   Arranges to meet a prostitute, or offers to arrange a meeting with
a prostitute; or
      (3)   Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for the
purpose of prostitution.
(Ord. 4246, passed 11-17-2014)
§ 138.03 STREET SOLICITATION FOR PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   Any person who remains or wanders about in a public place and
repeatedly beckons to, or repeatedly attempts to engage, passersby in
conversation, or repeatedly interferes with the free passage of other persons,
for the purpose of soliciting for a prostitute, shall be guilty of a violation
of this section.
   (B)   Any person who remains or wanders about in a public place and
repeatedly beckons to, or repeatedly stops, or repeatedly attempts to stop, or
repeatedly attempts to engage passersby in conversation, or repeatedly stops or
attempts to stop motor vehicles, or repeatedly interferes with the free passage
of other persons, for the purpose of pandering shall be guilty of a violation
of this section.
   (C)   Any person who responds to the beckoning of a prostitute in a public
place by inquiring about, negotiating for, accepting an offer of prostitution,
or by allowing another into his or her motor vehicle for purposes of inquiring
about, negotiating for, accepting an offer of prostitution, shall be guilty of
a violation of this section. The Village Police Department may make available
to local newspapers, radio and television stations the names of all persons
charged with violating this section.
(Ord. 4246, passed 11-17-2014) Penalty, see §
138.99
§ 138.04 PIMPING.
   Any person who receives any money, property, token, object or article or
anything of value from a prostitute, not for lawful consideration, knowing it
was earned in whole or in part from the practice of prostitution, shall be
guilty of a violation of this section.
(Ord. 4246, passed 11-17-2014) Penalty, see §
138.99
§ 138.05 PROSTITUTION.
   Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any act of sexual
penetration as defined in §
138.01 for any money, property, token, object or article or anything of value,
or any touching or fondling of the sex organs of one person by another person,
for any money, property, token, object or article or anything of value, for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification shall be guilty of a violation of
this section.
(Ord. 4246, passed 11-17-2014) Penalty, see §
138.99
§ 138.06 SOLICITING OF A PROSTITUTE.
   Any person who performs any of the following acts shall be guilty of a
violation of this section:
   (A)   Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution;
   (B)   Arranges to meet a prostitute, or offers to arrange a meeting with a
prostitute; or
   (C)   Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for the purpose
of prostitution.
(Ord. 4246, passed 11-17-2014) Penalty, see §
138.99
§ 138.07 PANDERING.
   Any person who performs any of the following acts for any money, property,
token, object or article or anything of value shall be guilty of a violation of
this section:
   (A)   Compels a person to become a prostitute;
   (B)   Arranges or offers to arrange a situation in which a person may
practice prostitution; or
   (C)   Solicitation by Internet, electronic communication device or print
media.
(Ord. 4246, passed 11-17-2014) Penalty, see §
138.99
§ 138.08 SOLICITATION BY INTERNET, ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE OR PRINT
MEDIA.
   Any person who utilizes a computer, phone, any electronic communication
device or print media (including, but not limited to, answering ads and
messages on commercial adult-themed websites or answering ads in all forms of
print media) in the commission of any of the violations set forth in this
chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this section.
(Ord. 4246, passed 11-17-2014) Penalty, see §
138.99
§ 138.09 PUBLIC MORALS NUISANCE VIOLATIONS; ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION.
   Any person issued a notice of violation by the village for violation of any
provision of this chapter may request an administrative hearing in accordance
with
Chapter 38 of the municipal code of the village.
(Ord. 4246, passed 11-17-2014)
§ 138.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of §§
138.03 through
138.08 shall be civilly liable for a public morals nuisance violation and shall
be fined not less than $500 and not more than $750.
(Ord. 4246, passed 11-17-2014)
CHAPTER 139: CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY
Section
   
139.01   Chronic nuisance property abatement
   
139.02   Definitions
   
139.03   Procedure
   
139.04   Judicial remedies
§ 139.01 CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY ABATEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any property within the village to become or
remain a chronic nuisance property in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person or person in charge to:
      (1)   Suffer or permit a property to become a chronic nuisance property;
and
      (2)   Allow a property to continue as a chronic nuisance property.
   (C)   Each day on which a violation of this chapter continues shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 4270, passed 5-4-2015)
§ 139.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the Village of Matteson or his or
her designee.
   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Property upon which three or more nuisance
activities have occurred within a 12-month period as a result of any three
separate factual events that have been independently investigated by any law
enforcement agency.
   CONTROL. The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern
conduct that occurs on that property.
   NUISANCE ACTIVITIES. Any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct,
as defined by federal, state or village ordinance:
      (1)   Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1;
      (2)   Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.;
      (3)   Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1;
      (4)   Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2 and 720 ILCS
5/24-1.5;
      (5)   Gambling as defined by 720 ILCS 5/28-1;
      (6)   Possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substances as
defined by 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.;
      (7)   Public indecency as defined by 720 ILCS 5/11-9;
      (8)   Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/
12-1 et seq.;
      (9)   Sexual abuse or related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-15 et
seq.;
      (10)   Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq.;
      (11)   Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq.;
      (12)   Possession, cultivation, manufacture, or delivery of cannabis as
defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.;
      (13)   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235
ILCS 5/1 et seq.;
      (14)   Criminal housing management as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1;
      (15)   Structure unfit for human occupancy as defined in the Village's
Property Maintenance Code;
      (16)   Unsafe structure as defined in the Village's Property Maintenance
Code;
      (17)   Unlawful structure as defined in the Village's Property
Maintenance Code;
      (18)   Multiple and serious violations of the Village's Property
Maintenance Code continuing after disposition of a housing court complaint for
those violations; and
      (19)   Activity that constitutes a violation of a felony or Class A
misdemeanor pursuant to a federal or Illinois statute.
   OWNER. Any person, partnership, land trust, or corporation having any legal
or equitable interest in the property. OWNER includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   A mortgagee in possession in who is vested:
         (a)   All or part of the legal title to the property; or
         (b)   All or part of the beneficial ownership and the rights to the
present use and enjoyment of the premises.
      (2)   An occupant who can control what occurs on the property; or
      (3)   Any person acting as an agent of an owner as defined herein.
   PERMIT. To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
   PERSON. Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, or other
entity capable of owning, occupying or using property in the village.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. Any person in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under
his or her ownership or control.
   PROPERTY. Any real property, including land and that which is affixed,
incidental, or pertinent to land, including but not limited to, any premises,
room, house, building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof,
whether permitted or not.
(Ord. 4270, passed 5-4-2015)
§ 139.03 PROCEDURE.
   When the Chief of Police of the village receives one or more police reports
documenting the occurrence of a nuisance activity on or within a property, the
Chief of Police shall independently review such reports to determine whether
they describe nuisance activities. Upon such findings, the Chief shall:
   (A)   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property is in danger
of becoming a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the property;
      (2)   A statement that the Matteson Police Department has information
that the property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise
description of the nuisance activities that may exist or that have occurred;
      (3)   Service shall be made either personally or by first class mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at
the address of the property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such
other place which is likely to give the person in charge notice of the
determination by the Chief of Police;
      (4)   A copy of the notice shall be served on the taxpayer of record at
such address as shown on the tax rolls of the county and/or the occupant, at
the address of the property, if these persons are different from the person in
charge, and shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage
prepaid; and
      (5)   The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may
be a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the
proceedings under this chapter.
   (B)   Should the person in charge fail to prevent the property from becoming
a chronic nuisance property, the Chief of Police or his designee may commence
proceedings to abate the nuisance conditions. The village shall have the right,
in its sole discretion, to pursue nuisance abatement proceedings either in the
Circuit Court of Cook County, or through administrative adjudication of
building and housing violations (as provided in the Village of Matteson
Municipal Code).
(Ord. 4270, passed 5-4-2015)
§ 139.04 JUDICIAL REMEDIES.
   (A)   In the event the village pursues a judicial abatement remedy and in
the event that a court determines a property to be a chronic nuisance property,
the court may order that the property be closed and secured against all use and
occupancy for a period of not less than 30 days, but not more than 180 days or
the court may employ any other remedy deemed by it appropriate to abate the
nuisance.
   (B)   In addition to the remedy provided in division (A) above, the violator
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $750 per day,
payable to the Village of Matteson, for each day the owner or his agent had
actual knowledge that the property was a public nuisance property and permitted
the property to remain a public nuisance property.
   (C)   In determining what remedy or remedies to employ, the court may
consider evidence of other conduct that has occurred on the property,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The disturbance of neighbors;
      (2)   The occurrence of other nuisances on or from the property; or
      (3)   The property's general reputation and/or the reputation of persons
in or frequenting the property.
   (D)   The court may authorize the village to physically secure the property
against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within the time
specified by the court. In the event that the village is authorized to secure
the property, all costs reasonably incurred by the village to affect the
closure shall be made and assessed as a lien against the property and debt to
the village. As used herein, "costs" mean those costs actually incurred by the
village for the physical securing of the property.
   (E)   The Village Building Department employee affecting the closure shall
prepare a statement of costs, and the village shall thereafter submit said
statement to the court for its review. If no objection to the statement is made
within the period described by the court, a lien in said amount may be recorded
against said property.
   (F)   Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty by
the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the village.
(Ord. 4270, passed 5-4-2015)
CHAPTER 140: CRIME-FREE HOUSING
Section
   
140.01   Definitions
   
140.02   Establishment of registry
   
140.03   Residential rental license
§ 140.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, and the interpretation and application
thereof the following terms, phrases, words, and their deviations shall have
the meanings given herein, unless the context in which they are used shall
indicate otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the singular number include the
plural number and words in the plural number include the singular number. Words
or phrases not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police of the Village of Matteson or his or
her designee.
   CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY. Property upon which three or more nuisance
activities have occurred within a 12-month period as a result of any three
separate factual events that have been independently investigated by any law
enforcement agency.
   CONTROL. The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract, or govern
conduct that occurs on that property.
   DESIGNATED AGENT/MANAGER. Any person or business entity hired or appointed
to by the owner and as such is responsible for inspection, maintaining, and
securing the property that is being rented for residential purposes.
   DWELLING UNIT. A house or apartment used to provide a living accommodation.
   LANDLORD. A person, trustee, corporation, business entity, condominium
owner, townhouse owners, homeowners' association or other title holder engaged
in renting, leasing, or operating a dwelling unit.
   NUISANCE ACTIVITIES. Any of the following activities, behaviors, or conduct,
as defined by federal, state or village ordinance:
      (1)   Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 ILCS 5/26-1;
      (2)   Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq;
      (3)   Mob action as defined in 720 ILCS 5/25-1;
      (4)   Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 ILCS 5/24-1.2 and 720 ILS
5/24-1.5;
      (5)   Gambling as defined by 720 ILCS 5/28-1;
      (6)   Possession, manufacture, or delivery of controlled substances as
defined by 720 ILCS 570/401 et seq;
      (7)   Public indecency as defined by 720 ILCS 5/11-9;
      (8)   Assault or battery or any related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/
12-1;
      (9)   Sexual abuse or related offense as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-15 et
seq;
      (10)   Prostitution as defined in 720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq;
      (11)   Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq;
      (12)   Possession, cultivation, manufacture, or delivery of cannabis as
defined in 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq;
      (13)   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235
ILCS 5/1 et seq;
      (14)   Criminal housing management as defined in 720 ILCS 5/12-5.1;
      (15)   Structure unfit for human occupancy as defined in the village's
Property Maintenance Code;
      (16)   Unsafe structure as defined in the village's Property Maintenance
Code;
      (17)   Unlawful structure as defined in the village's Property
Maintenance Code;
      (18)   Multiple and serious violations of the village's Property
Maintenance Code continuing after disposition of a housing court complaints for
those violations; and
      (19)   Activity that constitutes a violation of a felony or Class A
misdemeanor pursuant to a federal or Illinois statute.
   OWNER. Any person, partnership, land trust, or corporation having any legal
or equitable interest in the property. OWNER includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   A mortgagee in possession in who is vested:
         (a)   All or part of the legal title to the property; or
         (b)   All or part of the beneficial ownership and the rights to the
present use and enjoyment of the premises.
      (2)   An occupant who can control what occurs on the property; or
      (3)   Any person acting as an agent of an owner defined herein.
   PERMIT. To suffer, allow, consent to acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly assent or agree to the doing of an act.
   PERSON. Any natural person, association, partnership, corporation, or other
entity capable of owning, occupying, or using property in the village.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. Any person in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under
his or her ownership or control.
   PROPERTY. Any real property, including land and that which is affixed,
incidental, or pertinent to land, including but not limited to, any premises,
room, house, building, or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof,
whether permitted or not.
   TENANT. Any person who resides in a dwelling unit, regardless of whether or
not a written lease has been executed between the TENANT and the landlord.
(Ord. 4570, passed 9-18-2023)
§ 140.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGISTRY.
   Pursuant to the provision of this chapter, the village, or its designee,
shall establish a registry cataloging each rental property within the village,
containing the information required by this section.
(Ord. 4570, passed 9-18-2023)
§ 140.02 RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE.
   (A)   License requirement. No person, corporation, partnership or other
business entity, condominium, townhouse, cooperative membership association or
homeowners' association shall engage in the business of renting any dwelling
units to the public, the operation of a rental dwelling unit, rooming house, or
rooming unit, unless a valid residential license has been issued by the village
for the specific location. A dwelling unit may not be rented, and no new lease
may be entered into, and no lease may be renewed until a license is secured
pursuant to this section, or while a license is suspended or revoked.
   (B)   Exception. The license requirement pursuant to this section shall not
apply to group homes governed by the Specialized Living Centers Act, 405 ILCS
2511, et seq., dealing with the developmentally disabled, or to other similar
uses governed by the state or federal laws, rules, or regulations.
   (C)   Application. The verified application for a residential rental license
shall be made in the name of the legal owner of the premises to be rented and
shall be submitted to the village on a form to be provided by the village. The
application shall identify the following:
      (1)   Full name, legal address, and date of birth of legal owner; if
owned by a trust, a trust disclosure is required. If owned by a trust or entity
other than an individual, the owner's name must be on the application plus the
name and date of birth of the agent or manager representing the owner.
      (2)   The address of the building containing the rental dwelling units
for which the license is requested.
      (3)   Three contacts, including the property owner(s), the names,
addresses, and telephone numbers for 24-hour contact in case of an emergency;
      (4)    The owner's agent for service of process;
      (5)   Any such other information the village may reasonably require.
   (D)   Registration of rental property. Upon being approved for a residential
rental property license, every owner, or landlord of rental property, shall
prior to permitting occupancy thereof by any person, register the property with
the village or its designee. A separate registration is required for each
rental property.
   (E)   Applicant residency. Any applicant for a residential rental license
shall reside in the village or within 20 miles of the village. No residential
rental license shall be issued or renewed for a nonresident applicant, unless
such applicant designates in writing to the Village Clerk the name of a
designated agent, for the receipt of notice and service of notice for violation
of provisions of this section and for service of process. Such designation
shall be made in writing and shall accompany each application.
   (F)   License fee.
      (1)   The annual fee for a residential rental license shall be paid at
the time of the application as follows:
         (a)   One dwelling unit or single-family residence: $200.
         (b)   Two to four dwelling units: $300.
         (c)   Five to 12 dwelling units: $400.
         (d)   13 or greater dwelling units (per each unit): $600.
      (2)   Neither the sale of property nor the suspension or revocation of a
license shall entitle an applicant to a refund of any license fee.
   (G)   Renewal. Application for renewal of a residential rental license may
be made in the same manner as for a new license. An application renewal of the
rental residential license may be made 60 days prior to the expiration of the
present license. Any such application for renewal not made prior to the
expiration of the existing license shall be subject to a late fee recurring 10%
of registration and renewal fee every 30 days.
   (H)   Transferability. No license shall be transferable. As such, each new
owner of a rental dwelling must obtain a new license.
   (I)   Residential rental license requirements. The Village Clerk shall not
issue or renew a residential rental unless the renal dwelling unit, along with
its common areas and appurtenances has undergone a public safety/crime
prevention inspection. Rental dwelling units that undergo a change in ownership
shall be subject to a rental dwelling unit public safety/crime prevention
inspection, notwithstanding any other required inspection as a condition
precedent to transfer of title. The owner shall be provided with an inspection
report describing any condition that eels to meet the public safety/crime
prevention guidelines and shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to correct
such conditions. Failure to correct said conditions shall result in a
suspension or revocation of an existing license or, in the case of a new
application, the denial of a license or revocation.
   (J)   Term of license. A residential rental license shall be issued for a
period of one calendar year. Such licenses shall expire December 31st next
after issuance unless previously revoked. The license fees shall be made
payable to the village. Said fees shall not be prorated.
   (K)   Required reporting. Every owner or designated agent shall provide
written notice to the Village Clerk of any change in the designated agent or
change in ownership within seven days of changing the designated agent, or
after having conveyed or otherwise transferred or disposed of the legal control
of any licensed dwelling. Such notice shall include the name and address of the
person succeeding to the ownership or control of such dwelling unit.
   (L)   Annual inspection. Every rental dwelling unit subject to this section,
along with its common areas and appurtenances, shall be subject to an annual
public safety/crime prevention inspections by the village at reasonable times
and in a reasonable manner to ensure continuing compliance with this section
and with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations. Whenever it appears,
pursuant to an inspection or otherwise, that conditions or practices exist that
violate the provisions of this section or any applicable laws, rules, or
regulations, the village shall serve written notice upon a licensee of such
violation, providing for what action is necessary to correct the violation and
a time by which violation must be corrected. Violations not corrected within
the time set forth in the written notice shall result in a residential rental
license suspension or revocation.
   (M)   Annual inspection fees. The annual fee for an ESI inspection shall be
as follows:
      (1)   Single-family: $75.
      (2)   Single-family with sprinkler: $125.
      (3)   Apartments (per each unit): $75.
   (N)   Crime-free housing seminar.
      (1)   All applicants for a residential rental license and all persons who
administer, manage, or control the operation of any rental dwelling must attend
a crime-free housing seminar, administered by the Matteson Police Department or
by any other approved municipal agency within three months of application for a
residential rental license. In the event that a seminar is not attended within
said three-month period, the residential rental license shall be denied,
suspended, or revoked. If a property owner hires, changes, replaces, or adds
any persons or persons to administer, manage, or control the operation of a
rental dwelling unit, the village shall be notified upon said change and that
person or persons must attend the crime-free housing seminar within three
months of said change. Failure to do so shall result in the suspension or
revocation of a residential rental license. All persons who are issued a
residential rental license and all persons who administer, manage, or control
the operation of the dwelling unit shall attend the seminar every three years.
Failure to do shall result in a suspension or revocation of a residential
license.
      (2)   Attendance records. The Chief of Police shall designate a Crime-
Free Housing Coordinator, who shall maintain a list of those persons who have
attended a crime-free housing seminar, the date of attendance, and verification
that the owner, agent, or designee is eligible to obtain, maintain or renewal
residential rental license.
   (O)   Crime-free lease agreement addendum. Every cooperative housing
agreement, lease, renewal of lease or other such agreement for the rent or
lease of any residential property shall utilize the “crime free lease
addendum.” The “crime-free lease addendum” shall be attached to every
residential lease.
   (P)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section,
the village shall not enforce its crime-free housing program based on:
      (1)   Contact made to police or other emergency services, if the contact
was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence or sexual
violence; the intervention or emergency assistance was needed to respond to or
prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or the contact was made by, on
behalf of, or otherwise concerns of an individual with a disability and the
purpose of the contact was related to that individual's disability;
      (2)   Incident(s) of actual or threatened domestic violence or sexual
violence against a tenant, household member, or guest occurring in the dwelling
unit or on the premises; or
      (3)   Criminal activity or a village ordinance violation occurring in the
dwelling unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic violence
or sexual violence, engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's household,
guest, or other party, and against a tenant, household member, guest, or other
party.
      (4)   The exceptions listed are not applicable to the actual perpetrators
of domestic violence or sexual violence occurring in the dwelling unit or on
the premises who shall be subject to penalty, including but not limited to
abatement and/or eviction.
   (Q)   Violation of crime-free addendum. It shall be unlawful for residential
property owner, administrator, manager, or person in control of the operation
of any rental dwelling unit to permit any person to occupy any residential
rental property in violation of any provision of the crime-free lease addendum
set forth above.
   (R)   Administrative adjudication of violations. Any violation of this
section shall be subject to adjudication hearings of this code.
   (S)   Appeal; reinstatement of license. A person whose residential rental
license has been denied, suspended, or revoked shall be entitled to an
adjudication hearing upon request made in wring and shall be filed with the
Village Manager within ten days following the denial, issuance of a suspension
or revocation. If, in the case of an inspection violation-related suspension or
revocation, the village finds upon a re-inspection that the violations have
been corrected and the rental dwelling unit is in compliance, the suspension of
an existing license shall be rescinded, or, in the case of a new license
application, the denial, imposition of a suspension or revocation shall be
lifted, and a license shall be issued.
(Ord. 4570, passed 9-18-2023)
Statutory reference:
   Exceptions; criminal activity, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.5
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION PLAN
      
152.   FLOODPLAIN AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CODE
      
153.   SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION REGULATIONS
      
154.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
155.   TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
      
156.   COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
      
157.   LAND USE PLAN
      
158.   ZONING CODE
      
159.   RESERVED
      
160.   SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTALS
      
161.   FORECLOSURE, VACANT AND RENTAL PROPERTY
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Code
   
150.001   Adoption of Building Code
   
150.002   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes
   
150.003   Adoption of Residential Building Code
   
150.004   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes
Accessibility Code
   
150.005   Adoption of Illinois Accessibility Code
Existing Building Code
   
150.010   Adoption of Existing Building Code
   
150.011   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes
Property Maintenance Code
   
150.015   Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code
   
150.016   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes
Plumbing Code
   
150.030   Adoption of Plumbing Code
   
150.031   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes
Electrical Code
   
150.045   Adoption of Electrical Code
   
150.046   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes
Elevator Safety Code
   
150.060   Adoption of an Elevator Safety Code
Mechanical Code
   
150.075   Adoption of Mechanical Code
   
150.076   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes
Fuel Gas Code
   
150.090   Adoption of Fuel Gas Code
   
150.091   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes
Energy Conservation Code
   
150.105   Adoption of Energy Conservation Code
Swimming Pool and Spa Code
   
150.120   Adoption of Swimming Pool and Spa Code
   
150.121   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes
 
   
150.999   Penalty
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.001 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of each which are on file in the office of
the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Building
Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix Chapters C, F, H105, H106, I, K, as
published by the International Code Council, Inc. be and is hereby adopted as
the Building Code of the village, for the control of buildings and structures
as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Building Code are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part of, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions,
insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.002.
(2000 Code, § 150.001) (Ord. 1643, passed 12-2-1996; Ord. 1927, passed 10-6-
2003; Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 150.002 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES.
   (A)   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Matteson.
   (B)   Section 101.4.3. Replace "International Plumbing Code" with "Illinois
Plumbing Code"; Replace "International Private Sewage Disposal Code" with
"Illinois Plumbing Code".
   (C)   Section 101.4.6. Replace "International Energy Conservation Code" with
"Illinois Energy Conservation Code [71 Ill. Admin. Code 600.100 et seq.].
   (D)   Section 105.2. Delete: Items 1 through 8 and 12.
   (E)   Section 107.1. Revise the second sentence to read: "The construction
documents shall be prepared by an Illinois licensed design professional."
   (F)   Add new section 107.6. As-Built Drawings. Upon completion of
construction, a set of as built drawings shall be submitted to the Village in
PDF or other approved format.
   (G)   Section 109. Insert subsection 109.7 Fee Schedule. All fees shall be
in accordance with the current fee schedule for the Village of Matteson as
adopted by the Board of Trustees and from time to time amended.
   (H)   Section 113. Add subsection 113.4 Appeals Board. The Village Board of
Trustees shall serve as the board of appeals. Add subsection 113.5 Appeals
Process. Appeals shall be made to the Building Official then to the Plan
Commission then to the Village Board of Trustees.
   (I)   Section 403.1. Add subsection 403.1.1 Gas Curb. The garage floor shall
be poured a minimum of 4 inches below the top of the foundation or have a
concrete gas curb a minimum of 4 inches tall at all walls of the garage
abutting the structure.
   (J)   Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.11 are hereby deleted and replaced with
903.2.1. An automatic sprinkler system shall be provided throughout any
occupancy use except accessory structures 1.000 square feet or less.
   (K)   Section 1013.2. Rename section to "Low-level exit signs in Group R-
1 and other occupancies."
   (L)   Section 1013.2. Add the following after the first sentence: "Exit and
exit access doors leading from a space that has an occupant load greater than
fifty shall be marked with an additional low-level exit sign.
   (M)   Section 1101.1 Scope. Revise to read: "The provisions of the Illinois
Accessibility Code shall control the design and construction of facilities for
individuals with disabilities." Delete the remainder of Chapter 11.
   (N)   Section 1809.12 Timber Footings deleted in its entirety.
   (O)   Section 2901.1 Scope. Delete and replace with: "Plumbing for new and
existing structures shall comply with the Illinois Plumbing Code."
   (P)   Insert subsection 2901.2 Stormwater Drainage. Stormwater drainage
shall comply with Chapter 11 of the International Plumbing Code.
   (Q)   Section 3002.4 Elevator car to accommodate ambulance stretcher. Revise
first sentence to read: "Where elevators are provided in buildings, not less
than one elevator shall be provided for fire department emergency access to all
floors."
   (R)   Section 3301. Add Subsection 3301.3 Hours of Construction.
Construction or activities related to construction shall be permitted only
during the following times:
 
Weekdays             7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Saturdays            8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Sundays and holidays 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
 
   (S)   Section 3303.4 Vacant Lot. Add subsection 3303.4.1 Requirements. All
building materials shall be removed, utilities shall be disconnected and
capped, fill shall be clean, grading shall be made to drain to an approved
drainage system. The grade shall match adjacent area and be completed with top
soil and seed or sod. The vacant property shall not have standing or ponding
water.
(2000 Code, § 150.002) (Ord. 1450, passed 9-17-1990; Ord. 1480, passed 9-16-
1991; Ord. 1643, passed 12-2-1996; Ord. 1927, passed 10-6-2003; Ord. 4186,
passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 150.003 ADOPTION OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Residential
Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, D, F, G, H, J, K, M,
and O, as published by the International Code Council, Inc. be and is hereby
adopted as the residential building code of the village, for regulating the
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in
height in the village, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection
of fees there for; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions
and terms of such International Residential Code, 2018 Edition, published by
the International Code Council on file in the office of the village are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part of, as if fully set out in this section,
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.004.
(2000 Code, § 150.003) (Ord. 1926, passed 10-6-2003; Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-
2013; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 150.004 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised.
   (A)   Section R101.1. Insert: Village of Matteson.
   (B)   Section R105.2. Delete: Items 1 through 5, and item 10, under
"Building".
   (C)   Section R106.1. Revise the second sentence to read: "The construction
documents shall be prepared by an Illinois licensed design professional."
   (D)   Section R106.2. Delete the first sentence and replace with the
following:
      The construction documents submitted with the application for permit
shall be accompanied by a site plan showing to scale the size and location of
new construction/improvements, and existing structures on the site, distances
from lot lines, the established street grades, the proposed finished grades,
top of foundation, elevations at the property corners and any additional spot
elevations required to indicate drainage patterns; and it shall be drawn in
accordance with an accurate boundary survey by a registered Illinois
Professional Land Surveyor.
   (E)   Add the following sections:
      Section R106.2.1 Spotted Plat of Survey. Upon installation of the
foundation the permit holder shall submit a spotted plat of survey showing to
scale the size and location of the new construction and existing structures on
the site, distances from lot lines, and top of foundation drawn in accordance
with an accurate boundary line survey by a registered Illinois Professional
Land Surveyor.
      Section R106.2.2 Final Plat of Survey. Upon completion of the new
construction the permit holder shall submit a final plat of survey showing to
scale the size and location all improvements, distances from lot lines,
proposed and final grades, spot elevations and elevations at property corners,
proposed and existing top of foundation.
      Section R107.5 Temporary Driveway. A temporary driveway consisting of a
minimum of 2-inch size stone shall be installed after the foundation is
constructed and before any further construction.
      Section R108.4.1 Cash Bond. The Village may request the deposit of a cash
bond in an amount determined by the permit fee schedule to insure the
restoration of public property that may be damaged during the construction of
the improvements for which a permit is sought. In the event there is damage to
public property as a result of the construction activities for which the permit
was sought and proper restoration was not performed, the bond will be
liquidated to pay for such repairs as needed. Such bond or remaining portion
thereof will be returned to the applicant upon verification of completion of
any required restoration work.
      Section R115 Hours of Construction. Construction or activities related to
construction shall be permitted only during the following times:
 
Weekdays             7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Saturdays            8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
Sundays and holidays 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
 
   (F)   Table R301.2(1). Insert the following data into the table:
Ground snow load                          30 lbs/sq. ft.
Wind design (speed)                       115 mph
Wind design (topographic effects)         No
Seismic design category                   B
Subject to damage from (weathering)       Severe
Subject to damage from (frost line depth) 42" below grade
Subject to damage from (termite)          Moderate to heavy
Winter design temperature                 -5°F
Ice barrier underlayment required         Yes
Flood hazards                             No
Air freezing index                        2,000
Mean annual temperature                   48°F
Elevation                                 758
Latitude                                  42
Winter heating                            1
Summer cooling                            88°
Altitude correction factor                .98
Indoor design temperature                 72°F
Design temperature cooling                75°F
Heating temperature differential          (72)
Cooling temperature differential          15
Wind velocity heating                     15
Wind velocity cooling                     7 ½
Coincident wet bulb                       74
Daily range                               M
Winter humidity                           40
Summer differential                       2.25
 
   (G)   Section R302.2.2, Item 1. Revise to read:
      "Where a fire sprinkler system is provided, the common wall shall be not
less than a 2-hour Fire-resistance-rated wall assembly tested in accordance
with ASTM E119, UL 263 or section 703.3 of the International Building Code.
   (H)   Section R304.1. Revise to read:
      "Habitable rooms shall have a floor area of not less than 100 square
feet."
   (I)   Section R304.2. Revise to read:
      "Habitable rooms shall not be less than 8 feet in any horizontal
dimension."
   (J)   Section R305.1.
      Revise the first sentence to read:
         "Habitable space shall have a ceiling height of not less than 8 feet."
      Revise the second sentence to read:
         "Bathrooms, toilet rooms, laundry rooms and basements shall have a
ceiling height of not less than 7 feet 6 inches."
   (K)   Section R309.1. Add subsection R309.1.1 Gas Curb. The garage floor
shall be poured a minimum of 4 inches below the top of the foundation or have a
concrete gas curb a minimum of 4 inches tall at all walls of the garage
abutting the house. The gas curb shall be placed before the garage floor is
placed or be monolithic and be part of the garage floor.
   (L)   Section R311.3. Add the following sentence to the end:
      "All exterior door landings shall be supported by a frost protected
footing/foundation."
   (M)   R324.1. Add subsection R324.1.1 Raceway requirements. Solar panel
conduit shall be placed in the attic and not on the roof covering. The conduit
shall be located as to not interfere with proper attic access. Exceptions: 1.
Cathedral Ceilings. 2. Approval from the village inspector prior to
installation. No conduit or other items shall be placed in the fire department
setback or accessible pathways. Solar panels shall be a minimum of 3 feet from
all walls intersecting with the roof area.
   (N)   Section R401.3. Add:
      "All dwellings shall be equipped with gutters, downspouts, extensions
and/or splash blocks adequately designed and installed to accommodate roof
drainage. All accessory structures with a footprint of larger than 144 square
feet shall be equipped with gutters, downspouts, extensions and/or splash
blocks adequately designed and installed to accommodate roof drainage."
   (O)   Section R402.1. Delete the entire section and replace with the
following:
      Wood foundation systems shall not be permitted for dwelling units.
Detached accessory structures with a footprint of 144 square feet or less may
be placed on an approved wood platform provided that wood in direct contact
with the ground shall be protected against decay in accordance with Section
R317. Such platform shall be anchored to the ground with an approved anchoring
system designed to withstand basic wind speed forces as determined by Figure
R301.2 (5) A.
   (P)   Section R403.1.4.1. Revise to read:
      "Except where otherwise protected from frost, foundation walls, piers,
fences, decks, and other permanent supports of buildings and structures shall
be protected from frost by one or more of the following:"
      Rest of section to remain. Delete 403.1.4.1 delete exceptions 2 and 3.
R403.3 Frost-protected shallow foundations. Delete in its entirety.
   (Q)   Section R405.1. Add the following to the end of the first paragraph:
      "Sump pumps shall drain to storm sewer for all new construction unless
directed otherwise by the village. Sump pump drainage shall discharge no closer
than 10'-0" to property lines. The drain pipe shall be 1 size larger than the
sump pump discharge pipe. Discharge shall not create standing or ponding water.
   (R)   Add the following:
      Section R506.3 Accessory Structures. Accessory structures exceeding 144
square feet shall be supported by a concrete foundation and floor system as
follows: the concrete shall be 12 inches thick at the perimeter of the
foundation, which thickness shall extend a minimum of 6 inches inward before
sloping at a 45 degree angle to meet the bottom of a 5-inch slab floor. The
floor shall be reinforced with a minimum of #10,6 x 6 wire mesh or equivalent.
The structure shall be anchored to the foundation with ½ inch x 8 inch anchor
bolts, nuts and washers, with bolts extending a minimum of 6 inches into the
concrete and placed 4 feet on center and within 2 per bottom plate and no more
than 12 inches from the corners. Accessory structures over 144 square feet
shall be provided an electrical circuit for a lighting outlet and a ground
fault protected receptacle outlet. Accessory structures shall be located a
minimum of 10'-0" from any structure used as a dwelling except wood decks
attached to the dwelling, pergolas and gazebos with no walls.
      Section R506.4 Concrete Flatwork. Driveways, driveway approaches, garage
floors and public walks shall consist of 5 inches of concrete placed on a 5-
inch base course consisting of clean graded and compacted gravel, crushed stone
or crushed blast furnace slag passing a two-inch sieve. Concrete slabs for
patios, service walks and similar structures shall consist of 4 inches of
concrete with a minimum 6 x 6 welded wire fabric reinforcing placed on a 4-inch
base course consisting of clean graded and compacted gravel, crushed stone or
crushed blast furnace slag passing a two-inch sieve. Driveways shall only lead
to approved off-street parking spacers). The driveway approach (city parkway)
shall have a concrete thickness no less than 6 inches in depth with a width no
greater the 25 feet parallel to the street.
      The underlying soil shall be undisturbed and possess adequate load
bearing capacity. Disturbed soils such as found in the over dig area
surrounding a foundation shall be allowed to settle for minimum of six months
or adequate bearing capacity shall be determined by a geotechnical evaluation.
The specified compressive strength of concrete shall be as set forth in Section
R402.2.
   (S)   Section R507.3.2. Delete exceptions.
   (T)   Section R703.1. Add subsection:
      R703.1.3 Dissimilar Materials. Removal of dissimilar siding materials is
required for siding replacement and repairs.. Siding, soffit, fascia material
shall match throughout the entire structure. Special designs shall be approved
by the Village prior to installation.
   (U)   Section R703.3. Add the following sentence to the end: New siding
shall be installed over a sound flat substrate. Installing siding over existing
lap or lap style siding is prohibited.
   (V)   Add Section R908.7 Dissimilar Materials. Removal of dissimilar roofing
materials is required for reroofing. Roof material shall match throughout the
entire structure.
   (W)   Chapters 25-33 are hereby deleted. For amendments to the electrical
chapters, see the National Electrical Code (NEC) amendments in 150.046.
   (X)   Section M1503.1 Domestic Cooking Exhaust. Add the following: All
domestic kitchen cooking appliances shall be provided with a ducted range hood.
   (Y)   Section M1503.3 Exhaust Discharge. Delete exception.
(2000 Code, § 150.004) (Ord. 1926, passed 10-6-2003; Ord. 1954, passed 1-20-
2004; Ord. 2090, passed 11-20-2006; Ord. 3053, passed 4-7-2008; Ord. 4186,
passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 150.005 ADOPTION OF ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE.
   The provisions of the Illinois Accessibility Code (71 Ill. Adm. Code 400)
shall control the design and construction of facilities for accessibility for
individuals with disabilities.
(Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
EXISTING BUILDING CODE
§ 150.010 ADOPTION OF EXISTING BUILDING CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Existing
Building Code, 2018 Edition, as published by the International Code Council,
Inc. be and is hereby adopted as the Existing Building Code of the village, for
regulating and governing repair, alteration, change of occupancy, additions and
relocation of existing buildings, including historic buildings, as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Existing Building Code, 2018 Edition on file in
the office of the Village Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part
of, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 150.006.
(Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 150.011 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are revised.
   (A)   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Matteson.
   (B)   Section 1401.2. Insert: December 2, 1996.
   (C)   Section 1301.1. Insert: Regardless of the outcome of the evaluation,
buildings shall be sprinklered in accordance with the International Building
Code.
(Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 150.015 ADOPTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, including Appendix Chapter A, as published by
the International Code Council, Inc. be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the village, for regulating and governing the conditions
and maintenance of all property and buildings and providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for human
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for
human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as
herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition on file in
the office of the Village Clerk are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part
of, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.016.
(2000 Code, § 150.015) (Ord. 1645, passed 12-2-1996; Ord. 1930, passed 10-6-
2003; Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 150.016 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are revised.
   (A)   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Matteson.
   (B)   Section 103.5. Revise to read: "The fees for activities and services
performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this
code shall be as indicated in the most recent fee schedule adopted by the
President and Board of Trustees."
   (C)   Add the following:
      Section 105.5 Certificate of Occupancy. No owner, agent or person in
charge of a dwelling unit or a commercial or industrial structure or space
within shall allow any person to occupy the same as tenant or lessee or for
valuable consideration unless said dwelling unit or structure shall have been
inspected subsequent to its most recent occupancy and determined to be in
compliance with all of the provisions of this code as well as all health and
building laws as evidenced by a certificate of occupancy issued by the Building
Official.
      Upon request of the owner, agent or other authorized person, an inspector
will be available at an appointed time at a minimum of within two working days
or some other time as mutually agreed upon to perform an inspection.
      If such inspection establishes compliance with all of the provisions of
this code and all other health and buildings laws of the Village of Matteson,
then the Building Official shall issue a certificate of occupancy for said
dwelling unit, commercial or industrial structure or space.
      Section 105.6 Annual Inspection of Multi-Family Buildings. Every owner,
agent or person in charge of a multi-family building within 15 days of
notification by the village shall apply for an annual inspection of said multi-
family building. The inspection shall be limited to the exterior and common or
public areas. This inspection shall be in addition to occupancy inspections.
      Section 109.7 Boarding. The windows and doors of all structures, whether
occupied or not shall be enclosed by transparent materials designed for such
purpose. The material shall secure the building and be able to withstand impact
without breaking. The transparent materials shall be customarily used for such
purposes and shall not be enclosed by boarding or similar methods of enclosure
security of the property. But not as a substitute for or in place of customary
materials used for windows or doors.
   (D)   Section 111.2. Delete and replace with the following:
      Section 111.2 Membership of Board. The Board of Appeals shall have the
same membership as the Village Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (E)   Section 302.4 Weeds. Insert: Six Inches (6").
   (F)   Section 302.4 Weeds. Add the following sentence before the final
paragraph:
      Building frontage and fence lines shall be maintained free of tree
saplings and overgrown bushes and vegetation.
   (G)   Add the following:
      Section 302.8.1 Control of Shopping Carts. It shall be the responsibility
of the owner or the agent having charge of a shopping establishment to maintain
control of shopping carts and similar devices or equipment and to retrieve any
such shopping carts removed from the premises or in a location not approved for
storage. Shopping carts may be stored outside provided they are stored on the
premises of the shopping establishment in a designated area on a paved surface.
The Director of Community Development or designee may approve alternate storage
arrangements. The village may remove or cause to be removed any shopping carts
that due to their location are causing a public safety hazard. The cost of
removal shall be the responsibility of the owner or agent in charge.
   (H)   Section 304.14 Insect Screens. Insert: March 1 to November 30.
   (I)   Section 307.3.2. Change the first sentence to read:
      The owner of every establishment producing rubbish or garbage shall
provide and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-proof containers
with tight-fitting covers. The owner shall provide an enclosure with a 6 foot
apron as wide as the enclosure constructed of 6 inch thick concrete slab to
support the weight of a waste disposal truck. The slab and approach shall be
place on a 4 inch stone base and reinforced with a minimum of 6 by 6 welded
wire fabric.
      Add the following:
      The occupant of every dwelling unit shall be responsible for placing
rubbish and garbage containers out for collection and removing them after
collection. Upon removal the containers shall be placed to the rear of the
building so that no container is visible from the street in front.
   (J)   Section 602.3 Heat Supply. Insert: October 1 to May 15.
   (K)   Section 602.4. Occupiable work space. Insert: October 1 to May 15.
   (L)   Section 302.2. Add:
      A)   Sump pump, down spouts extensions, or other drain lines or devises
shall be directed and not to be within 10 feet of sidewalks, driveways or
neighboring property.
      B)   No drain lines shall be placed under sidewalk or driveway without
approved design by permit.
      C)   All back yard drain lines are to be directed towards the storm
drain; no drain line shall cause the flooding of utility devices in the
easement area.
      D)   This code applies to holes, ruts along driveways or in yards and
along sidewalks.
   (M)   Section 302.3. Add:
      A)   All commercial parking spaces shall be striped and clearly visible
marked according to its design, this includes disability spaces, fire lanes and
no parking areas.
      B)   Potholes, cracking, or crumbling asphalt, concrete or brick surfaces
must be repaired so as not to cause tripping or other hazards.
      C)   Residential driveways that are asphalt must be seal coated and
maintained for decay or weathering.
      D)   All concrete or brick driveways, all cracks or holes or decay must
be filled or kept in maintained appearance.
   (N)   Section 302.4. Add:
      A)   No Bushes, Tree limbs, Shrubs or other vegetation can obstruct
egresses, pathways, sidewalks, driveways, or alleyways.
      B)   For properties with alleyways, it is the responsibility of the
property owner or agent to keep all vegetation, weeds, bushes, shrubs, and
trees on their property trimmed and cut back to their property line or fence
line so as not to obstruct alleys.
      C)   It is the property owner or agent's responsibility to keep all
vegetation from growing into gutters, down spouts, roofs and covering widow
egresses, doorways, or hatches.
      D)   This Code includes residential and commercial properties cutting of
grass and weeds in parkways.
      E)   No landscaping, planting or decorative features are to be placed in
the parkway without permission and approved by Zoning, Community Development
Director, or Public Works Director.
   (O)   Section 302.8. Add:
      A)   A licensed vehicle larger than a B plate can not be stored or kept
on property or on driveway, this would include Box trucks, Commercial trucks,
large vans, Bus or RV's.
      B)   Trailers, Boats, Camper, or anything towed by a motor vehicle cannot
be parked or stored on driveways.
      C)   All vehicles with B plate and smaller items that are towed by a
motor vehicle must be parked on an approved surface (Concrete, asphalt or brick
paved) on the side or back but not to be past the front of the residence.
      D)   Any vehicle or towed items that are covered must be maintained and
in compliance with the section 302.8 of the code. All covers must be in good
repair (no tears, worn, ripped etc.) and secured to the covered item.
      E)   No vehicles shall be parked in alleyways or in front of garages on
alleyways. vehicles shall be placed in the garage or on an approved parking
surface on the property.
   (P)   Section 304.3. Add:
      This code will also apply to properties on alley’s, address numbers
should be placed on garage, shed, or fence facing the alleyway.
   (Q)   Section 304.8. Add:
      A)   All exterior holiday decor shall be removed within thirty days after
the holiday. This includes lawn decorations, house decorations and any lighting
that is seasonal.
      B)   Any non-seasonal lighting on structure or landscaping must be kept
in safe and non- hazardous condition.
   (R)   Section 308. Add:
      A)   This code includes alleyway and parkways.
   (S)   Section 308.3.2. Add:
      A)   Containers shall be placed at the rear of the building so that no
containers are visible from the street.
      B)   Containers and trash can be placed at the curb at 12pm (noon) the
day before collection and must be off the curb by 7 am the following day.
(2000 Code, § 150.016) (Ord. 1645, passed 12-2-1996; Ord. 1804, passed 5-7-
2001; Ord. 1930, passed 10-6-2003; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021; Ord. 4560,
passed 5-15-2023)
PLUMBING CODE
§ 150.030 ADOPTION OF PLUMBING CODE.
   (A)   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of
the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the Illinois Plumbing Code,
77 Ill. Admin. Code 890, as published by the Illinois Department of Public
Health, be and is hereby adopted as the plumbing code of the village for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Plumbing Code
are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of, as if fully set out in this
section.
   (B)   Pursuant to 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3730.307(c) (4) and subject to the
Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Admin. Code 890) and the Lawn Irrigation
Contractor and Lawn Sprinkler System Registration Code (77 Ill. Admin. Code
892), all new and replacement plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers
installed after the effective date of this section shall bear the WaterSense
label (as designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency
WaterSense Program), when such labeled fixtures are available.
(2000 Code, § 150.025) (Ord. 1650, passed 1-6-1997; Ord. 1931, passed 10-6-
2003; Ord. 2023, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 4296, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 4476,
passed 10-18-2021)
§ 150.031 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised; the following sections or
subsections are not adopted and specifically excluded in their entirety, unless
otherwise specified.
   (A)   Section 890.320. Delete subpart (1) Plastic Pipe joints, items number
1 and 2.
   (B)   Section 890. Appendix A Table A, Approved Building Drainage/Vent pipe.
Delete item 12 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe with Cellular Core and footnote 4.
   (C)   Section 890 Appendix A, Table A. Approved materials for Water Service
Pipe. Delete Items 1, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12.
   (D)   Section 890, Appendix A, Table A. Approved Materials for Water
Distribution Pipe, Items 2, 5, 7, 8, and 9.
   (E)   Section 890.210 Materials. Shall be amended to add at the end of
section 890.210 the following:
      j.   All copper water tubing, when installed underground shall be a
minimum type K, and when copper tubing in used above grade shall be a minimum
Type L copper. All water service lines shall be sized per 890 Table N, Water
Supply Fixture Unit, with service pipe no less than 1 inch in size.
   (F)   Section 890.330 Special joints (c) Slip joint. Shall be amended to
delete the reference to CPVC potable water applications.
   (G)   Section 890.340 Use of joints. Shall be amended to add the following
language to the end of item (I) Copper Water Tube.
      (1)   Flared joint adapter shall be required at all water service supply
lines two (2) inches or less with full port ball valve upstream of the water
meter.
      (2)   Soldered and or braided fittings shall not be installed below
grade.
   (H)   Section 890.420 pipe cleanouts. Add item number 6 under subsection (a)
to read as follows: On multiple unit construction a cleanout shall be extended
to the exterior of the foundation at the end of the building drain runes).
   (I)   890.1360 Sanitary waste below sewer. b) Shall be amended by adding the
following at the end of the subsection:
      No sump or ejector basin shall be less than 30 inches deep with a minimum
14 inch sump below inlet pipe invertor or a design specified by manufacture and
approved by the Village of Matteson Plumbing Inspector.
(2000 Code, § 150.027) (Ord. 1650, passed 1-6-1997; Ord. 1931, passed 10-6-
2003; Ord. 2023, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 4296, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 4476,
passed 10-18-2021)
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 150.045 ADOPTION OF ELECTRICAL CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the National Electrical Code,
2017 Edition, as published by the National Fire Protection Association be and
is hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the village, for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Electrical
Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of, as if fully set out in
this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §
150.046.
(2000 Code, § 150.040) (Ord. 1644, passed 12-2-1996; Ord. 1929, passed 10-6-
2003; Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 150.046 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES.
   (A)   Add 210.8(A) (5) Exception. Sump Pumps/Ejector Pumps. All sump pumps
and ejector pumps shall be served by a simplex receptacle and no OPCI
protection is required.
   (B)   Article 300.1(A). Add the following:
      For all new work, wiring shall be installed in metal conduit or surface
metal raceways appropriate for the intended installation. The use of PVC is
permitted with the approval of the village for underground installations. If
PVC is to be used, it shall be 1 size larger than the minimum required size.
Flexible metallic cable may be used for extending flexible metallic conduit
systems when approved by the village. All exposed flexible metallic conduit
shall be limited to six feet in length. Unless approved by the village, all
conduit exposed to weather or installed in concrete shall be rigid metal
conduit.
   (C)   Article 310.106(B). Delete the following: "aluminum, copper clad
aluminum, or unless otherwise specified" and to read as follows:
      Conductor material. Conductors in this article shall be copper.
   (D)   Article 314.4. Add Section 314.4.1. Minimum size. The minimum size for
metal boxes for receptacle outlets and switches shall be 4 inches (1900 box)
with plaster rings.
   (E)   Add the following requirements:
      Roof Mounted Photovoltaic System requirements.
      No conduit or wiring shall be visible from the street. All conduit and
wire shall be installed in a workmanship manner. Conduit shall not be attached
on the exterior of the roof. The attachment for connecting solar equipment and
accessories shall be properly flashed. Flashing method shall be tested and
listed by and approved testing agency.
      Inspections of Photovoltaic Systems
      The contractor and subcontractors installing solar equipment shall have a
licensed electrician registered with the Village of Matteson, II. on site
during installation. The licensed electrician shall be present at inspections.
The contractor shall provide a copy of the license at the inspection.
      The contractor shall provide access to all work areas for inspection by
the Village of Matteson inspector. If an independent or special inspector is
required to complete any of or all inspections, the contractor listed on the
permit application shall be responsible for the cost of the contractor.
(2000 Code, § 150.041) (Ord. 1644, passed 12-2-1996; Ord. 1929, passed 10-6-
2003; Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
ELEVATOR SAFETY CODE
§ 150.060 ADOPTION OF AN ELEVATOR SAFETY CODE.
   The documents listed in the ordinance description of Ord. 3022, passed July
16, 2007, three copies of which are on file in the office of the Village Clerk,
being marked and designated collectively as the Elevator Safety Code, are
hereby adopted as the Elevator Safety Code of the village; for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Elevator
Safety Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of, as if fully set
out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed by the village.
(2000 Code, § 150.050) (Ord. 3022, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-
2021)
MECHANICAL CODE
§ 150.075 ADOPTION OF MECHANICAL CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Mechanical
Code, 2018 Edition as published by the International Code Council, Inc. be and
the same is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the village, for the
control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Mechanical
Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of, as if fully set out in
this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §
150.076.
(2000 Code, § 150.090) (Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-
2021)
§ 150.076 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
   (A)   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Matteson.
   (B)   Section 106.5.2. Insert: "The current fee schedule for the Village of
Matteson as adopted by the Board of Trustees and from time to time amended."
   (C)   Section 106.5.3. Insert: [75%]; [75%].
   (D)   Section 108.4. Insert: [code violation]; [$750]; [none].
   (E)   Section 108.5. Insert: [&$100]; [$750].
   (F)   Delete 109.2 and replace with 109.2 Appeals Board. The Village Board
of Trustees shall serve as the board of appeals. Add subsection 109.2.1 Appeals
Process. Appeals shall be made to the Building Official then to the Plan
Commission then to the Village Board of Trustees.
   (G)   Section 505.1 General. Add the following: All domestic kitchen cooking
appliances shall be provided with a ducted range hood.
   (H)   Section 505.3 Exhaust Discharge. Delete exception number 1.
(2000 Code, § 150.091) (Ord. 1928, passed 10-6-2003; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-
2021)
FUEL GAS CODE
§ 150.090 ADOPTION OF FUEL GAS CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fuel Gas Code,
2018 Edition as published by the International Code Council, Inc. be and the
same is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the village, for the control of
buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Fuel Gas Code
are hereby referred to, adopted and made part of, as if fully set out in this
section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in §
150.091.
(Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 150.091 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
   (A)   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Matteson.
   (B)   Section 106.6.2. Insert: "The current fee schedule for the Village of
Matteson as adopted by the Board of Trustees and from time to time amended."
   (C)   Section 106.6.3. Insert: [75%]; [75%].
   (D)   Section 108.4. Insert: [code violation]; [$750]; [none].
   (E)   Delete 109.2 and replace with 109.2 Appeals Board. The Village Board
of Trustees shall serve as the board of appeals. Add subsection 109.2.1 Appeals
Process. Appeals shall be made to the Building Official then to the Plan
Commission then to the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 4186, passed 4-1-2013; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
§ 150.105 ADOPTION OF ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   The village acknowledges and affirms that the Illinois energy efficient
building act, 20 ILCS 3125/1 et seq., and the Illinois Energy Conservation Code
adopted thereunder, 71 Ill. Admin. Code 600.100 et seq., apply within the
village. The Illinois Energy Conservation Code is hereby adopted and
incorporated as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
§ 150.120 ADOPTION OF SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE.
   A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Swimming Pool
and Spa Code, 2018 Edition as published by the International Code Council, Inc.
be and the same is hereby adopted as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the
village, regulating and governing the design, construction, alteration,
movement, renovation, replacement, repair and maintenance of swimming pools,
spas, hot tubs, aquatic facilities and related equipment as herein provided;
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and
each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of
said Swimming Pool and Spa Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made part
of, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in §
150.121.
(Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 150.121 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES.
   The following sections are hereby revised:
   (A)   Section 101.1. Insert: Village of Matteson.
   (B)   Section 105.6.2. Insert "The current fee schedule for the Village of
Matteson as adopted by the Board of Trustees and from time to time amended."
   (C)   Section 105.6.3. [75%]; [75%]; [$750]; [none].
   (D)   Section 107.4. Insert: [code violation].
   (E)   Section 107.5. Insert [$50]; [$750].
   (F)   Delete 108.2 and replace with 108.2 Appeals Board. The Village Board
of Trustees shall serve as the board of appeals. Add subsection 108.2.1 Appeals
Process. Appeals shall be made to the Building Official then to the Plan
Commission then to the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is
not specifically provided, shall be fined as provided in §
10.99, not more than $750 for each and every violation thereof, and every day
the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in this chapter, violations of the village's
adopted Plumbing Code by licensed plumbers and registered plumbing contractors
shall be reported to and regulated by the State Department of Public Health.
(2000 Code, § 150.999) (Ord. 4296, passed 2-1-2016; Ord. 4476, passed 10-18-
2021)
CHAPTER 151: NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION PLAN
Section
   
151.01   Neighborhood Preservation Program established
   
151.02   Designation of neighborhoods
   
151.03   Implementation of Neighborhood Preservation Program
   
151.04   Designation of first Neighborhood Preservation Area
§ 151.01 NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION PROGRAM ESTABLISHED.
   There is established a Neighborhood Preservation Program to preserve,
coordinate and concentrate maintenance efforts by the village in designated
neighborhoods, and to promote community involvement in such activities.
(2000 Code, § 151.01) (Ord. 932, passed 3-7-1977)
§ 151.02 DESIGNATION OF NEIGHBORHOODS.
   The village has conducted studies in consultation with community
representatives to determine which neighborhoods within the village should be
considered for designation as Neighborhood Preservation Areas, and will develop
appropriate programs for such neighborhoods so designated.
(2000 Code, § 151.02) (Ord. 932, passed 3-7-1977)
§ 151.03 IMPLEMENTATION OF NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION PROGRAM.
   (A)   On designation of Neighborhood Preservation Areas by the village, the
village will transmit a communication to the County Bureau of Administration,
Office of the Chief Administrative Officer.
   (B)   This communication will include the following:
      (1)   A legal description of the Neighborhood Preservation Areas
designated by the village, and an official village map delineating the area;
and
      (2)   A statement that the ordinance or resolution designating the
Neighborhood Preservation Area did not become final until members of the public
had an opportunity to comment on such designation.
(2000 Code, § 151.03) (Ord. 932, passed 3-7-1977)
§ 151.04 DESIGNATION OF FIRST NEIGHBORHOOD PRESERVATION AREA.
   (A)   After consultation with community representatives, the following area
is designated as a Neighborhood Preservation Area:
      On the south by Lincoln Highway (Route 30), on the north by Butterfield
Creek, on the east by Interstate I-57, and on the west at the intersection of
Amherst Place and Princeton Avenue running north to Colgate Lane, and from
thence continuing north in line with an imaginary line where Princeton Avenue
continued north to Butterfield Creek (more commonly known as the Butterfield
Creek Tributary through the Glenridge and Cricket Hill Subdivisions).
   (B)   Phases of development:
      (1)   Phase One - Georgetown north 500 feet +;
      (2)   Phase Two - 500 feet north of Georgetown added extension north 500
feet +;
      (3)   Phase Three - 1,000 feet north of Georgetown added extension north
500 feet +;
      (4)   Phase Four - 1,500 feet north of Georgetown added extension north
500 feet +; and
      (5)   Phase Five - Georgetown - Lincoln Hwy. (Rt. 30) 650 feet +.
(2000 Code, § 151.04) (Ord. 932, passed 3-7-1977)
CHAPTER 152: FLOODPLAIN AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CODE
Section
   
152.01   Floodplain and Stormwater Management Code adopted by reference
   
152.02   Additions, insertions, deletions and changes
§ 152.01 FLOODPLAIN AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Floodplain and Stormwater Management Code set forth in Ord. 1471, passed
July 3, 1991, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set
forth herein.
(2000 Code, § 153.01) (Ord. 1471, passed 7-3-1991)
§ 152.02 ADDITIONS, INSERTIONS, DELETIONS AND CHANGES.
   (A)   Amend Section 164.101 entitled “Purpose” by deleting subparagraph (g)
and adding a new paragraph (l) to read as follows:
      (g.)   to comply with the latest edition of the rules and regulations of
the National Flood Insurance Program codified as 44 C.F.R. Part 59-79, as
amended;
      (l.)   to amend existing regulations to incorporate all requirements of
paragraph 60.3 (d) of the NFIP regulations.
   (B)   Amend Section 164.102 entitled “Definitions and Terms”.
      For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively:
      (1)   “DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and
that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as
designated by IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-
year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage
due to the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10 percent
increase in velocities.
         (a)   The floodways are designated for Butterfield Creek on the
following map number 17031C, panels 0718J, 0719J, 0738J, 0739J, 0781J, 0782J,
0801J and 0802J effective August 19, 2008 of the countywide Flood Insurance
Rate Map for Cook County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
         (b)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that
are within the one and half mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village
and may be annexed into the village are designated for Butterfield Creek on the
following map number 17031C and panels 0716J, 0717J, 0736J and 0737J effective
August 19, 2008, of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map for Cook County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
         (c)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the
designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map
and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated
floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.”
      (2)   “FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with
ground surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency
flood elevation. Floodplains may also include detached Special Flood Hazard
Areas, ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the Special Flood
Hazard Area (SFHA).
         (a)   The SFHAs of the village are generally identified as such on the
following map number 17031C and panels 0718J, 0719J, 0738J, 0739J, 0781J,
0782J, 0801J and 0802J effective August 19, 2008 of the countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Cook County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
         (b)   The SFHA’s for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that
are within the one and half mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village
and may be annexed into the village are designated for Butterfield Creek on the
following map number 17031C and panels 0716J, 0717J, 0736J and 0737J effective
August 19, 2008, of the countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map for Cook County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.”
      (3)   “REGULATORY FLOODWAY: See DESIGNATED FLOODWAY.”
      (4)   “IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Natural Resources Office of Water
Resources.”
      (5)   “NFIP: National Flood Insurance Program.”
      (6)   “SHFA: Special Flood Hazard Area.”
   (C)   Delete in its entirety Section 164.307, entitled “Base Flood
Elevation”, and substitute instead the following:
      Section 164.307. BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
      The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the one and one-half
mile extraterritorial jurisdiction or that may be annexed into the village
shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the countywide Flood
Insurance Study for Cook County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency effective August 19, 2008, and such amendments or revisions to such
study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
(2000 Code, § 153.02) (Ord. 1778, passed 10-16-2000; Ord. 3058, passed 5-5-
2008)
CHAPTER 153: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Findings and purpose
   
153.02   Definitions
   
153.03   General principles
Permits
   
153.15   Site development permit required
   
153.16   Exceptions to requirement of site development permit
   
153.17   Application for permit
   
153.18   Accompanying information
   
153.19   Bond required
   
153.20   Review and approval
   
153.21   Appeal of decision
   
153.22   Retention of plans
   
153.23   Expiration of permit
Standards and Requirements
   
153.35   Operation standards and requirements; applicability
   
153.36   Responsibility for damage
   
153.37   Standards handbook adopted by reference
   
153.38   Inspections
   
153.39   Special precautions
   
153.40   Amendments of plans
Enforcement
   
153.55   Exceptions to requirements
   
153.56   Stop work order; revocation of permit
   
153.57   Violations
 
   
153.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Findings. The President and Board of Trustees of the village hereby
find the following:
      (1)   Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing
development for certain non-agricultural uses including, but not limited to,
the construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial plants,
the building of roads and highways, and the creation of recreational
facilities;
      (2)   The washing, blowing and falling of eroded soil across and upon
roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof by decreasing vision
and reducing traction of road vehicles;
      (3)   Soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gulleys, washed-
out fills and embankments;
      (4)   Sediment from soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to
pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes and reservoirs;
      (5)   Sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial
purposes, promotes the growth of undesirable aquatic weeds, destroys fish and
other desirable aquatic life, and is costly and difficult to remove; and
      (6)   Sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways, resulting in
increased chances of flooding at risk to public health and safety.
   (B)   Purpose. The President and Board of Trustees of the village therefore
declare that the purpose of this chapter is to safeguard persons, protect
property, prevent damage to the environment, and promote the public welfare by
guiding, regulating and controlling the design, constructions, use and
maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the
topsoil or otherwise results in the movement of earth or land situated in the
village.
(2000 Code, § 154.01) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the village for the construction,
erection or alteration of a structure or building.
   CERTIFY or CERTIFICATION. Formally attesting that the specific inspections
and tests where required have been performed, and that those tests comply with
the applicable requirements of this chapter.
   CUBIC YARDS. The amount of material in excavation or fill measured by the
method of average end areas.
   DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. The person charged with the
administration and enforcement of this chapter or his or her duly authorized
representative, as appointed by the Village President and Village Board of
Trustees.
   EXCAVATION. Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or
any other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
   EXISTING GRADE. The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior
to excavation or filling.
   FILL. Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
humans to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
   FINAL GRADE. The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after
the grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
   GRADING. Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
   NATURAL DRAINAGE. Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
   PARCEL. All contiguous land in one ownership.
   PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the state
and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of America,
its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or employee
of any of the foregoing.
   REMOVAL. Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction or
killing by spraying.
   SITE. A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT. Altering terrain or vegetation and constructing
improvements.
   SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. A permit issued by the village for the construction
or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion,
runoff and grading.
   STRIPPING. Any activities which removes the vegetative surface cover
including tree removal, clearing and storage or removal of top soil.
   U.S.G.S. United States Geological Survey.
   VACANT. Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Matteson, Cook County, Illinois.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. The person or firm appointed by the Village President with
the advice and consent of the Village Board.
(2000 Code, § 154.02) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982; Ord. 4086, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 153.03 GENERAL PRINCIPLES.
   (A)   It is the objective of this chapter to control soil erosion and
sedimentation caused by development activities in the village. Measures taken
to control erosion and sedimentation should be adequate to assure that sediment
is not transported from the site by a storm event of ten-year frequency or
less.
   (B)   The following principles shall apply to all development activities
within the village and to the preparation of the submissions required under §
153.18.
      (1)   Development should be related to the topography and soils of the
site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes
where high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible,
and natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
      (2)   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever
possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses should be left
undisturbed wherever possible.
      (3)   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the
shortest practical time during development.
      (4)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins, or silt traps or
filters should be installed and maintained to remove sediment from run-off
waters from land undergoing development.
      (5)   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should
be based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs and
benefits involved.
      (6)   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices,
aesthetics and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
      (7)   Provision should be made to accommodate the increased run-off
caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development.
Drainage ways should be designed so that their final gradients and the
resultant velocities of discharges will not create additional erosion.
      (8)   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed as soon as
practical during development.
(2000 Code, § 154.03) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
PERMITS
§ 153.15 SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall commence or
perform any grading, stripping, excavating or filling of land without having
first obtained a site development permit from the Director of Community
Development with the approval of the Village Engineer.
(2000 Code, § 154.15) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.16 EXCEPTIONS TO REQUIREMENT OF SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A permit shall not be required for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Development of a site of less than five acres for residential use, or
of less than two and one-half acres for commercial or industrial use, provided
that the person responsible for any such development shall submit in writing to
the Director of Community Development for his or her, and the Village
Engineer’s, review and approval, the necessary erosion and sedimentation
control measures to satisfy the principles set forth in §
153.03;
   (B)   Excavation below final grade for the basement and footings of a
single-family residence and appurtenant structures on a site in excess of five
acres for which a building permit has been issued by the village;
   (C)   Agricultural use of land, including the implementation of conservation
measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the soil and Water
Conservation District, and including the construction of agricultural
structures; and
   (D)   Installation, renovation or replacement of a septic system to serve an
existing dwelling or structure.
(2000 Code, § 154.16) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.17 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Application for a site development permit shall be made by the owner of the
property or his or her authorized agent to the Director of Community
Development on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall bear
the name and address of the owner or developer of the site and of any
consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of the
applicant’s principal contact at such firm and shall be accompanied by a fee as
established by the Board of Trustees and as indicated on the Community
Development Department fee schedule. Each application shall include
certification that any land clearing, construction or development involving the
movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon issuance
of the permit.
(2000 Code, § 154.17) (Ord. 1366, passed 10-17-1988)
§ 153.18 ACCOMPANYING INFORMATION.
   Each application for a site development permit shall be accompanied by the
following information:
   (A)   A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy location in the
field of the site for which the permit is sought, and including the boundary
line and approximate acreage of the site, existing zoning, and a legend and
scale;
   (B)   A development plan of the site showing:
      (1)   Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within
approximately 150 feet of the boundaries, drawn at no greater than two-foot
contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation and drainage pattern
of the area with a benchmark on datum located on the site;
      (2)   The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities, water
bodies, floodplains, drainage facilities, vegetative cover, paved areas and
other significant natural or human-made features on the site and adjacent land
within approximately 150 feet of the boundary;
      (3)   A general description of the predominant soil types on the site,
their location and their limitations for the proposed use; and
      (4)   Proposed use of the site, including present development and planned
utilization, areas of excavation, grading and filling, proposed contours,
finished grades and street profiles, provisions for storm drainage, including
the control of accelerated runoff, with a drainage area map and computations,
kinds and locations of utilities, and areas and acreages proposed to be paved,
covered, sodded, or seeded, vegetatively stabilized or left undisturbed.
   (C)   An erosion and sedimentation control plan showing:
      (1)   All erosion and sedimentation control measures necessary to meet
the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases of construction and
permanently after completion of development of the site;
      (2)   Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed
preparation expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer
application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures;
      (3)   Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including
easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance; and
      (4)   Identification of the person(s) or entity which will have legal
responsibility for maintenance of erosion control structures and measures after
development is completed.
   (D)   (1)   The proposed phasing of development of the site, including
stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and
landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of
clearing, installation of temporary sediment control measures, installation of
storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas, and establishment of
permanent vegetative cover.
      (2)   These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the
standards and requirements contained in Procedures and Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Northeastern Illinois, prepared by the
Northeastern Illinois Erosion and Sedimentation Control Steering Committee and
adopted by Will-South Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District, which
standards and requirements are incorporated into this chapter by reference.
   (E)   The Director of Community Development, with the approval of the
Village Engineer, may waive specific requirements for the content of submission
upon finding that the information submitted is sufficient to show that the work
will comply with the objectives and principles of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 154.18) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.19 BOND REQUIRED.
   The applicant shall be required to file with the village a faithful
performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other improvement security
satisfactory to the Municipal Attorney, in an amount equal to 110% of all costs
of improvements, landscaping, maintenance of and landscaping for such period as
specified by the village and engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost
of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site.
(2000 Code, § 154.19) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.20 REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   Each application for a site development permit shall be reviewed and
acted upon according to the following procedures.
      (1)   (a)   The Director of Community Development, with the approval of
the Village Engineer, will review each application for a site development
permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The
Director of Community Development may also refer any application to the Will-
South Cook County Soil and Water Conservation District or any other local
government or public agency within whose jurisdiction the site is located for
review and comment.
         (b)   Within 30 days after receiving an application, the Director of
Community Development shall in writing, do the following:
            1.   Approve the permit application if it is found to be in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and issue the permit;
            2.   Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this
chapter, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
            3.   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies
and the procedure for submitting a revised application or submission.
      (2)   No site development permit shall be issued for an intended
development site unless:
         (a)   The development, including, but not limited to, subdivisions and
planned unit development, has been approved by the village where applicable;
         (b)   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the village; or
         (c)   The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall
development program previously approved by the village for the area in which
the site is situated.
   (B)   Failure of the Director of Community Development to act on an original
or revised application within 30 days of receipt shall constitute denial of the
application unless the time is extended by agreement between the Director of
Community Development and the applicant. Pending preparation and approval of a
revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance
with conditions established by the Director of Community Development with the
approval of the Village Engineer.
(2000 Code, § 154.20) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.21 APPEAL OF DECISION.
   The applicant, or any person or agency which received notice of the filing
of the application, may appeal the decision of the Director of Community
Development as provided in §
153.20(B), to the Village Plan Commission. Upon receipt of an appeal, the
Village Plan Commission shall schedule and hold a public hearing after giving
15-days’ public notice thereof. The Village Plan Commission shall forward a
written recommendation to the Village President and Village Board of Trustees
within ten days of the hearing. The Village President and the Village Board of
Trustees shall, within 30 days after receipt of the recommendation, review the
decision on the appeal. Factors to be considered on review shall include, but
need not be limited to: the effects of the proposed development activities on
the surface water flow to tributary and downstream lands, any comprehensive
watershed management plans, or the use of any retention facilities; possible
saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic;
runoff surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainageways; nature
and type of soil or rock which when disturbed by the proposed development
activities may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be
landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape
through grading or removal of vegetation.
(2000 Code, § 154.21) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.22 RETENTION OF PLANS.
   Plans, specifications and reports for all site developments shall be
retained in original form or on microfilm by the Community Development
Department.
(2000 Code, § 154.22) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.23 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   Every site development permit shall expire and become null and void if the
work authorized by the permit has not been commenced within 90 days, or is not
completed within one year from the date of issuance, except that the Director
of Community Development may, if the permittee presents satisfactory evidence
that unusual difficulties have prevented work being commenced or completed
within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if
written application is made before the expiration date of the permit.
(2000 Code, § 154.23) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.35 OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS; APPLICABILITY.
   All grading, stripping, excavating and filling which is subject to the
permit requirements of this chapter, and any grading, stripping, excavating and
filling which is exempted from the permit requirement by §
153.16(A) shall be subject to the applicable standards and requirements set
forth in this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 154.35) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.36 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGE.
   The permittee shall not be relieved of responsibility for damage to persons
or property otherwise imposed by law, and the village or its officers or agents
will not be made liable for such damage by:
   (A)   The issuance of a permit under this chapter;
   (B)   Compliance with the provisions of that permit or with conditions
attached to it by the Director of Community Development and Village Engineer;
   (C)   Failure of village officials to observe or recognize hazardous or
unsightly conditions;
   (D)   Failure of village officials to recommend denial of or to deny a
permit; or
   (E)   Exemptions from the permit requirements of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 154.36) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.37 STANDARDS HANDBOOK ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The standards and specifications contained in Procedures and Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois, cited in §
153.18, are incorporated into this section and made a part hereof by reference
for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods of operation under site
development and erosion and sedimentation control plans approved under §§
153.15 through
153.23. In the event of conflict between provisions of the manual and of this
chapter, the chapter shall govern.
(2000 Code, § 154.37) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.38 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The Director of Community Development or the Village Engineer
shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that
portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work
fails to comply with the site development or erosion and sedimentation control
plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating and filling work
bearing the stamp of approval of the Director of Community Development shall be
maintained at the site during progress of the work.
      (2)   In order to obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the
Director of Community Development at least two full working days before the
completion of:
         (a)   Stripping and clearing;
         (b)   Rough grading;
         (c)   Final grading; and
         (d)   Final landscaping.
   (B)   If stripping, clearing, grading or landscaping are to be done in
phases or areas, the permittee shall give notice and request inspection at the
completion of each of the above work stages in each phase or area. If an
inspection is not made and notification of the results given within five
working days after notice is received by the village from the permittee, the
permittee may continue work at his or her own risk, without presuming
acceptance by the village. Notification of the results of the inspection shall
be given in writing at the site.
(2000 Code, § 154.38) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.39 SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS.
   (A)   If at any stage of the grading of any development site the Director of
Community Development, or the Village Engineer determines by inspection that
the nature of the site is such that further work authorized by an existing
permit is likely to imperil any property, public way, watercourse or drainage
structure, the Director of Community Development, or the Village Engineer may
require, as a condition of allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable
special precautions be taken as is considered advisable to avoid the likelihood
of such peril. Special precautions may include, but shall not be limited to, a
more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities,
berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing, installation of plant materials for
erosion control, and recommendations of a registered soils engineer or
engineering geologist which may be made requirements for further work.
   (B)   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on
any development site is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee
required to install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be
required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large
developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the Director of
Community Development, or the Village Engineer, may specify the time of
starting grading and time of completion or may require that the operations be
conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures
or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
(2000 Code, § 154.39) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.40 AMENDMENTS OF PLANS.
   Major amendments of the site development or erosion and sedimentation
control plans shall be submitted to the Director of Community Development and
shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as the
original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the
Director of Community Development, or the Village Engineer, by written
authorization to the permittee.
(2000 Code, § 154.40) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.55 EXCEPTIONS TO REQUIREMENTS.
   The Village President and Village Board of Trustees may authorize exceptions
to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter in
accordance with the following procedures.
   (A)   (1)   Application for any exception shall be made by a verified
petition of the applicant for a site development permit, stating fully the
grounds of the petition and the facts relied upon by the applicant. The
petition shall be filed with the site development permit application.
      (2)   In order for the petition to be granted, it shall be necessary that
the Village President and Village Board of Trustees find all of the following
facts with respect to the land referred to in the petition:
         (a)   The land is of such shape or size or is affected by such
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it
is impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter;
         (b)   The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of
a substantial property right of the applicant; and
         (c)   The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property.
   (B)   Each application for an exception shall be referred to the Director of
Community Development for review. The Director of Community Development shall
transmit his or her recommendations to the Village President and Village Board
of Trustees which shall review the recommendations prior to granting or denying
the exception.
   (C)   The Village President and Village Board of Trustees shall hold a
public hearing on each application for exception within 30 days after receiving
application, in the manner provided with respect to appeals. After public
hearing, the Village President and the Village Board of Trustees may approve
the site development permit application with the exceptions and conditions it
deems necessary, or it may disapprove the site development permit application
and exception application, or it may take such other action as appropriate.
(2000 Code, § 154.50) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.56 STOP WORK ORDER; REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   In the event any person holding a site development permit pursuant to
this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or carries on-site development
in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare or
safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the development
site, or so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious
to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the Director of Community
Development or the Village Engineer may suspend or revoke the site development
permit.
      (1)   Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop work order issued
by either the Director of Community Development or the Village Engineer and
delivered to the permittee or his or her agent or the person performing the
work. The stop work order shall be effective immediately, shall state the
specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under which work may
be resumed. A stop work order shall remain in effect until a hearing is
scheduled by the Village President and Village Board of Trustees which shall
not be later than 21 days from the issuance of the stop work order, at which
the conditions of division (A)(2) below can be met.
      (2)   (a)   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or
revoked until a hearing is held by the Village President and Village Board of
Trustees.
         (b)   Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee,
either personally or by registered mail, and shall state:
            1.   The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or
revocation, in clear and concise language; and
            2.   The time and place the hearing will be held.
   (B)   Notice shall be served on the permittee at least five days prior to
the date set for the hearing. At the hearing, the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on his or
her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Village President and Village
Board of Trustees shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or
revoked.
(2000 Code, § 154.51) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 153.57 VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair or maintain any grading,
excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation
of any terms of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 154.52) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted shall
constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any violation, such person,
partnership or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than $750
for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section,
any person, partnership or corporation convicted of violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be required to restore the site to the
condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to bear the expense
of such restoration.
(2000 Code, § 154.99) (Ord. 1141, passed 5-17-1982)
CHAPTER 154: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Title
   
154.002   Purpose
   
154.003   Interpretation
   
154.004   Application of regulations; authority and jurisdiction
   
154.005   Violation
   
154.006   Definitions
   
154.007   Dedication of school sites or payments of fees in lieu thereof
Procedure for Review of Plats
   
154.020   Duties of subdivider and Plan Commission
   
154.021   Stages of approval
   
154.022   Fees
   
154.023   Recording
   
154.024   Building permits and certificates of occupancy
   
154.025   Residential disclosure statements and homebuyer information
Specifications for Plans and Plats
   
154.040   Sketch plan
   
154.041   Preliminary plat
   
154.042   Engineering plans and drawings
   
154.043   Final plat
Design Standards
   
154.055   General
   
154.056   Streets
   
154.057   Blocks
   
154.058   Lots
   
154.059   Easements
Improvements
   
154.070   Purpose
   
154.071   Qualifications of contractors
   
154.072   Time of construction
   
154.073   Sequence of construction
   
154.074   Debris removal
   
154.075   Modifications of design for improvements during construction
   
154.076   Oversize improvements
   
154.077   Monuments
   
154.078   Grading
   
154.079   Improvements required
   
154.080   Protection and repair of existing improvements
   
154.081   Inspection of improvements
Engineering Specifications
   
154.095   Compliance required
   
154.096   Streets
   
154.097   Storm drainage structures
   
154.098   Water supply facilities
   
154.099   Sanitary sewage system
Dedications, Easements and Reservations
   
154.110   Dedications
   
154.111   Easements
   
154.112   Reservations
   
154.113   Right of refusal
Modifications
   
154.125   Hardship
   
154.126   Application for modification
 
   
154.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Matteson Subdivision
Regulations”.
(2000 Code, § 155.001) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.002 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To promote the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience,
prosperity and general welfare;
   (B)   To conserve, protect and enhance property and property values;
   (C)   To secure the most appropriate use of land, and to facilitate the
adequate but economical provision of public improvements;
   (D)   To provide for orderly growth and development, to afford adequate
facilities for the safe, convenient and efficient means for the traffic
circulation of its population, and to safeguard the public against flood
damage;
   (E)   To prescribe reasonable rules and regulations governing the
subdivision and platting of land; the preparation of plats; the location, width
and course of streets and highways; the installation of utilities, street
pavements and other essential improvements; and the necessary public grounds
for schools, parks, playgrounds and other public open spaces; and
   (F)   To establish procedures for the submission, approval and recording of
plats; and to provide the means for enforcement and to provide penalties for
violations.
(2000 Code, § 155.002) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.003 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and effectuation
of the purposes set forth herein.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way interfere
with any provision of law or any rules or regulations other than subdivision
regulations adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the subdivision or
development of land. Where this chapter imposes greater restrictions or
requirements than are imposed or required by other provisions of law, rules,
regulations, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall
control, but nothing herein shall interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
easements, covenants, deed restrictions or agreements between parties which
impose restrictions greater than those imposed by this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 155.003) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.004 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS; AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall apply to all subdivisions made within the corporate
limits of the village and to all unincorporated areas located within one and
one-half miles of the corporate limits, subsequent to August 4, 1975, in
accordance with provisions of 65 ILCS 5, as amended. The subdivisions shall, in
all respects, be in full compliance with the applicable requirements set forth
in this chapter with the official map.
(2000 Code, § 155.004) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.005 VIOLATION.
   Whoever shall sell or offer for sale, or lease for any time exceeding five
years, any lot or block in any subdivision before complying with all the
requirements of this chapter and the statutes governing plats shall be subject
to a fine, as provided in §
154.999, for each lot or block, or part thereof, so disposed of, offered for
sale or leased.
(2000 Code, § 155.005) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.006 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular access to the back
or side of properties abutting on and having access to a street.
   ARTERIAL STREET. A street so designated in the major street plan.
   COLLECTOR STREET. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to an
arterial street, including the principal entrance streets of residential
developments, and the principal streets for circulation within such a
development.
   CONTRACT PURCHASER. A homebuyer who signs a contract to purchase any
residential dwelling unit within the development property.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A short minor street ending in a turnaround designed and
intended as a permanent terminus.
   DEAD-END STREET. Any street, other than a cul-de-sac, which has only one
outlet.
   DEVELOPMENT. The act of building structures or installing site improvements.
   DEVELOPMENT PROPERTY. All property which any residential development shall
be undertaken after the effective date of this section.
   EASEMENT. A grant or reservation of specific rights in land conveyed by the
land owner to the public or to persons for a particular purpose or purposes.
   ENGINEER. A professional engineer registered as such in this state.
   EXPRESSWAY. A street or highway to which access is limited or controlled,
designed to move vehicular traffic between communities or other large areas.
Included in this definition are tollway, freeway and turnpike.
   HALF-STREET. When a proposed street has as its centerline, or within its
right-of-way, the boundaries of one or more tracts, that portion of the street
on either side of such tract boundary shall be known as a HALF-STREET.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The Village Health Officer.
   HOMEBUYER. Any potential purchaser or purchaser of a single-family dwelling,
two-family dwelling, duplex dwelling, multiple-family dwelling, townhouse or
condominium, within any development property.
   MAJOR STREET PLAN. The so designated portion of the official plan adopted
and as may hereafter be amended by the village.
   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street which is approximately parallel and
adjacent to an arterial street or expressway, and which provides access to
abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
   MINOR STREET. A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties.
   OFFICIAL MAP. The official map, or any part thereof, as adopted by the Board
of Trustees of the village.
   OFFICIAL PLAN. The official comprehensive plan, or any part thereof, as
adopted by the Board of Trustees of the village.
   OWNER. Any person having sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought
to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to subdivide the same
under this chapter.
   PARK. Open space provided by the developer.
   PEDESTRIAN WAY. A right-of-way, however designated, across or within a block
for use by pedestrian traffic. Included are sidewalks and crosswalks.
   PLAN COMMISSION. The Village Plan Commission.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any improvement of property that includes five or
more single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, duplex dwellings, multiple-
family dwellings, townhouses or condominiums.
   RESIDENTIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT. The document described in §
154.020, to be prepared and recorded against all of the development property,
on a form provided by the village.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. Every owner, developer and applicant for annexations or
subdivision of a development property.
   RESUBDIVISION. The relocation of property boundaries, or the reallocation of
property in a plat of record. However, the dissolution of property lines, not
accompanied by the creation of new property lines, shall not constitute
RESUBDIVISION.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land conveyed or dedicated for street use; or,
where appropriate, for other special use such as a crosswalk, railroad,
pipeline, utility main or electric transmission line.
   STREET. A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street,
highway, thoroughfare, freeway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however
otherwise indicated.
   STREET WIDTH. The shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-
of-way of a street.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect a
subdivision of land hereunder for himself, herself or for another.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of land into two or more lots, parcels or areas.
SUBDIVISION shall include resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context,
shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land subdivided.
SUBDIVISIONS exempted from the terms of the chapter are: the conveyance of
parcels of land or interests therein for use as a right-of-way for railroads or
other public utility facilities and other pipe lines which does not involve any
new streets or easements of access; the conveyance of land owned by a railroad
or other public utility which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access; the conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or grants
or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or instruments
relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use; conveyances made
to correct descriptions in prior conveyances.
   SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered as such in this state.
   VILLAGE ENGINEER. The person or firm appointed by the Village President with
the advice and the consent of the Village Board.
   ZONING CODE. The zoning code of the village, and all maps pertaining thereto
for subdivisions located within the corporate limits of Matteson; and shall
mean the zoning code of the appropriate county having jurisdiction for
subdivisions located in unincorporated areas within one and one-half miles of
the village.
(2000 Code, § 155.006) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975; Ord. 1169, passed 2-7-1983;
Ord. 3020, passed 6-18-2007; Ord. 4086, passed 1-3-2011)
§ 154.007 DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES OR PAYMENTS OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF.
   (A)   Findings. The President and Board of Trustees hereby find the
following:
      (1)   During the past few years, the village has experienced a population
increase due principally to the development of vacant lots, annexation of
additional land and the subdivision of vacant land within the jurisdiction of
the village;
      (2)   The village has found that productive community life depends in a
great part on the availability of adequate school facilities to serve the new
development;
      (3)   The village adopted Ord. 1669 on May 19, 1997, to establish a
specific requirement for the dedication of school grounds or the payment of
fees in lieu of dedication, and that ordinance requires a periodic update to
ensure consistency with current land development and school needs;
      (4)   It is hereby found and determined that the public interest,
convenience, health, welfare and safety require the establishment of school
ground within the village generally in accordance with the following criteria
which is consistent with the minimum site recommendations of the office of the
State Superintendent of Education and Elementary School Districts No. 159 and
No. 162, and Rich Township High School District No. 227 (hereinafter “School
Districts”) operating within the jurisdiction of the village:
         (a)   Six hundred capacity elementary schools (K-5) on 11 acres of
useable land;
         (b)   Nine hundred capacity junior high schools (6-8) on 29 acres of
useable land; and
         (c)   One thousand five hundred capacity high schools (9-12) on 45
acres of useable land.
      (5)   Demographic studies of the residential portion of a proposed
subdivision or planned unit development can be readily and scientifically
conducted to determine the number of elementary and secondary school age
children and adults typically to be generated therefrom, and provide a method
whereby the required dedications of land directly attributable to the activity
of the subdivider, developer or builder and the proposed subdivision or planned
development may be calculated; and
      (6)   It is found and determined that the location of the school grounds
to serve the immediate and future needs of residents and children of each new
development is as essential to proper land development as are streets, water,
sewers and sidewalks, and to that end the village has determined that the
dedication of land for school grounds or cash contributions in lieu of actual
land dedication (where the latter is deemed impractical) or a combination of
both, shall be required of each residential builder or each developer of a
residential subdivision or a planned residential development.
   (B)   Indemnity agreement required. This section shall be applicable only to
those school districts with a valid and enforceable indemnity agreement which
will hold the village harmless for any complaints arising out of the
implementation of this section.
   (C)   Condition of approval. The provisions of this section shall be a
condition of the approval of a final plat of subdivision or approval of a final
plat of a planned residential development, or approval of a building permit on
a parcel of land within an already approved subdivision (provided the developer
of said subdivision has not already paid a fee or donated land for school
grounds). Each applicant, builder, subdivider or developer will be required to
dedicate land for school grounds to serve the immediate and future needs of the
residents of the development, or make a cash contribution in lieu of actual
land dedication, or a combination of both, at the option of the village, in
accordance with the following criteria and formula.
      (1)   Criteria for requiring school grounds dedication.
         (a)   Requirement and population ratio. The ultimate number of
students to be generated by a subdivision or planned residential development
shall bear directly upon the amount of land required to be dedicated for school
grounds. The land dedication requirement shall be determined by obtaining the
ratio of: estimated children to be served in each such school classification
from the development over the maximum recommended number of students to be
served in each such school classification as stated herein, and then applying
such ratio to said minimum recommended number of acres for a school site of
each such school classification as stated herein. The product thereof shall be
the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient land for school grounds to
serve the estimated increase in the number of children in each such school
classification.
         (b)   School classification and size of school grounds. Classification
and size of school grounds within the village shall be determined in accordance
with the following criteria:
 
                           Maximum Number of Students Minimum Number of Useable
School Type/Grades         for Each Such School       Acres of Land for School
                           Classification             Grounds for Each Such
                                                      Classification
Elementary schools, grades 600 students               11 acres
K-5
Junior high schools,       900 students               29 acres
grades 6-8
High schools, grades 9-12  1,500 students             45 acres
 
         (c)   Location. Standards adopted by the affected School District
shall be used as a guideline in locating sites.
      (2)   Criteria for requiring a contribution in lieu of school grounds.
Where the development is small and the potential dedication of school grounds
are too small to be practical or when the available land is inappropriate for
school grounds, the village shall require the builder, subdivider or developer
to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the land dedication required. The cash
contributions in lieu of school grounds shall be held in trust by the School
District for use in the acquisition of land to serve the immediate or future
needs of children from the subdivision or development or for site improvements,
which include school buildings or other infrastructure necessitated and
specifically and uniquely attributed to the development or subdivision in
question.
         (a)   Fair market value. The cash contributions in lieu of land shall
be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in the area improved in
accordance with all applicable village regulations for subdivisions or planned
residential developments that otherwise would have been dedicated as school
grounds. It has been determined that the present fair market value of such
improved land in and surrounding the village is $90,000 per acre and such
figure shall be used in making any calculation herein unless changed by the
President and Board of Trustees by a motion specifically referring to this
division (C)(2)(a), or unless a subdivider or a developer files a written
objection thereto. In the event of any objection, the fair market value of such
improved land shall be determined in the following manner:
            1.   At the sole cost of the developer, each of the following shall
name an appraiser who shall make an appraisal of the fair market value of such
acres of land on behalf of the village: the Village President and Board of
Trustees; the School District; and the developer;
            2.   All appraisers shall be MAI appraisers who shall issue bona
fide appraisals of the fair market value of the land in question; and
            3.   The final determination of the “fair market value” shall be
the average of the two appraisals which give the highest land value.
         (b)   Density formula.
            1.   Division (C)(2)(c) below establishes the population density
formulas which are generally indicative of current and short-range projected
trends in family size for new construction and shall be used in calculating the
amount of required dedication of acres of land or cash contribution in lieu
thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by the subdivider or
developer.
            2.   The School District shall submit to the President and Board of
Trustees for their approval, not less than once every five years, revised
population density formulas. Upon their approval, the calculations in division
(C)(2)(c) below shall be revised.
         (c)   Contribution in lieu of school grounds and density formula.
 
School Type     Student Capacity Acres Acres/Student Acreage Cost Cost of Land/
                                                                  Student
Grades K-5      600              11    0.0183        $90,000      $1,647
Junior high (6- 900              29    0.0322        $90,000      $2,898
8)
High school (9- 1,500            45    0.0300        $90,000      $2,700
12)
Detached            Junior Total  High               Total $    Total $
Single-  Elementary High   Grades School Total Total Elementary High     Total
Family   Grade K-5  Grades K-8    Grades $ K-5 $ 6-8 District   School   Fee
                    6-8           9-12                          District
Detached            Junior Total  High               Total $    Total $
Single-  Elementary High   Grades School Total Total Elementary High     Total
Family   Grade K-5  Grades K-8    Grades $ K-5 $ 6-8 District   School   Fee
                    6-8           9-12                          District
2        0.136      0.048  0.184  0.020  $224  $139  $363       $54      $417
bedroom
3        0.369      0.173  0.542  0.184  $608  $501  $1,109     $497     $1,606
bedroom
4
bedroom  0.530      0.298  0.828  0.360  $873  $864  $1,737     $972     $2,709
(or
more)
Attached Single-Family
2        0.088      0.048  0.136  0.038  $145  $139  $284       $103     $387
bedroom
3        0.234      0.058  0.292  0.059  $385  $168  $553       $159     $712
bedroom
4
bedroom  0.322      0.154  0.476  0.173  $530  $446  $976       $467     $1,443
(or
more)
 
      (3)   Criteria for requiring dedication and a fee.
         (a)   There will be situations in subdivisions or planned residential
developments when a combination of land dedication and a contribution in lieu
of land are both necessary.
         (b)   These occasions will arise when:
            1.   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a school grounds. That portion of the land within the subdivision
falling within the school location shall be dedicated; and
            2.   A major part of the school grounds has already been acquired
and only a small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the
grounds. The remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash
contribution in lieu thereof shall be required.
      (4)   Objections to density formula. In the event an applicant, builder,
subdivider or developer files a written objection to the population density
formulas listed herein, he or she shall submit his or her own demographic study
showing the estimated additional population to be generated from the
subdivision or planned residential development and in that event final
determination of the density formula to be used in such calculation shall be
made by the Village Board of Trustees based upon such demographic information
submitted by the subdivider or developer and from other sources which may be
submitted to the Village Board of Trustees by the school district, or others.
It is recognized that population density, age distribution and local conditions
change over the years, and the specific formula for the dedication of land, or
the payment of fees in lieu thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic
review and amendment if necessary.
      (5)   Reservation of additional land. Where the comprehensive plan of the
village calls for a larger amount of school grounds in a particular proposed
subdivision or planned residential development than the developer is required
to dedicate, the land needed beyond the subdivider’s or developer’s
contribution shall, if so determined by the Village Board of Trustees, be
reserved for subsequent purchase by the village or other public body designated
by the village provided that such acquisition is made within one year from the
date of approval of the final plat.
      (6)   Topography and grading. The slope, topography and geology of the
dedicated site as well as its surroundings must be suitable for its intended
purposes. Grading on land dedicated for school grounds shall not differ greatly
from surrounding land.
      (7)   Improved sites. All school grounds shall be dedicated in a
condition ready for full service of electrical, water, sewer and streets as
applicable to the location of the property, or acceptable provision made
therefor. The sidewalks and trees normally included within the definition of
improved grounds may be deleted due to the delay time between dedication of any
such school grounds and construction of school facilities thereon.
      (8)   Title to grounds. All school grounds shall be conveyed either by
warranty or trustee’s deed for the benefit of the School District and conveyed
directly to the School District. The subdivider or developer shall be
responsible for conveying good, merchantable title to such grounds, and shall
be responsible for payment of all real estate taxes to the date of conveyance,
including any agricultural roll back taxes which might be extended or levied
against such grounds for any tax years or periods prior to the time of
conveyance.
      (9)   Use of parcel. When, in the opinion of the School District holding
title to any parcel of land dedicated under this section, any such parcel has
become unnecessary or unsuitable or inconvenient, such parcel may be sold as
provided by applicable statutory authority, and the proceeds shall be held in
trust by said unit of local government, solely for such uses as are provided
for in this section.
      (10)   Dedication and payment of cash contributions. All dedications
shall be made at the time of final plat approval and all cash contributions
required herein shall be made prior to the issuance of each building permit by
the village.
(2000 Code, § 155.007) (Ord. 1669, passed 5-19-1997; Ord. 1956, passed 2-2-
2004)
PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF PLATS
§ 154.020 DUTIES OF SUBDIVIDER AND PLAN COMMISSION.
   The prospective subdivider is urged to consult informally with the Plan
Commission and, where pertinent, county officials, state agencies and public
utilities, on the availability of services and public facilities in the area to
be subdivided. He or she is also encouraged to study the pertinent rules and
regulations, including the Zoning Code, Building Code and especially this
chapter. The Plan Commission is responsible for discouraging not only premature
development, but also development in unsuitable areas that are inaccessible or
hazardous or lack services. The Plan Commission is also charged with
encouraging replatting of inadequate subdivisions and coordinating the platting
of small parcels of adjacent land.
(2000 Code, § 155.015) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.021 STAGES OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   All subdivision plats shall be processed in three stages leading to
approval for recording, except that in instances as specified by this chapter,
certain stages may be waived or combined. The three stages are the sketch plan,
the preliminary plat, and the final plat and engineering plans.
      (1)   Sketch plan.
         (a)   The sketch plan is a sketch proposal, complying with the
provisions of §§
154.040 through
154.043, submitted informally by the developer to the Plan Commission.
         (b)   The purposes of the sketch plan and the preapplication
conference with the Plan Commission are to:
            1.   Develop cooperation and confidence;
            2.   Familiarize the developer with requirements;
            3.   Do away with major revisions of the preliminary plats;
            4.   Save the developer time and money; and
            5.   Provide assistance to small-scale subdividers.
      (2)   Preliminary plat.
         (a)   The preliminary plat is a drawing which shall be prepared
subsequent to and in accordance with the agreements reached in the sketch plan
conference. It shall be prepared in accordance with §§
154.040 through
154.043 and all other applicable provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances, and four copies shall be filed with the Director of Community
Development, together with an application form in duplicate.
         (b)   The Plan Commission shall approve or disapprove the application
for preliminary approval within 90 days from the date of the application or the
filing by the applicant of the last item of required supporting data, whichever
date is later, unless the time is extended by mutual consent. If the plat is
disapproved, then within the 90 days the Plan Commission shall furnish to the
applicant, in writing, a statement setting forth the reason for disapproval and
specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to
conform to the ordinances, including the official map. If the plat is approved,
the corporate authority shall accept or reject the plat within 30 days after
its next regular stated meeting following the action of the Plan Commission.
Preliminary approval shall not qualify a plat for recording.
         (c)   If the plat is approved, the Director of Community Development
shall attach a certified copy of the order or resolution of approval to a copy
of the plat. If the proposed plat is disapproved, the order or resolution shall
state the reasons for the disapproval, specifying with particularity the
aspects in which the proposed plat fails to conform to the official map. A copy
of the order or resolution shall be filed in the office of the Director of
Community Development.
      (3)   Final plat.
         (a)   The final plat is a record of the subdivision as surveyed in the
field. It shows property lines and other dimensions important to the subdivider
in selling lots, and to the public in keeping records of street lines,
easements and utility locations.
         (b)   Application for approval of a final plat shall be made not later
than one year after approval of a preliminary plat has been granted. This
application must be supported by the drawings, specifications and bond as may
be necessary to demonstrate compliance with all requirements of this chapter.
         (c)   The final plat shall be prepared in accordance with §§
154.040 through
154.043 and all other applicable provisions of this chapter and other
ordinances, and the original and three copies shall be filed with the Village
Clerk, together with four copies of all required supporting materials and an
application form in duplicate.
         (d)   It is intended that approval by the Plan Commission and the
Board of Trustees be automatic if the final plat conforms closely to the
approved preliminary plat and approved engineering plans. Disapproval is
warranted, however, if:
            1.   There are more than minor deviations from the preliminary
plat;
            2.   More than one year has elapsed since the approval of
engineering plans; or
            3.   A new highway, pipeline or other major feature has been
constructed or has directly affected the site by virtue of the improvement
being included in the official map.
         (e)   When a person submitting a plat of subdivision or resubdivision
for final approval has supplied all drawings, maps and other documents required
by this chapter to be furnished in support thereof, and if all the material
meets all the requirements, the Village Board shall approve the proposed plat
within 60 days from the date of filing the last required document or other
paper, or within 60 days from the date of filing application for final approval
of the plat, whichever date is later. The applicant and the Board may mutually
agree to extend the 60-day period.
         (f)   If the plat is approved, the Village Clerk shall attach a
certified copy of the order or resolution of approval to a copy of the plat. If
the proposed plat is disapproved, the order or resolution shall state the
reasons for the disapproval, specifying with particularity the aspects in which
the proposed plat fails to conform to the official map. A copy of the order or
resolution shall be filed in the office of the Village Clerk.
      (4)   Engineering plans.
         (a)   Engineering plans are drawings, specifications and construction
cost estimates for all new construction of facilities in the development, and
shall comply with the provisions of §§
154.040 through
154.043.
         (b)   The engineering plans may be submitted at the same time as the
preliminary plat or at any time up to and including the date of filing the
final plat for village approval.
      (5)   Development in sections.
         (a)   The applicant may elect to have final approval of a geographic
part of the plat that received preliminary approval, and may delay application
for approval of other parts until a later day or dates beyond one year with the
approval of the Village Board, provided all facilities required to serve the
part for which final approval is sought have been provided. In such case only
the part of the plat as has received final approval shall be recorded.
         (b)   In no case, except for the final section, shall any section
filed for approval under this provision contain less than 50 residential lots.
   (B)   (1)   For the purposes of this chapter, a MINOR SUBDIVISION is defined
as any subdivision containing not more than ten lots fronting on an existing,
improved, public, minor street, not involving any new street or road or the
extension of municipal facilities, not adversely affecting the development of
the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not conflicting with any
provision or portion of the official plan, zoning code or this chapter.
      (2)   Final plats for minor subdivisions may be submitted without going
through the preliminary plat stage.
(2000 Code, § 155.016) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975; Ord. 1147, passed 6-7-1982)
§ 154.022 FEES.
   (A)   Filing fee.
      (1)   The following non-refundable filing fee shall be collected from the
applicant at the time of application for site plan review or preliminary plat
review for any commercial, industrial, institutional or multi-family
development, whether they be new construction or remodeling.
 
0 to less than 3 acres   $1,000
3 to less than 10 acres  $2,500
10 to less than 35 acres $5,000
35 to less than 50 acres $8,000
50 or more acres         $15,000
 
      (2)   The filing fee amount shall be deducted from the total of the final
engineering review fee and the inspection fees as outlined in divisions (B) and
(C) below, and required to be paid in full at the time of recording of the
subdivision plat or issuance of a building permit, whichever comes first.
   (B)   Final engineering review. At the time of application for approval of
the final engineering site improvement plans, the developer shall pay a fee
sufficient to compensate the Village Engineer and/or his or her designee for
examination of the final engineering plans and all supporting documents in the
amount of 2% of the design engineer’s estimate of cost of the entire project.
   (C)   Inspection of project improvements. All improvements approved by the
Village Engineer and/or his or her designee shall be inspected during the
course of construction by the Village Engineer and/or his or her designee. As
compensation for such inspection, the developer shall pay an inspection fee in
the amount of 3% of the design engineer’s estimate of cost of the entire
project. Said inspection fee shall be in addition to the final engineering
review fee.
   (D)   Cost of recording. At the time of receiving approval of a final plat,
the subdivider shall pay a fee sufficient to cover the cost of recording.
(2000 Code, § 155.017) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975; Ord. 1905, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 154.023 RECORDING.
   (A)   Within seven days of receiving the approved final plat from the
Village President and the recording fee from the subdivider, the Village Clerk
shall submit the plat to the County Recorder for recording, and the final plat
shall become the property of the county.
   (B)   Recording of the final plat authorizes the issuance of building
permits, but does not constitute acceptance of proffered or required
dedications.
(2000 Code, § 155.018) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.024 BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
   Within the village corporate limits:
   (A)   Building permits shall not be issued until the subdivision final plat
has been approved by the Plan Commission and the Board of Trustees and
recorded, and the required permits from the Metropolitan Sanitary District of
Greater Chicago, Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, or other agencies
have been issued;
   (B)   All building plans shall be approved by the Director of Community
Development, and must meet the requirements of the International Building Code
and village additions and deletions, as amended from time to time; and
   (C)   All development property subject to this section shall be in
compliance with §
154.025 which requires an executed acknowledgment from the contract purchaser
stating they have received the residential disclosure statement, a contract
purchaser survey and they have seen the displayed community information in the
sales center, sales trailer and model home related to their subdivision prior
to the village’s issuance of either a building permit or a certificate of
occupancy.
(2000 Code, § 155.019) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975; Ord. 1147, passed 6-7-1982;
Ord. 3020, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 154.025 RESIDENTIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENTS AND HOMEBUYER INFORMATION.
   (A)   Residential disclosure statement requirement. All development property
shall be encumbered by a residential disclosure statement as provided in this
section.
   (B)   Preparation and recording by responsible party. The responsible party
shall prepare and record the residential disclosure statement against the
development property. The residential disclosure statement shall be approved by
the village prior to execution by the village of any plat or subdivision or
annexation agreement for the development property. The residential disclosure
statement shall be recorded against all parcels of property within the
development property simultaneously with the recording of the final plat of
subdivision for the development property.
   (C)   Display of residential disclosure statement. Copies of the residential
disclosure statement shall be displayed by, and distributed on request to every
homebuyer by the responsible party in each sales center, sales trailer and
model home related to the development property, in the same place and manner as
the community information provided for in §
154.024.
   (D)   Content of disclosure statement. Each residential disclosure statement
shall include at least all of the following information:
      (1)   All existing zoning classifications and proposed land uses within
and abutting the development property;
      (2)   The names of all current owners and beneficiaries of the
development property;
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all persons or
entities that have maintenance responsibility for any portion of the
development property and information relating to the timing and method of any
transfer of maintenance responsibilities;
      (4)   A description of all improvements planned for and features of the
development property, including without limitation open space areas, bike
trails, parks, school sites and detention/retention areas and delineation and
designation of all wetlands and floodplains;
      (5)   A description of all public improvements planned for the
development property, including without limitation roadways, utilities,
pipelines and overhead power lines and the companies and entities that shall
own, or have jurisdictional authority over those improvements;
      (6)   Identification of all existing and proposed major public
facilities, utilities and other significant features within 1,000 feet of any
portion of the development property, including without limitation waste
disposal sites, schools, public buildings, parks, thoroughfares, airports and
major commercial developments. Most of this information is available to the
responsible party from the village;
      (7)   All governmental entities, including name, address, telephone
number and contact person, with taxing authority and jurisdiction over any
portion of the development property, including without limitation the following
entities:
         (a)   The Village of Matteson;
         (b)   Each applicable school district;
         (c)   Any library district;
         (d)   Any sanitary sewer district; and
         (e)   Rich Township.
      (8)   A list of available upgrade options, available to the contract
purchaser;
      (9)   An acknowledgment to be signed by the contract purchaser that he or
she has received information regarding permissible hours for construction
activities in the village; and
      (10)   An acknowledgment to be signed by the contract purchaser that he
or she has received all applicable homeowner’s association by-laws, covenants
and other documents.
   (E)   Display of community information. The responsible party shall cause to
be displayed prominently in each sales center, sales trailer and model home
related to the development property all of the information listed in this
division (E). Such information shall be assembled by the responsible party. The
contents of such information and its intended display location shall be
reviewed and approved by the village prior to the issuance by the village of
any occupancy from any such sales issuance by the village of any occupancy from
any such sales center, sales trailer or model home. The information shall
include at least the following:
      (1)   Current copies of the village’s official zoning map, comprehensive
plan map and bike path map;
      (2)   A current village street map;
      (3)   A site plan of the development depicting or describing the zoning,
existing and proposed land uses, lot lines and all major development elements
including without limitation open space areas, roadways, sidewalks, bicycle
paths, playgrounds, landscaping, detention and retention areas, above-ground
utilities and other such improvements. Such site plan shall include the date on
which it was prepared;
      (4)   A map or graphic indicating within 1,000 feet of the development
property; existing zoning and land uses and if different the recommended land
uses from the comprehensive plans of the village, adjoining municipalities and
the county, all existing and proposed public roadways, public open spaces,
bicycle paths, detention and retention areas and major above-ground utilities.
Most of the information is available to the responsible party from the village.
Such map or graphic shall include the date on which it was prepared; and
      (5)   A list of all taxing districts serving the development, including
each district’s telephone number and address of its main office.
   (F)   Homebuyer acknowledgment requirement. The responsible party shall
obtain an executed and dated acknowledgment from each contract purchaser that
such contract purchaser has received the residential disclosure statement, has
had the opportunity to review the community information provided for in this
section and has received a copy of the contract purchaser survey provided for
in this section. The responsible party shall file such executed and dated
acknowledgment with the village at the time of application for a building
permit for the dwelling for which the contract purchaser has signed a contract
and shall provide a copy of such acknowledgment to the contract purchaser. No
building permit shall be issued by the village for said dwelling until after
such executed and dated acknowledgment has been filed with the village. In the
event the dwelling is constructed prior to execution of a contract for that
dwelling by a contract purchaser, or in the event that the contract purchaser
for a dwelling changes, the responsible party shall obtain an executed and
dated acknowledgment from a contract purchaser at least 45 days prior to the
respective closing date for the dwelling and file it with the village prior to
issuance by the village of any certificate of occupancy for such dwelling.
   (G)   Contract purchaser survey. The responsible party shall provide to each
contract purchaser a contract purchaser survey on a form provided by the
village. Any contract purchaser may complete and submit to the village a
contract purchaser survey at any time within one year after the date of closing
of the contract purchaser dwelling within the development property. The village
shall cause one copy of all surveys so filed with the village to be kept on
file with the village and made available for public inspection on request. The
survey form provided by the village may be revised from time to time and
generally shall request the following information and questions:
      (1)   Name of development/subdivision;
      (2)   Name and address of builder/developer;
      (3)   Telephone numbers of builder/developer;
      (4)   Name of buyers (optional);
      (5)   Address of buyers (optional);
      (6)   Telephone number of buyers (optional);
      (7)   Date of purchase contract;
      (8)   Date of closing;
      (9)   Was your salesperson knowledgeable about the development and the
village?
      (10)   Was your salesperson knowledgeable about the residential
disclosure? Requirements?
      (11)   How did you find the service of the builder/developer during the
building of your home?
      (12)   Was the builder/developer knowledgeable?
      (13)   Did the builder/developer answer your questions to your
satisfaction?
      (14)   Were there problems completing the house and, if so, what were
they?
      (15)   Was your home completed at the time of closing and, if not, what
work remained to be done?
      (16)   How did you find the service of the builder/developer after the
closing of your home?
      (17)   If there was work remaining to be completed at closing, was the
work completed in a reasonable time period?
      (18)   Were there problems completing the unfinished work, if so, what
were they?
      (19)   Did your builder/developer complete the 90-day list within a
reasonable period of time?
      (20)   Were there problems completing the unfinished work, if so, what
were they?
      (21)   Did your builder/developer complete the six-month list in a
reasonable period of time?
      (22)   Were there problems completing the unfinished work, if so, what
were they?
      (23)   Did the builder/developer have a service department that took care
of your problems and questions?
      (24)   If the builder/developer did have a service department, how did
the department take care of your problems and questions? and
      (25)   Do you have additional comments?
   (H)   Declaration of public nuisance. Violation of this section is hereby
declared a public nuisance, which a court may abate in the manner provided by
law including imposition of an injunction terminating any development on any
property for which this
Chapter 154 has not been complied with as determined by the Village
Administrator or his or her designee.
   (I)   Adoption of forms by reference. The following forms, attached to Ord.
3020, passed June 18, 2007, are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set
forth herein:
      (1)   Village of Matteson Residential Information and Disclosure Form;
      (2)   Village of Matteson Contract Purchaser Acknowledgment Statement;
and
      (3)   Village of Matteson Contract Purchaser Survey.
(2000 Code, § 155.020) (Ord. 3020, passed 6-18-2007) Penalty, see §
154.999
SPECIFICATIONS FOR PLANS AND PLATS
§ 154.040 SKETCH PLAN.
   (A)   The subdivider shall meet with the Plan Commission in a preliminary
conference which shall be scheduled by appointment.
   (B)   Prior to the conference, he or she shall submit to the Plan Commission
a rough site sketch plan showing:
      (1)   The boundaries and dimensions of the property to be subdivided;
      (2)   Land characteristics such as natural drainage, swamp areas, wooded
areas and ridges on and adjacent to the tract;
      (3)   Existing easements: location, width and purpose;
      (4)   Streets on and adjacent to the tract; name and right-of-way width
and location; type, width and approximate elevation of surfacing;
      (5)   Existing utilities on and adjacent to the tract, location and size
of water mains, fire hydrants, gas mains, street lights, storm and sanitary
sewers, including invert elevations of sewers to which connections are to be
made;
      (6)   Other conditions on the tract and adjacent land, including:
approximate directions and gradient of ground slope, any embankments or
retaining walls; character and locations of buildings and other structures,
railroads, power lines, towers and other nearby nonresidential land uses of
adverse influence; and owners of adjacent unplatted land;
      (7)   Zoning on and adjacent to the tract;
      (8)   Proposed public improvements; highways or other major improvements
planned by public authorities for future construction on or near the tract;
      (9)   The proposed layout of streets, blocks and lots;
      (10)   The proposed location of business, park and other nonresidential
areas; and
      (11)   Existing covenants affecting the property.
(2000 Code, § 155.030) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.041 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   The preliminary plat shall be prepared by an engineer or surveyor, and
shall be drawn or printed on paper at a scale of 100 feet to one inch, unless a
different scale was approved at the sketch plan conference.
   (B)   This plat shall show or be accompanied by the following information.
      (1)   Title and certificate. Name under which the proposed subdivision is
to be recorded; location and position by quarter-quarter section, section,
township, range, meridian, county and state; names and addresses of
subdividers; notation stating scale, north arrow; and the following
certificate:
 
   State of Illinois, County of Cook, Village of Matteson
Approved by Matteson Plan Commission at a meeting held this ______ day of
__________, 20_____.
_____________________________________
Chairperson
Matteson Plan Commission
Approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Matteson,
Illinois, at a meeting held this ______ day of __________ A.D., 20_____
_____________________________________
President of the Board of Trustees
_____________________________________
Village Clerk
 
      (2)   Description of existing conditions.
         (a)   Boundary lines. Complete survey data such as angles, bearings,
dimensions and curve data shall be shown for the exterior lines of the
subdivision. The error of linear closure of the boundary survey shall not be
greater than one in 5,000;
         (b)   Easements. Location, width and purpose of easements and other
existing restrictions, reservations or covenants;
         (c)   Streets. Name, location, right-of-way width; also curbs,
gutters, culverts, sidewalks and building setbacks;
         (d)   Utilities. Location and size of sanitary and storm sewers, fire
hydrants and water mains; location of gas, electric and telephone lines. If
water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the
distance and direction to, and the size of, the nearest ones;
         (e)   Physical conditions. Existing contours at elevation intervals of
one foot. Watercourses, marshes, bogs and areas subject to inundation; wooded
areas; isolated preservable trees one foot or more in diameter;
         (f)   Human-made features. Houses, barns and other structures; other
constructed features;
         (g)   Conditions on adjacent land. All of the requirements of plat
preparation shall apply equally to the site being subdivided and to all land
within 200 feet of its boundaries, waiving accuracy requirements as to scale of
features, but not as to boundary lines;
         (h)   Proposed public improvements. Highways or other major
improvements planned by public authorities for future construction on or near
the tract, according to the information received from the Plan Commission at
the sketch plan conference;
         (i)   Subsurface conditions. Depth of groundwater unless test pits are
dry at a depth of eight feet; location and results of any tests made to
ascertain subsurface soil and rock conditions; and
         (j)   Percolation tests. Percolation test data shall be submitted for
all subdivisions of three or more lots to be served by individual sewage
disposal systems.
      (3)   Proposals. All proposals of the subdivider, including:
         (a)   Name of subdivision. Must be original and not duplicate or be
substantially similar to any existing subdivision located in the townships of
Bloom, Rich, Thornton or Bremen in the county;
         (b)   Streets. Unduplicated names to be approved by the Board of
Trustees; right-of-way and roadway widths; radius of curvature; length of curve
and tangent sections; and similar data for alleys, if any;
         (c)   Easement rights-of-way. Location, width and purpose;
         (d)   Lot lines and approximate dimensions;
         (e)   Sites, if any, to be used for the following: industrial,
commercial, public or semi-public, multi-family or other than single-family
residential;
         (f)   Sites to be reserved or dedicated for any public or semi-public
use;
         (g)   Minimum building setback lines;
         (h)   Site data. A tabulation of gross area, street area, other
dedicated area, net subdivided area, number of lots, average lot size, typical
lot dimensions and lineal feet of street; and
         (i)   Proposed contours of the finished subdivision for all areas when
original ground elevations are changed by more than three feet.
      (4)   Additional approval. Where the preliminary plat contains utility
easements, the plat shall be accompanied by a written statement bearing the
signature of an authorized employee of the utility company attesting to the
suitability of the easements for the purpose shown.
(2000 Code, § 155.031) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.042 ENGINEERING PLANS AND DRAWINGS.
   (A)   Engineer shall prepare.
      (1)   Whenever new construction is required in the development of a
subdivision, an engineer shall prepare all plans, specifications and
construction cost estimates. The engineer or engineering firm shall be approved
by the Village Board of Trustees.
      (2)   If he or she so elects, and when so allowed by the Board of
Trustees, the subdivider may contract with the village for the preparation of
the engineering plans, specifications and cost estimates. These services will
then be performed by the Village Engineer as directed by the Board of Trustees,
provided that a deposit is placed in escrow payable to the village in
accordance with the schedule then in effect between the village and the Village
Engineer to cover the cost of engineering design services.
      (3)   All engineering plans are subject to the approval of the Plan
Commission and the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Required plans and drawings. The engineer shall submit to the Plan
Commission triplicate copies of the aftermentioned plans, specifications and
cost estimates bearing his or her signature and the imprint of his or her seal:
      (1)   Plans and specifications for street construction, including
centerline profile and grade line of each street with a typical cross section
of the roadway. The street plan shall show the location of drainage structures
and their sizes. The profile at grade lines shall be shown to a scale of one
inch equals 50 feet horizontal and one inch equals two feet vertical;
      (2)   Plans, details and specifications of proposed storm drainage
improvements;
      (3)   Plans, details and specifications of proposed water distribution
systems and of proposed water supply facilities;
      (4)   Plans, details and specifications of sewerage systems; and
      (5)   Plans, details and specifications of proposed street lighting
systems, street signs and sidewalks.
   (C)   Supplementary plans and drawings. When unusual site conditions exist,
the Plan Commission may require such additional plans, specifications and
drawings as are found necessary for an adequate review of the plat. The Plan
Commission shall request this additional material from the subdivider by
letter, stating therein the information requested and the particular or unusual
site conditions which make this information necessary.
(2000 Code, § 155.032) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.043 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Plat form and content.
      (1)   The final plat shall be drawn in waterproof black (India) ink on
tracing cloth, or their equivalents. Scale shall be 100 feet to one inch or
larger. Variation in scale may be allowed when determined by the Plan
Commission to be necessary for a proper exhibit of the subdivision. When more
than one sheet is used for any plat, they shall be numbered consecutively, and
each sheet shall contain a notation showing the whole number of sheets in the
plat and its relation to the other sheets (such as, sheet one of three sheets).
Linear dimensions shall be given in feet and decimals of a foot.
      (2)   The final plat shall show on the face thereof:
         (a)   The name of plat;
         (b)   The location and position of the subdivision indicated in each
of the following ways, by:
            1.   Quarter-quarter section, section, township, range, meridian,
county and state;
            2.   Distances and bearings from true north or angles with
reference to a corner or corners established in the United States Public Land
Survey; and
            3.   A written legal description of the exterior boundaries of the
land as surveyed and divided.
         (c)   The top of the plat shall be oriented north and the plat shall
contain a north arrow;
         (d)   A graphic scale;
         (e)   The date of preparation;
         (f)   The description and location of all survey monuments;
         (g)   Survey data sufficient to reproduce any line or reestablish any
monument in the subdivision;
         (h)   A graphic presentation of all streets, alleys, blocks, parcels
and public grounds into which the land is divided, and of all easements and
rights-of-way;
         (i)   The length of boundary lines of all streets, alleys, blocks,
lots, parcels, public grounds, easements and rights-of-way, or enough
information so that the length of these lines can be derived by simple
calculation. Where a boundary line is an arc of a circle, the length of the
chord shall be shown;
         (j)   The widths of all streets, alleys, easements and rights-of-way;
         (k)   A graphic presentation of the minimum building setback lines on
all lots and parcels, and a notation of the distance between such lines and the
street right-of-way line. In no case shall the setback line be less than that
required by the Zoning Code or major street plan;
         (l)   The area of each lot or parcel containing an area of one acre or
more;
         (m)   Consecutive letters or numbers on all blocks and consecutive
numbers on all lots throughout the plat;
         (n)   The name of each street printed on the graphic representation of
each street, and an appropriate label designating all other easements, rights-
of-way, setback lines, dedications and reservations (such as, “dedicated for
park purposes” or “reserved for public school site”); and
         (o)   Abutting street lines and adjoining lakes or streams at the date
of survey, and a graphic presentation and notation of the high-water marks of
such lakes or streams. If any portion of the land within a subdivision shown on
any final map is subject to inundation or flood hazard by stormwaters, such
fact and portion shall be clearly shown on the final plat by a prominent note
on each sheet of the plat whereon any such portion shall be shown.
   (B)   Certificate required. The final plat shall include the following final
plat certificates, in black (India) ink:
Approved by Matteson Plan Commission at a meeting held this ______ day of
__________ A.D., 20_____.
_____________________________________
Chairperson
Matteson Plan Commission
State of Illinois, County of Cook, Village of Matteson, approved by the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Matteson, Illinois, at a
meeting held this ______ day of __________ A.D., 20_____.
Approved by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Matteson,
Illinois, at a meeting held this ______ day of __________, A.D. 20_____
_____________________________________
President of the Board of Trustees
_____________________________________
Village Clerk
I find no deferred installments of outstanding unpaid special assessments due
against the land included in the above drawn plat. Dated this ______ day of
__________ A.D., 20_____.
_____________________________________
Collector of the Village of Matteson, Illinois
 
   (C)   Signature of owner or owners of property. If a corporation, it shall
be signed by the President and attested to by the Secretary, corporate seal to
be affixed. All signatures shall be attested to by a notary public and notarial
seal affixed.
(2000 Code, § 155.033) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 154.055 GENERAL.
   (A)   Conformity to plans. All subdivisions shall conform to the official
plan, or adopted segments thereof; to the zoning code and subdivision code; and
to all other pertinent ordinances, resolutions and plans.
   (B)   Interpretations. In order to promote the best possible development and
use of land, the Plan Commission shall interpret the standards, provisions and
specifications contained in this chapter liberally and in favor of the
community interest. Exceptions from these standards, provisions and
specifications may be granted when shown conclusively and to the satisfaction
of the Plan Commission that the exceptions will bring about a more logical and
desirable result than would be obtained by strict compliance.
   (C)   Natural features.
      (1)   Each subdivision shall be appropriate to the topography, the
drainage and other natural features of the site. Developments shall be so laid
out that they will tend to preserve, enhance and promote the public benefit
from natural scenic beauty.
      (2)   No live tree exceeding three inches in diameter one foot above the
ground may be cut down or otherwise removed from the land within any
subdivision without the approval of the Plan Commission. In instances where the
removal of trees is authorized, the Plan Commission at its option may require
the replacement of the trees in accordance with the provisions of §§
154.070 through
154.081.
   (D)   Land subject to inundation. See
Chapter 152 of this title.
(2000 Code, § 155.045) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.056 STREETS.
   (A)   Layout. The layout of streets in a subdivision plan shall conform to
existing regulations and policies and shall be based on a thorough
consideration of:
      (1)   Topographic considerations and drainage;
      (2)   Public convenience and safety;
      (3)   The existing street pattern;
      (4)   The future circulation needs of nearby lands; and
      (5)   The proposed uses of land to be served.
   (B)   Right-of-way.
      (1)   Street right-of-way widths shall be as designated on the major
street plan.
      (2)   In all other instances, the following table shall apply:
Alleys                                    20 feet
Collector streets                         80 feet
County highways                           100 feet
Marginal access streets                   66 feet
Minor streets (multiple-family dwellings) 66 feet
Minor streets (single-family dwellings)   66 feet
State highways                            120 feet
Township highways                         80 feet
 
      (3)   All streets with 66-foot rights-of-way shall have a pavement width
of 30 feet face of curb to face of curb.
      (4)   Greater right-of-way widths may be required where indicated by
physical features and sound principles of highway design.
   (C)   Minor streets. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage
high-speed or through traffic.
   (D)   Boundary streets. Streets shall not be laid out on the boundary of a
subdivision. Exceptions to this may be permitted where the streets are
desirable for further expansion or where streets shall conform to the existing
street system.
   (E)   Intersections. Street intersections with main highways shall be
limited to not more than one per quarter mile unless topographic and physical
conditions require a lesser distance. Street intersections shall be at right
angles. Where unusual conditions exist, the Plan Commission may permit
intersections of less than 90 degrees but not less than 60 degrees. In all
cases, street intersections and junctions shall be laid out so as to facilitate
the safe flow of traffic. In no case shall two junctions be offset less than
125 feet.
   (F)   Cul-de-sacs. A cul-de-sac shall be not more than 500 feet in length
measured along the centerline from the centerline of the street of origin to
the center of the turnaround, and each shall have a terminus generally circular
in shape, with a diameter of 120 feet and a center on or within 30 feet of the
cul-de-sac centerline.
   (G)   Marginal access streets. Wherever a subdivision borders on or contains
the right-of-way of a limited access street, highway or thoroughfare, or a
railroad or a utility right-of-way, a street may be required approximately
parallel to and on either side of the right-of-way a distance suitable to the
service of such uses as front thereon.
   (H)   Half-streets. Half-streets shall not be permitted except to complete
an existing half-street which is dedicated and accepted, or to conform to the
major street plan.
   (I)   Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall not
be permitted. All streets intended to provide the subdivision with future means
of ingress and egress shall extend to the subdivision boundary.
(2000 Code, § 155.046) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.057 BLOCKS.
   (A)   Design. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with
due regard for the following:
      (1)   Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs
of the types of use contemplated;
      (2)   Zoning requirements as to lot size and dimension;
      (3)   Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of
street traffic; and
      (4)   Limitations and opportunities of topography.
   (B)   Length. No block shall exceed 1,800 feet in length except where
required by unusual topographic conditions, nor shall they be less than 600
feet in length.
   (C)   Crosswalks. Where blocks exceed 1,000 feet in length or where
orientation or pedestrian circulation requirements indicate, crosswalks may be
required. Crosswalks shall consist of a public right-of-way or easement not
less than ten feet in width. In addition, side yards adjacent to the crosswalk
right-of-way shall have a minimum width of ten feet.
(2000 Code, § 155.047) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.058 LOTS.
   (A)   Dimensions. Lot dimensions and area shall be not less than the
requirements of the Zoning Code.
   (B)   Frontage. All lots shall front directly on an improved public street.
Lots adjoining state highways, expressways and arterial streets shall be
provided with marginal access streets or shall front on an interior street.
   (C)   Lot lines. Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to the
street line or substantially so, and along curvilinear street lines, side lot
lines so formed shall form a lot having a minimum frontage at the street right-
of-way line and at the rear property line equal to the combined width of the
two side yards required in the zone in which the lot is located or 25 feet,
whichever is greater.
   (D)   Deep lots. Lots abutting an expressway or arterial street, a railroad
right-of-way, or other inharmonious use shall have a depth of 20 feet in excess
of the typical interior lot in the same subdivision. A dense planting screen
easement 20 feet in width, across which there shall be no right of access,
shall be required on such deep lots.
   (E)   Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall have sufficient
gross and buildable area to provide an appropriate building setback from and
orientation to both streets.
   (F)   Buildable area. Buildable area is the difference between the gross lot
area and the minimum area requirement of front yards, side yards and rear yards
as defined in the Zoning Code.
      (1)   Interior lots. All residential interior lots shall contain a
minimum buildable area.
      (2)   Corner lots. All residential corner lots shall contain a buildable
area not less than the buildable area of residential interior lots within the
same zoning district of the subdivision.
(2000 Code, § 155.048) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.059 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Utility easements.
      (1)   All utility distribution lines for communication, telephone,
electric and other utility services to be installed in developments or
subdivisions shall be installed underground within utility easements or
dedicated public ways.
      (2)   Easements shall be provided for underground utility service. They
shall have a minimum width of 15 feet. Where it is intended that all utilities
shall share the same underground easement, additional width sufficient to avoid
conflict shall be provided. Easements shall be established along rear lot lines
and such other lot lines as are required to provide continuity of alignment
throughout the area to be served.
   (B)   Drainage easements.
      (1)   When a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, established
drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of the
watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for proper drainage. It shall include an additional area at least 15
feet in width adjoining both edges of the established watercourse as certified
by the subdivider or his or her engineer.
      (2)   Where ditch drainage is used in conjunction with storm sewers, the
easement shall be of sufficient width to allow future construction of a storm
sewer main adequate to carry the ultimate runoff of the watershed.
(2000 Code, § 155.049) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 154.070 PURPOSE.
   It is deemed necessary and essential to require and control the provision
and installation of improvements when property is subdivided and developed, in
order to:
   (A)   Endure conformity to the statutes governing the subdivision of land in
this state;
   (B)   Cause the installation of the utilities and public service facilities
necessary to serve the property developed;
   (C)   Provide for the current financing of the facilities;
   (D)   Spread the cost of required improvements on the property benefitted;
   (E)   Prevent the dissipation or the improper use of public funds in
providing these improvements or maintaining faulty installation; and
   (F)   Protect the living standards, public safety and the common welfare of
residents within and without the subdivision.
(2000 Code, § 155.060) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.071 QUALIFICATIONS OF CONTRACTORS.
   The Village Engineer shall recommend to the President and the Board of
Trustees minimum standards of qualifications for contractors and subcontractors
participating in the construction of public improvements. On passage and
approval by the President and the Board of an ordinance containing standards of
qualifications for contractors and subcontractors, only the contractors and
subcontractors who meet the minimum standards of qualifications shall be
eligible to participate in the construction of public works.
(2000 Code, § 155.061) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.072 TIME OF CONSTRUCTION.
   All improvements required herein shall be completely installed after
recording the final plat of the subdivision. The subdivider shall post a
performance bond or letter of credit approved by the Village Attorney
guaranteeing the installation of these improvements within the time limits
established by this chapter. The required approval of the performance bond or
letter of credit shall be necessary prerequisites to final plat approval, and
shall be in the sum equal to 110% of estimated cost of construction, as
approved by the Village Engineer.
(2000 Code, § 155.062) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.073 SEQUENCE OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   All underground utilities, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water
mains installed in streets, alleys, service roads or highways shall be
constructed or installed prior to the surfacing of the streets. Service
connections to the underground utilities and sewers shall be extended to two
feet beyond the property line of each lot so as to obviate disturbing the
surface improvements in the public ways when service connections are later
made.
   (B)   All excavations below subgrade of proposed pavements shall be made by
drilling or open cut. If done by open cut, granular trench backfill conforming
to the latest issue of the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction of the State Department of Transportation shall be used.
   (C)   All excavations below the subgrade of existing pavements shall be made
only by drilling under the existing pavement in such a way that surfacing is
not disturbed or weakened.
(2000 Code, § 155.063) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.074 DEBRIS REMOVAL.
   The subdivider shall clean and maintain all public ways, sewers and drains
free from debris and trash or other extraneous material prior to acceptance,
and at such other times during construction as may be deemed necessary to
prevent the creation of a public nuisance.
(2000 Code, § 155.064) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.075 MODIFICATIONS OF DESIGN FOR IMPROVEMENTS DURING CONSTRUCTION.
   No changes or modifications to plans previously approved by the village or
the Village Engineer will be permitted without the approval of the Village
Engineer.
(2000 Code, § 155.065) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.076 OVERSIZE IMPROVEMENTS.
   Whenever necessary to conform to an overall plan or otherwise to protect or
promote the public interest, oversize improvements may be required of the
subdivider.
(2000 Code, § 155.066) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.077 MONUMENTS.
   (A)   Preservation of existing monuments. All United States, state, county
or other official benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations in or
adjacent to the subdivision shall be preserved. When a proposed improvement in
a subdivision makes necessary the moving of benchmarks, monuments or stations,
the authority having jurisdiction shall be notified and given sufficient time
to take appropriate action.
   (B)   Placement of new monuments. Permanent monuments shall be erected at
all street corners and all points where street lines intersect the exterior
lines of the subdivision, and at all lot corners, block corners, angles in the
streets or lot lines, and points of beginning or end of curves.
   (C)   Monument materials. Permanent monuments shall be of galvanized iron
pipe not less than three-quarter inch in diameter, or solid steel rod not less
than one-half inch in diameter, and not less than 24 inches in length; or of
stone or concrete not less than four inches in diameter and not less than 24
inches in length. In no case shall thinwall pipe or electrical conduit be
permitted.
(2000 Code, § 155.067) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.078 GRADING.
   Where it is proposed to alter ground elevations more than three feet,
proposed as well as existing contours shall be shown on the contour map for
approval by the Village Engineer. Top soil removed during the course of grading
or construction shall be redistributed evenly to a depth of at least four
inches. All exposed areas shall be reseeded or sodded to prevent erosion.
Seeding and sodding shall conform to the specifications as set forth in §
154.096(F).
(2000 Code, § 155.068) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.079 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Streets.
      (1)   Unless otherwise specified, the type, design and construction of
streets shall be in accordance with the provisions of §§
154.095 through
154.099.
      (2)   Where the proposed subdivision fronts lots on only one side of a
public street, the subdivider shall be responsible for half of the street to be
improved as described above. Whenever land adjacent to an existing public
street is subdivided with lots facing thereon, and the street is not improved
to a standard as high as that required for an interior street of similar
character, the subdivider may be required to improve the public street, but in
no case shall the required expenditure for the improvement exceed that required
for a similar interior street. Any improvement of an existing public street
shall be subject to the approval of the public authority having jurisdiction.
      (3)   Street profile plans and cross-sections for all subdivision streets
shall be prepared by an engineer in accordance with the requirements of §§
154.095 through
154.099, and the engineer, as agent for the subdivider or his or her
contractor, shall be responsible for establishing the proper lines and grades
for all earth work and drains.
      (4)   Not less than one street of a width in accordance with the
provisions of §§
154.056 and
154.096(A)(3) shall be provided to furnish the subdivision with access to an
existing improved public highway. The access street shall be improved by the
subdivider in accordance with the standards appropriate to its function,
whether or not it lies partly or entirely outside the subdivision.
   (B)   Storm drainage.
      (1)   The storm drainage improvements shall conform to the system
designed and established by the engineer and approved by the Plan Commission.
Computations may be required for the entire watershed or drainage basin of
which the subdivision is a part. The design and construction of such structures
shall be in accordance with the specifications of §§
154.095 through
154.099.
      (2)   In all residential subdivisions, and in all business and industrial
subdivisions, underground storm sewer systems shall be constructed where
required, and installation shall be completed prior to the placement of any
surfacing material.
      (3)   Special consideration shall be given to the avoidance of problems
which may arise from concentration of stormwater runoff onto adjacent
properties. All storm drainage shall be conducted or connected to an approved
outfall.
   (C)   Culverts and bridges. Adequate drainage structures shall be provided.
The design, installation and construction of drainage structures shall comply
with specifications of §§
154.095 through
154.099.
   (D)   Curbs and gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be provided in all
subdivisions.
   (E)   Sidewalks.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of all streets in
subdivisions containing lots less than 20,000 square feet in size.
      (2)   In subdivisions containing no lots smaller than 20,000 square feet,
sidewalks may be required in accordance with the following standards, to
provide:
         (a)   A reasonable extension of an existing sidewalk system;
         (b)   Continuity between existing systems of sidewalks;
         (c)   Adequate pedestrian circulation in the vicinity of schools,
shopping centers or other community facilities; and
         (d)   For pedestrian safety.
      (3)   In subdivisions where sidewalks are required, pedestrian ways
bisecting blocks shall also be improved with sidewalks constructed to the same
standards.
   (F)   Street trees. Street or shade trees shall be planted by the developer
within the public right-of-way of all streets of the subdivision and may be
planted within lot boundaries of the subdivision. Trees shall have a trunk
diameter, measured 12 inches above the ground, of not less than three inches,
and shall be spaced not more than 40 feet apart. The plantings shall be
restricted to thornless honey locust, hackberry, sugar maple, red oak or pin
oak, sycamore, Norway maple, ironwood, columnar maple or hard maple, American
or European linden, and any other of the hardwood species approved by the Plan
Commission. Chinese elm, box elder, willow, poplar and similar fast-growing
brittlewood species are prohibited.
   (G)   Street signs. Signs giving names of streets shall be erected at all
street intersections. Street signs shall be provided by the subdivider in
accordance with village standards and specifications, and shall be located so
as to identify every street within the subdivision.
   (H)   Street lights.
      (1)   In residential subdivisions, street lighting shall be provided at
all street intersections within or abutting the subdivisions and at such other
locations designated by the Village Engineer. The street light system shall
have a minimum average maintained horizontal illumination of 0.6 footcandles,
or that minimum designated by the latest approval of the American National
Standards Institute contained in the American National Standard Practice for
Roadway Lighting, whichever is greater. Uniformity shall be a ratio not
exceeding six to one, as determined in the average level to minimum point
method.
      (2)   Business area street light shall have a minimum average maintained
horizontal illumination of 1.2 footcandles or that minimum designated by the
latest approval of the American National Standards Institute contained in the
American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting, whichever is greater.
Uniformity shall be a ratio not exceeding three to one, as determined in the
average level to minimum point method.
   (I)   Water supply facilities.
      (1)   A water supply, treatment and distribution system, including water
service pipes to each lot and appurtenances, shall be installed to serve each
subdivision.
      (2)   All water distribution systems shall be designed and constructed in
compliance with the standards set forth by the village, Environmental
Protection Agency and other applicable governmental agencies.
      (3)   All water supply systems shall meet the design specifications of §§
154.095 through
154.099.
   (J)   Fire hydrants. Every water supply system shall have adequate pipe
sizes, water pressure and supply, and sufficient fire hydrants to provide
adequate fire protection to meet local neighborhood needs in accordance with
the specifications set forth in §§
154.095 through
154.099.
   (K)   Sanitary sewage facilities.
      (1)   A sanitary sewage system, including service pipes to each lot and
appurtenances, shall be installed to serve each subdivision.
      (2)   All sanitary sewage systems shall be constructed in compliance with
the standards set forth by the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater
Chicago, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and other applicable
governmental agencies.
      (3)   All sanitary sewage systems shall meet the design specifications of
§§
154.095 through
154.099.
   (L)   Planting screens. The subdivider shall plant, install, construct or
otherwise provide all required fences, dense planting strips or other required
buffers along lot lines of houses within any development backing up to or
adjoining any existing or future expressway or arterial street; railroads; or
commercial area; or to enclose any hazard which, in the opinion of the Plan
Commission, might create a public nuisance.
(2000 Code, § 155.069) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.080 PROTECTION AND REPAIR OF EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The subdivider, his or her contractors, and suppliers shall be jointly
and severally responsible that existing improvements and the property of the
village are not damaged or rendered less useful or unsightly by the operations
of the subdivider, his or her contractors, or suppliers. This provision is
intended to include damage or nuisance with respect to the land, improvements
or landscaping of the village; damage to existing streets, sidewalks, curbs and
gutters, or parkways by passage thereover of equipment or trucks or by
excavation for any purpose; the spillage or tracking of earth, sand or rock
onto existing streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or parkways; the washing
by stormwater of earth or sand onto streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, or
parkways, or into catch basins; damage of water mains, sanitary sewers,
culverts or storm sewers. To reduce or localize the possibility of damage to
streets by heavy trucking, the Superintendent of Public Works shall instruct
the subdivider as to the streets to be used for access to the subdivision by
equipment and trucks, and the subdivider shall be responsible for enforcement
of this instruction on his or her contractors and their suppliers. The
subdivider may be required to construct a temporary construction road in lieu
of using local streets for access to and within the subdivision. The subdivider
shall make provisions to prevent the washing of earth or sand onto sidewalks,
streets, curbs and gutters, and into catch basins by stormwater.
   (B)   Where deemed advisable, the Board of Trustees shall require that the
subdivider post a surety to guarantee repair of damages or abatement of
nuisance. Where need for surety becomes apparent after construction is in
process, the Superintendent of Public Works shall have the power to order
construction discontinued until surety has been posted. Expenses incurred by
the village in repairing damages, cleaning streets, catch basins and sewers
shall be deducted from the surety.
(2000 Code, § 155.070) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.081 INSPECTION OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Required improvements. On notice from the Village Engineer that work
on any improvements is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of the
subdivision code or any other ordinance of the village, and not in compliance
with the plans or specifications as previously approved by the Village
Engineer, or that the work is being performed in an unsafe and dangerous
manner, the work shall be immediately stopped. The stop work order shall be in
writing from the Village Engineer, and shall be given to the owner of the
property involved, or to the owner’s agent, or to the person doing the work;
and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Any person who
shall continue any work in or about the improvement after having been served
with a stop order by the Village Engineer, except such work as he or she is
directed to perform to remove the violation or unsafe conditions, shall be
liable to a fine under the general penalties of the code of ordinances of the
village.
   (B)   Notification. Before commencing the construction of any improvements,
the engineer for the subdivider shall ascertain what persons or governmental
agencies, in addition to the Village Engineer, are to be notified and shall be
responsible for the notification in compliance with permits issued for
construction.
   (C)   Reports. Any inspection which requires the presence of the Village
Engineer, the village, or other governmental agency or an authorized
representative, shall also be attended by the engineer of the subdivider. The
subdivider’s engineer shall be responsible for submitting a report on the
inspection with copies to each in attendance.
   (D)   Subdivider’s responsibility. Regardless of contracts, agreements or
inspections performed, final responsibility for the installation of all
improvements, in accordance with the applicable standards, rests with the
subdivider.
   (E)   Approval and acceptance.
      (1)   When all improvements and all appurtenances thereto, based on
approved plans, have been constructed or installed, the engineer for the
subdivider shall provide the Village Engineer with a letter certifying
completion of improvements in substantial compliance with the plans and
specifications therefor.
      (2)   On receipt of the letter of completion, the Village Engineer shall
schedule a final inspection of the improvements installed at which
representatives of the engineer for the subdivider, the Village Engineer,
Superintendent of Public Works and any other agency having jurisdiction over
construction shall be present. When the Village Engineer is satisfied that the
improvements have been satisfactorily installed in substantial compliance with
the plans and specifications therefor, he or she shall address a letter stating
such to the President and the Board of Trustees.
      (3)   The letter shall not constitute acceptance by the public; it shall
be the responsibility of the agency intending to maintain and operate the
facility to provide the developer with a letter of acceptance.
      (4)   All improvements and all appurtenances thereto shall be guaranteed
by the developer and contractor against defects and workmanship for one year,
subsequent to the date of acceptance by the village by motion adopted at a
meeting of the President and the Board of Trustees.
      (5)   Sewer mains shall be inspected by closed circuit television within
two months of the end of the final guarantee period. Inspection shall be at the
subdivider’s expense, with detailed report in triplicate to the Board of
Trustees prior to termination of the one year guarantee. Pictures shall be
included in the report.
      (6)   Three copies of the “as built” drawings for all utilities installed
shall be submitted to the Village Engineer before the Village Engineer writes
his or her letter recommending acceptance.
      (7)   Prior to acceptance by the village, the engineer for the subdivider
shall be responsible for the completion, execution and submission of the
necessary final documents required by governmental agencies who have issued
permits for the improvements, and a copy of the documents approved by the
cognizant agency must be furnished to the village and the Village Engineer.
(2000 Code, § 155.071) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975; Ord. 891, passed 1-19-1976)
Penalty, see §
154.999
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS
§ 154.095 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   The construction of all improvements required by this chapter shall be in
compliance with the specifications set forth herein. Unforeseen construction or
improvements, as may be required by unusual topographic, soil or other
conditions, shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer. In these
special cases, prior to actual construction, drawings, reports, data, work
sheets and estimates of cost may be requested. Unless otherwise specified, all
street, sidewalk, storm drainage, sanitary sewer, water, street light and such
other improvements required, shall be designed and constructed in compliance
with the latest issue of Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction as published by the State Department of Transportation; Standard
Specifications for Traffic Signals as published by the State Department of
Transportation; The Sewer Permit Ordinance of the Metropolitan Sanitary
District of Greater Chicago; American National Standard Practice for Roadway
Lighting, sponsored by the Illuminating Engineering Society; regulations
published by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency; Standard
Specifications for Water and Sewer Construction in Illinois as published by the
Illinois Society of Professional Engineers et al; and such other specifications
as may be published by governmental agencies having control over design
standards in this state. Plans, specifications and estimates of cost for all
improvements must be submitted in quadruplicate to the Village Engineer for his
or her review and approval.
(2000 Code, § 155.080) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.096 STREETS.
   The following specifications for the design, grading and surfacing of new
and existing streets shall be adhered to.
   (A)   Design.
      (1)   Grades of streets. The maximum grades for collector and larger
streets shall not exceed 6%. The maximum grades for other streets shall not
exceed 8%. In no case shall the grade of any street be less than 0.3%.
      (2)   Vertical curvature. Vertical curves shall be provided at all
changes in street grade. Length of vertical curves shall be determined by good
engineering judgment. In no case shall the vertical curve at a street
intersection be less than 50 feet.
      (3)   Horizontal curvature.
         (a)   The minimum radius of centerline horizontal curvature shall be
as follows:
 
Arterial streets  500 feet
Collector streets 300 feet
Other streets     100 feet
 
         (b)   Angles on the centerline of a street are not permitted.
      (4)   Stopping sight distance. Stopping sight distance shall be based on
a line of sight, one end of which is four and one-half feet above the pavement
and the other end four inches above the pavement. In flat topography sight
distance of not less than 400 feet is desirable. In rolling topography sight
distance shall be not less than 200 feet.
      (5)   Width. Arterial street width shall be as determined by the Plan
Commission. Collector streets shall be constructed with a 36-foot width from
back to back of the curb. All other streets shall be 30 feet in width from face
of curb to face of curb.
   (B)   Grading. All excavations, embankment and subgrading work shall conform
to the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction. In general,
backslopes of all ditches on street rights-of-way shall be as flat as
topography will permit. In no instance shall the backslopes of cut sections or
ditches be less than two to one (two horizontal to one vertical).
   (C)   Construction. The following types of construction shall be the minimum
permitted.
      (1)   (a)   Base construction for residential streets exclusive of
collector streets shall be aggregate base course, type A or B, with a minimum
compacted thickness of nine inches.
         (b)   Base construction for collector streets in residential areas
shall be bituminous aggregate mixture base course, Marshall stability 1,700,
with a minimum compacted thickness of six inches.
         (c)   Base construction for streets in commercial and industrial areas
shall be bituminous aggregate mixture base course, Marshall stability 1,700,
with a minimum compacted thickness of eight inches.
      (2)   All streets shall be provided with a two course bituminous surface
consisting of bituminous concrete binder and surface courses, Class 1, each
course having an average minimum compacted thickness of one and one-half
inches.
      (3)   The final course (surface course) shall not be constructed until
written permission from the President and the Board of Trustees has been
granted.
      (4)   Binder and surface course mixes shall be State Department of
Transportation Class 1, unless otherwise approved by the Board of Trustees.
      (5)   The developer may petition for and be granted final acceptance of
the streets prior to completion of the final course. In this event he or she
will be required to place in escrow with the village an amount sufficient, as
determined by the Village Engineer, to cover the cost of the final surfacing
course. The village shall then contract to have this work done at such time as
it deems necessary.
   (D)   Curbs and gutters. Combination concrete curb and gutter shall be
constructed along the outside edges of all street pavements of the type and
thickness designated by the Village Engineer.
   (E)   Sidewalks. Sidewalks in residential areas shall be located one foot
inside the right-of-way line, and shall be not less than five feet wide and
five inches thick. The sidewalk shall be constructed with ready mix concrete
that is locally known as a six bag mix, air entrained, placed atop a two inch
cushion of CA-6 aggregate, properly compacted by mechanical method. The width,
thickness and location of sidewalks in nonresidential areas shall be subject to
the approval of the Plan Commission.
   (F)   Erosion control. All roadway ditches and slopes and all other slopes
subject to erosion by runoff waters shall be properly protected by riprap, sod,
seeding with rapid-growing grass or vegetation, and ditch checks. All the work
shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction, State of Illinois.
(2000 Code, § 155.081) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.097 STORM DRAINAGE STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Bridges and culverts. The size and capacity of all drainage structures
shall be computed using Talbot’s Formula for runoff. Wherever practical, pipe
culverts shall be used. The minimum length of culverts shall be at least equal
to the distance from edge of shoulder to edge of shoulder, plus six times the
vertical distance from the edge of shoulder to the flow line of the culvert. No
culvert shall have a diameter of less than 12 inches. In no case shall entrance
culverts be less than 20 feet in length. The design of all bridges and culverts
shall be approved by the Village Engineer.
   (B)   Storm sewers. The storm sewer system shall be designed by the rational
method, with self-cleaning velocities as follows.
      (1)   The part of the system which serves as main or terminal collectors
shall be of sufficient capacity to carry the maximum stormwater flows which may
occur in a ten-year period.
      (2)   The part of the system which serves as lateral collectors, and
which can readily be augmented by future additions, shall be of sufficient
capacity to carry maximum stormwater flows which may occur in a five-year
period.
      (3)   The system shall include all necessary appurtenances such as
inlets, catch basins and manholes as may be required for proper operation and
maintenance.
      (4)   The coefficients of runoff shall be based on the types of
development anticipated in all parts of the watershed affecting the drainage
structure, and shall be subject to approval of the Village Engineer.
      (5)   Where the main storm sewer serving a subdivision can be expected to
carry a substantial amount of stormwater from adjoining lands higher in the
drainage area, and where the runoff from these lands can be expected to
increase in the future because of more intense development, the developer shall
provide an underground storm sewer adequate to serve the entire drainage area
above the subdivision. The developer shall provide on-site retention in
compliance with the design promulgated by the Metropolitan Sanitary District of
Greater Chicago.
      (6)   No sewer line shall be less than ten inches in diameter.
(2000 Code, § 155.082) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.098 WATER SUPPLY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Individual wells. Wells for individual lots will not be allowed. All
properties shall be connected to the village water system.
   (B)   Water mains.
      (1)   All water mains that are to be constructed in the village shall be
ductile iron pipe, Class 2, cement lined.
      (2)   The water main shall not be less than eight inches in diameter, and
shall have all necessary valves housed within valve vaults having a minimum
inside diameter of four feet.
      (3)   The design of the water main layout and appurtenances and the
material used shall be subject to the approval of the Village Engineer.
      (4)   The necessary permit shall be obtained from the State Environmental
Protection Agency.
   (C)   Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants, subject to the approval of the village,
shall be installed throughout the entire subdivision at intervals of not
exceeding 300 feet. All fire hydrants shall be equipped with six-inch auxiliary
valve and valve box. Fire hydrants shall be East Jordan model BR-5 and shall be
equipped with two four-inch “steamer” connections. One “steamer” connection
shall be national standard threads, and the other shall be a five-inch Storz
connection. The locations for this type of fire hydrant will include all areas.
(2000 Code, § 155.083) (Ord. 1274, passed 9-16-1985; Ord. 3053, passed 4-7-
2008) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.099 SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Sewerage distribution system. Sanitary sewerage facilities shall be
designed and constructed in compliance with the rules and regulations and
permits which must be obtained from the Metropolitan Sanitary District of
Greater Chicago and Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. Plans,
specifications and construction work shall be subject to the approval and
inspection of both the Metropolitan Sanitary District of Greater Chicago and
the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer shall be given not less than three
working days’ notice in writing prior to commencement of construction.
   (B)   Sanitary sewer house service.
      (1)   All sanitary sewer house services that are to be constructed in the
village shall be PVC SDR-26 pipe, shall not be less than six inches in
diameter, and shall be installed in compliance with the Manual of Procedures
for the Administration of the Sewer Permit Ordinance of the Metropolitan
Sanitary District of Greater Chicago. The connection of the stub out of the
building with the sanitary sewer house service shall be made with what is
commonly known as a “mission band coupling”.
      (2)   The sanitary sewer house service shall be defined as the sewer
between the trunk line and the building.
(2000 Code, § 155.084) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975) Penalty, see §
154.999
DEDICATIONS, EASEMENTS AND RESERVATIONS
§ 154.110 DEDICATIONS.
   (A)   Areas required to be dedicated.
      (1)   All new streets created by a subdivision and shown on plats
submitted for approval and recording shall be dedicated outright to the public;
      (2)   Additional street widths shall be dedicated along existing
thoroughfares where a width greater than that existing is called for by the
major street plan;
      (3)   Pedestrian ways bisecting long blocks, or wherever else located,
shall be dedicated;
      (4)   Park and playfield sites: one acre per 80 dwelling units, with a
minimum site size of one-half acre; and
      (5)   Fire, police, utility services: as required.
   (B)   Identification of dedications. Areas to be dedicated shall be clearly
identified on the plat as dedicated to the public.
(2000 Code, § 155.095) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975; Ord. 1956, passed 2-2-2004)
§ 154.111 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Areas to be shown as easements.
      (1)   Public utilities, stormwater facilities and installations shall be
located on suitable easements as specified in §§
154.055 through
154.059 and
154.070 through
154.081; and
      (2)   Planting strips or other buffer zones, located between reverse
frontage lots and a thoroughfare, or between incompatible uses, or wherever
required.
   (B)   Identification of easements. Easements shall be clearly identified on
all plats.
(2000 Code, § 155.096) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.112 RESERVATIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Whenever the reasonable requirements provided by this chapter,
including the official map, shall indicate the necessity for providing for a
school site, park site or other public lands within any proposed subdivision
for which approval has been requested, and no such provision has been made
therefor, the Village Board shall require that lands be designated for such
public purpose before approving the plat. Whenever a final plat of subdivision,
or part thereof, has been approved by the Village Board as complying with the
official map and there is designated therein a school having jurisdiction of
the use, be it a school board, park board or other authority, the authority
shall acquire the land so designated by purchase or commence proceedings to
acquire the land by condemnation within one year from the date of approval of
the plat. If it does not do so within the period of one year, the land so
designated may then be used by the owners thereof in any other manner
consistent with this chapter, including the official map and the Zoning Code of
the village.
      (2)   Minimum reservations shall consist of the following:
         (a)   Elementary school sites (for combined school-park use): one acre
per 30 dwelling units, with a minimum site size of ten acres;
         (b)   Park and playfield sites: one acre per 80 dwelling units, with a
minimum site size of one-half acre;
         (c)   Fire, police, utility services: as required; and
         (d)   High school and junior high school sites: as required.
   (B)   Reservations and preliminary plats.
      (1)   Areas reserved shall be clearly identified on the preliminary plat
as reserved in accordance with this subchapter.
      (2)   The preliminary plat shall also contain the proposals of the
subdivider, as they might otherwise be platted, for the areas under
reservation, to be applied in the event the land is not acquired by the public
within the period of reservation.
      (3)   On completion of the period of reservation, the preliminary plat
shall remain a valid preliminary plat for the formerly reserved areas for a
period of one year.
   (C)   Reservations and final plats.
      (1)   Where practicable, final plats shall not include areas reserved;
the final plats should affect only that portion of the subdivider’s land which
is unrestricted by the reservations.
      (2)   Where final plats must include areas reserved, the areas shall be
clearly identified as reserved in accordance with this chapter, and shall not
contain any proposals of the developer.
      (3)   Final plats may be submitted for reserved land unacquired by the
public at the close of the reservation period. The plats will be considered
additional units of the subdivisions for which initial final plats were
recorded.
   (D)   Reversion. If the appropriate public agency having jurisdiction has
not, within the reservation period, acquired the site reserved for a public use
by the subdivider, he or she shall regain full and unencumbered title to the
same, and may use it in any way and any purpose permitted by the pertinent
regulations then in effect.
(2000 Code, § 155.097) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.113 RIGHT OF REFUSAL.
   The number, size and location of dedications, reservations and easements
shall be subject to approval, and the Plan Commission shall ascertain that the
proposed sites are suitable for the proposed uses. The public retains the right
to refuse any and all dedications.
(2000 Code, § 155.098) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
MODIFICATIONS
§ 154.125 HARDSHIP.
   When the Plan Commission, in interpreting this chapter, finds that
extraordinary hardship or injustice will result from strict compliance with
this chapter, the terms thereof may be varied to the extent deemed necessary
and proper to grant relief, provided that the modification is:
   (A)   Due to physical features of the site;
   (B)   The least deviation from this chapter which will mitigate the
hardship; and
   (C)   Not detrimental to the public interest, and is in keeping with the
general spirit and intent of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 155.110) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.126 APPLICATION FOR MODIFICATION.
   Application for any modification shall be made in writing by the subdivider
at the time the preliminary plat is filed for consideration, stating fully and
clearly all facts relied on by the petitioner, and shall be supplemented with
maps, plans or other additional data which may aid the Plan Commission in the
analysis of the proposed project. The plans for the development shall include
the covenants, restrictions or other legal provisions necessary to guarantee
the full achievement of the plan. Once the terms of any modification have been
agreed on, the review of the subdivision shall proceed as prescribed in §§
154.020 through
154.025.
(2000 Code, § 155.111) (Ord. 876, passed 8-4-1975)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than
$500 for each offense. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(2000 Code, § 155.999) (Ord. 1211, passed 6-7-1984; Ord. 3020, passed 6-18-
2007)
CHAPTER 155: TRAILERS AND TRAILER CAMPS
Section
   
155.01   Unlawful to permanently affix trailer to ground
§ 155.01 UNLAWFUL TO PERMANENTLY AFFIX TRAILER TO GROUND.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove the wheels or other
transporting device from any house car trailer or to otherwise fasten the house
car trailer, unless a permit to do so has been obtained from the village in
accordance with the existing Building and Zoning Codes. Such alteration shall
be construed as converting the house car trailer into a Class A residence
building and shall be subject to the requirements of the Building Code and
Zoning Code.
(2000 Code, § 156.01) (Ord. 322, passed 8-4-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 156: COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN
Section
   
156.01   Approval; adoption
   
156.02   Public inspection
§ 156.01 APPROVAL; ADOPTION.
   The Comprehensive Plan is hereby approved. The Comprehensive Plan is hereby
adopted as the official Comprehensive Plan of the Village of Matteson.
(Ord. 4446, passed 3-15-2021)
§ 156.02 PUBLIC INSPECTION.
   The Comprehensive Plan shall be available for public inspection.
(Ord. 4446, passed 3-15-2021)
CHAPTER 157: LAND USE PLAN
Section
   
157.01   Adoption of land use plan
   
157.02   Land use plan shall not amend Zoning Code
   
157.03   Areas the land use plan applies
§ 157.01 ADOPTION OF LAND USE PLAN.
   The development and land use plan, attached and made a part of Ord. 518, as
Appendix A thereof, which was prepared by the Plan Commission of the
municipality, under authority of 65 ILCS 5/11-12-6, is adopted as a part of the
official plan of the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 158.01)
§ 157.02 LAND USE PLAN SHALL NOT AMEND ZONING CODE.
   The development and land use plan is not intended to and does not in any way
amend the Zoning Code of the municipality, or in any way constitute a change in
zoning districts, but is a guide for future growth and development of the
municipality.
(2000 Code, § 158.02)
§ 157.03 AREAS THE LAND USE PLAN APPLIES.
   The development and land use plan applies only to the municipality and
contiguous territory not more than one and one-half miles beyond the corporate
limits of the municipality and not included in any other municipality.
(65 ILCS 5/11-12-12) (2000 Code, § 158.03)
CHAPTER 158: ZONING CODE
Section
   
158.01   Zoning code adopted by reference
§ 158.01 ZONING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Zoning Code of the village is hereby adopted by reference as if set
forth at length herein. The Village Planning Department shall maintain the
Zoning Code and make copies available to the public.
(2000 Code, § 159.01) (Ord. 1802, passed 4-23-2001; Ord. 1824, passed 9-17-
2001; Ord. 1833, passed 12-3-2001; Ord. 1865, passed 9-3-2002; Ord. 1875,
passed 11-4-2002; Ord. 1888, passed 1-6-2003; Ord. 1895, passed 3-3-2003; Ord.
1896, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 1901, passed 4-21-2003; Ord. 1935, passed 10-20-
2003; Ord. 1936, passed 10-20-2003; Ord. 2013, passed 12-20-2004; Ord. 2044,
passed 7-5-2005; Ord. 2054, passed 9-19-2005; Ord. 3036, passed 12-3-2007; Ord.
3086, passed 2-2-2009; Ord. 4018, passed 10-5-2009; Ord. 4025, passed 11-2-
2009; Ord. 4030, passed 12-21-2009; Ord. 4044, passed 6-7-2010; Ord. 4095,
passed 2-22-2011; Ord. 4121, passed 11-7-2011; Ord. 4125, passed 11-7-2011;
Ord. 4166, passed 10-15-2012; Ord. 4205, passed 11-4-2013; Ord. 4243, passed 9-
15-2014; Ord. 4298, passed 2-16-2016; Ord. 4318, passed 7-18-2016; Ord. 4413,
passed 3-16-2020; Ord. 4455, passed 6-21-2021; Ord. 4456, passed 6-21-2021;
Ord. 4481, passed 11-15-2021; Ord. 4518, passed 8-15-2022; Ord. 4519, passed 8-
15-2022; Ord. 4530, passed 9-26-2022; Ord. 4542, passed 10-17-2022; Ord. 4543,
passed 10-17-2022)
CHAPTER 159: RESERVED
CHAPTER 160: SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTALS
Section
   
160.01   Definitions
   
160.02   Purpose and applicability
   
160.03   Short-term rentals restricted
   
160.04   Public nuisance declared
   
160.05   Notice of violation
 
   
160.99   Penalty
§ 160.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   RENTAL PREMISES. All or part of a principal structure or accessory structure
in a residentially zoned district being rented or otherwise let to person(s)
other than the owner of the subject property.
   RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE. A residential structure located in a residential
zoning district within the corporate limits of the Village of Matteson, as
residential districts are defined in Chapter 150 of Zoning Regulations, as
amended from time to time.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. The accessory use and/or occupancy for a period of less
than three months of a principal structure or accessory structure pursuant to a
written or oral agreement which permits and/or provides for occupancy of all or
part of such structure by any person other than the owner thereof, or an
immediate family member of the owner thereof, and whether or not the permission
of such occupancy is in exchange for consideration, therefore.
   SHORT-TERM RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY OWNER. The individual or entity which
has title to the property which is the subject of a short-term residential
rental.
(Ord. 4443, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 160.02 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter (short-term residential
rentals) to preserve the character and integrity of residential neighborhoods
within the village by prohibiting residential structures from being used for
the commercial purpose of providing short-term residential rentals.
(Ord. 4443, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 160.03 SHORT-TERM RENTALS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, leasing, renting, offering or
inviting the leasing or renting, or otherwise permitting the short-term rental
and/or occupancy of any dwelling and/or accessory structure located within the
village for less than three consecutive months at a time shall be prohibited,
with the exception of a hotel or similar establishment duly licensed by the
village, and such conduct shall be prohibited, whether engaged in or
participated in by the owner(s) of the property, one or more agent(s) of the
property owner(s), and/or by any person(s) leasing, or seeking to lease as a
lessor(s), or renting or seeking to rent as lessee(s) and/or otherwise occupy a
premises as tenant(s) and/or temporary occupant(s) thereof.
   (B)   The term of any lease or occupancy agreement which has satisfied the
minimum term required by this section may be extended on a month to month basis
on the condition that the tenant(s) remain(s) the same and the property is
registered with the village as having obtained an appropriate business license.
   (C)   Dwellings shall not be leased, or otherwise permitted to be occupied
by other than the same tenant, more than two times during any consecutive 12-
month period unless the rental agreement therefore has been terminated by
reason of a tenant default.
   (D)   The restrictions of this chapter shall be applicable whether the
rental premises comprise(s) all or a part of the principal structure, or all or
part of any accessory structure.
   (E)   Whether or not consideration is exchanged for the lease and/or rental
of a premises shall not affect the fact that the occupancy thereof is treated
as a short-term rental for the purposes of this chapter if the definition
thereof is otherwise applicable to such activity.
   (F)   The property owner shall remain responsible for compliance with all
applicable provisions of this code and/or the village zoning ordinance during
the term of any rental and/or occupancy agreement and/or during the term of any
occupancy of the rental premises by persons other than the property owner.
   (G)   No temporary structure shall be permitted to be used for a short-term
rental.
   (H)   The prohibition on short-term rentals as herein provided shall not
apply when the immediately preceding owner of a property maintains possession
of the dwelling unit after closing on a real estate transaction for the sale
thereof and leases said property back from the successor owner for a period of
time pursuant to a written agreement.
(Ord. 4443, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 160.04 PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED.
   Operation of any short-term residential rental within the Village of
Matteson in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be deemed a public
nuisance and abated pursuant to all available remedies, including but not
limited to injunctive relief. In addition to the penalties provided for herein,
the Village of Matteson shall be entitled to receive from the short-term
residential rental owner reimbursement for the cost of the village's reasonable
attorney fees, costs and expenses incurred by the Village of Matteson to abate
a short-term residential rental operating as a public nuisance.
(Ord. 4443, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 160.05 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   The notice of a violation of the provisions set forth or referenced in this
chapter shall be served in any of the following manners:
   (A)   Personal service of process by handing the notice of violation to the
respondent, or their employees or agents, by any authorized Village of Matteson
official, police officer; or code enforcement officer.
   (B)   Personal service of process as authorized by the Illinois Code of
Civil Procedure, 735 ILCS 5/2-203.
   (C)   Mailing the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested to the
respondent's last known address, or in the case of a business, to the address
for the registered agent or the address for its principal place of business.
   (D)   E-mailing the notice to the short-term residential rental owner's last
known email address when the respondent is the short-term residential rental
owner.
   (E)   Posting the notice upon the property where the violation is found when
the respondent is the short-term residential rental owner.
(Ord. 4443, passed 2-16-2021)
§ 160.99 PENALTY.
   Any short-term residential rental owner or other person or entity who
violates any of the provisions set forth or referenced in this chapter, shall
be subject to the following penalties:
   (A)   A fine of $1,000 for a first offense within a 12-month period, and a
fine of $2,500 for a second or subsequent offense within a 12-month period.
   (B)   Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall be
considered a separate and distinct offense and a fine shall be assessed for
each day a provision of this chapter is found to have been violated.
Notwithstanding the forgoing, the escalation of fines as set forth above shall
not occur until a prior adjudication of a violation against the same individual
or entity has been entered.
   (C)   Continued violations of this chapter are subject to an injunction to
enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 4443, passed 2-16-2021)
CHAPTER 161: FORECLOSURE, VACANT AND RENTAL PROPERTY
Section
   
161.01   Purpose and intent
   
161.02   Definitions
   
161.03   Applicability and jurisdiction
   
161.04   Establishment of a registry
   
161.05   Inspection and registration of real property under foreclosure
   
161.06   Inspection and registration of real property that is not subject to a
mortgage in foreclosure
   
161.07   Registration of rental property
   
161.08   Maintenance requirements
   
161.09   Security requirements
   
161.10   Provisions supplemental
   
161.11   Public nuisance
   
161.12   Additional authority
   
161.13   Opposing, obstructing enforcement officer; penalty
   
161.14   Immunity of enforcement officer
   
161.15   Amendments
 
   
161.99   Penalty
§ 161.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   It is the purpose and intent of the Board of Trustees to protect the health,
safety, and welfare of the village and to ensure mortgagees, landlords, and
owners take responsibility to prevent and avoid nuisances in the village. The
purpose of this chapter is to identity foreclosing or foreclosed mortgages,
vacant property, and rental property in the village, to ensure that such
properties meet and maintain minimum building and housing code standards and
exterior maintenance standards. The Board of Trustees has determined that
requiring that all foreclosing mortgages, vacant properties, rental properties
be registered with the village and inspected serves these legitimate
governmental interests.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DEFAULT. That the mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the mortgage
on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of the debt,
referred to in the mortgage.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any law enforcement officer, building official, zoning
inspector, code enforcement officer, fire inspector, building inspector, or
other person authorized by the village to enforce the applicable code(s).
   EVIDENCE OF VACANCY. Any condition that on its own, or combined with other
conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property
is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: overgrown and/
or dead vegetation; past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities;
accumulation of trash junk or debris; abandoned vehicles, auto parts and/or
materials; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with
habitation or occupancy; the presence of an unsanitary, stagnant swimming pool;
the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail; statements by
neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government agents; and/or the
presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings in violation of
applicable code.
   FORECLOSURE or FORECLOSURE ACTION. The legal process by which a mortgagee,
or other lien holder, terminates or attempts to terminate a property owner's
equitable right of redemption to obtain legal and equitable title to the real
property pledged as security for a debt or the real property subject to the
lien. The legal process is not concluded until the property obtained by the
mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by certificate of title, or any
other means, is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length
transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
   LANDLORD. One or more persons or entities, jointly or severally, including a
mortgage holder in possession of real property, whom is vested all or part of
the legal title to the premises or all or part of the beneficial ownership and
a right to the present use and enjoyment of the premises, who rents, leases, or
lets for consideration any rental property.
   MORTGAGEE. The creditor, including but not limited to, trustees; mortgage
servicing companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent, servant, or
employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any assignee of the
creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement; or
any other person or entity with the legal right to foreclose on the real
property, excluding governmental entities.
   OWNER. Every person, entity, landlord, or mortgagee, who alone or severally
with others, has legal or equitable title to any real property as defined by
this chapter; has legal care, charge, or control of any such property; is in
possession or control of any such property; and/or is vested with possession or
control of any such property. The property manager shall not be considered the
owner.
   PROPERTY MANAGER. Any party designated by the owner as responsible for
inspecting, maintaining and securing the property as required in this chapter.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any residential or commercial land and/or buildings,
leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or portion thereof
identified by a property parcel identification number, located in the village
limits.
   REGISTRABLE PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any real property located in the village, whether vacant or
occupied, that is encumbered by a mortgage that is subject to an ongoing
foreclosure action by the mortgagee or trustee, has been the subject of a
foreclosure action by a mortgagee or trustee and a judgement has been entered,
or has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred
to the beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. The designation of a
"foreclosure" property as "registrable" shall remain in place until such time
as the property is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length
transaction or the foreclosure action has been dismissed; or
      (2)   Any property that is vacant for more than 30 days or any
cancellation of utility or service, whichever occurs first; or
      (3)   Rental property, as defined herein.
   REGISTRY. A web-based electronic database of searchable real property
records, used by the village to allow mortgagees, landlords, and owners the
opportunity to register properties and pay applicable fees as required in this
chapter.
   RENTAL PROPERTY. Any improved structure or portion of a structure within the
village which is occupied by someone other than the owner or landlord of the
real property for residential or commercial purposes, including but not limited
to the following: any living quarters or accommodations in any hotel, apartment
hotel, motel, resort motel, apartment, apartment motel, rooming house, mobile
home, mobile home park, mobile home space, recreational vehicle park, town
home, or condominium and for which the owner and/or landlord receives any value
or consideration, including but not limited to money, or the exchange of goods
or services, regardless of the relationship between lessor and lessee.
      LONG-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY. Rental property which the owner and/or
landlord rents or leases for a term of 181 days or longer.
      SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY. Rental property which the owner and/or
landlord rents or leases for a term not exceeding 180 days.
   SEMI-ANNUAL REGISTRATION. Six months from the date of the first action that
requires registration, as determined by the village, or its designee, and every
subsequent six months. The date of the initial registration may be different
than the date of the first action that required registration.
   UTILITIES AND SERVICES. Any utility and/or service that is essential for a
building to be habitable and/or perform a service necessary to comply with all
village codes. This includes, but is not limited to, electrical, gas, water,
sewer, lawn maintenance, pool maintenance, and snow removal.
   VACANT. Any parcel of land in the village that contains any building or
structure that is not lawfully occupied.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.03 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
   This chapter applies to all foreclosing, foreclosed, vacant, and rental
properties within the village.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGISTRY.
   Pursuant to the provisions of §
161.04 the village, or its designee, shall establish a registry cataloging each
registrable property within the village, containing the information required by
this chapter.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.05 INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION OF REAL PROPERTY UNDER FORECLOSURE.
   (A)   Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the
village shall perform an inspection of the property upon it being in default or
defaulted by the mortgagor as evidenced by the filing of a foreclosure action.
   (B)   Property inspected pursuant to division (A) above that remains in
foreclosure, shall be inspected every 30 days by the mortgagee or mortgagee's
designee. If an inspection shows a change in the property's occupancy status
the mortgagee shall, within ten days of that inspection, update the occupancy
status of the property registration.
   (C)   Within ten days of the date any mortgagee files a foreclosure action,
the mortgagee shall register the real property with the village registry, and,
at the time of registration, indicate whether the property is vacant, and if so
shall designate in writing a property manager to inspect, maintain and secure
the real property subject to the mortgage under foreclosure action. A separate
registration is required for each property under a foreclosure action,
regardless of whether the property is occupied or vacant.
   (D)   Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a
minimum the name of the mortgagee, the mailing address of the mortgagee, e-mail
address, telephone number and name of the property manager and said person's
address, e-mail address, and telephone number.
   (E)   At the time of initial registration each registrant shall pay a non-
refundable semi-annual registration fee of $300 for each property. Subsequent
non-refundable semi-annual registrations of registrable properties and fees in
the amount of $300 are due within ten days of the expiration of the previous
registration. Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: (1) registration
and registration enforcement; (2) code enforcement and mitigation related to
defaulted properties; (3) post-closing counseling and foreclosure intervention
limited to owner-occupied persons in default, which may not include cash and
mortgage modification assistance; and (4) for any related purposes as may be
adopted in the policy set forth in this chapter. Said fees shall be deposited
to a special account in the village's department dedicated to the cost of
implementation and enforcement of this chapter, and fulfilling the purpose and
intent of this chapter. None of the funds provided for in this section shall be
utilized for the legal defense of foreclosure actions.
   (F)   If the mortgage and/or servicing on a property is sold or transferred,
the new mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this chapter. Within ten days
of the transfer, the new mortgagee shall register the property or update the
existing registration. The previous mortgagee(s) will not be released from the
responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties accrued
during that mortgagee's involvement with the registrable property.
   (G)   If the mortgagee sells or transfers the registrable property in a non-
arm's length transaction to a related entity or person, the transferee is
subject to all the terms of this chapter. Within ten days of the transfer, the
transferee shall register the property or update the existing registration. Any
and all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties, regardless of who the
mortgagee was at the time registration was required, including but not limited
to unregistered periods during the foreclosure process, are the responsibility
of the transferee and are due and payable with the updated registration. The
previous mortgagee will not be released from the responsibility of paying all
previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties accrued during that mortgagee's
involvement with the registrable property.
   (H)   If the foreclosing or foreclosed property is not registered, or the
registration fee is not paid within 30 days of when the registration or renewal
is required pursuant to this section, a late fee equivalent to 10% of the semi-
annual registration fee shall be charged for every 30-day period, or portion
thereof, the property is not registered and shall be due and payable with the
registration.
   (I)   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as well as
any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure
or by any other legal means.
   (J)   Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the semi-
annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security, and maintenance
standards of this section as long as the property remains registrable property.
   (K)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly
register or to modify the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as
required by this chapter is a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the village.
   (L)   If any property is in violation of this chapter the village may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance with and/or place a lien on the
property for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any additional cost
incurred to the property into compliance.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.06 INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION OF REAL PROPERTY THAT IS NOT SUBJECT TO A
MORTGAGE IN FORECLOSURE.
   (A)   Any owner of vacant property located within the village shall within
ten days after the property becomes vacant, register the real property with the
village registry.
   (B)   Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a
minimum the name of the owner, the mailing address of the owner, e-mail
address, and telephone number of the owner, and if applicable, the name and
telephone number of the property manager and said person's address, e-mail
address, and telephone number.
   (C)   At the time of initial registration each registrant shall pay a non-
refundable semi-annual registration fee of $300 for each vacant property.
Subsequent semi-annual registrations of vacant properties and fees in the
amount of $300 are due within ten days of the expiration of the previous
registration. Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: (1) registration
and registration enforcement; (2) code enforcement and mitigation related to
vacant properties; and (3) for any related purposes as may be adopted in the
policy set forth in this chapter. Said fees shall be deposited to a special
account in the village's department dedicated to the cost of implementation and
enforcement of this chapter, and fulfilling the purpose and intent of this
chapter.
   (D)   If the property is sold or transferred, the new owner is subject to
all the terms of this chapter. Within ten days of the transfer, the new owner
shall register the vacant property or update the existing registration. The
previous owner(s) will not be released from the responsibility of paying all
previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties accrued during that owner's
involvement with the vacant property.
   (E)   If the vacant property is not registered, or either the registration
fee or the semi-annual registration fee is not paid within 30 days of when the
registration or semi-annual registration is required pursuant to this section,
a late fee shall be equivalent to 10% of the semi-annual registration fee shall
be charged for every 30-day period, or portion thereof, the property is not
registered and shall be due and payable with the registration. This section
shall apply to the initial registration and registrations required by
subsequent owners of the vacant property.
   (F)   Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the semi-
annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security, and maintenance
standards of this section as long as the property is vacant.
   (G)   Failure of the owner to properly register or to modify the
registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this chapter
is a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to enforcement by any of
the enforcement means available to the village.
   (H)   If any property is in violation of this chapter the village may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the property
for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any additional cost incurred to
the property into compliance.
   (I)   Properties registered as a result of this section are not required to
be registered again pursuant to the foreclosure mortgage property section or
rental property section.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.07 REGISTRATION OF RENTAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Every owner or landlord of rental property shall, prior to permitting
occupancy thereof by any person (or, within 60 days of the enactment of this
chapter) register the property with the Code Enforcement Department, or its
designee, on forms or other manner as directed. A separate registration is
required for each rental property. Registration shall be required annually
becoming due on the anniversary date of the initial obligation to register.
   (B)   Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name(s),
direct mailing address, a direct contact name, telephone number, and e-mail
address for the owner and/or landlord, and, if the owner and/or landlord does
not reside within 50 miles of the rental property, the name and 24-hour contact
phone number for the property manager. The registration shall also identify the
name(s), direct mailing address, a direct contact name, telephone number, and
e-mail address for the all persons authorized by the owner and/or landlord to
occupy the rental property.
   (C)   At the time of initial registration, each registrant shall pay a non-
refundable annual registration fee of $100 for single family, $150 for two to
four units, $200 for five to 12 units and $300 for 13 units or more. Subsequent
non-refundable annual registrations as required by this section are due within
ten days of the expiration of the previous registration. Said fees shall be
used to offset the costs of: (1) registration and registration enforcement; (2)
code enforcement and mitigation related to rental properties; (3) and for any
related purposes as may be adopted in the policy set forth in this chapter.
Said fees shall be deposited to a special account in the village's department
dedicated to the cost of implementation and enforcement of this chapter and
fulfilling the purpose and intent of this section.
   (D)   Any person or other legal entity that has registered a property under
this section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within ten days of the change.
   (E)   If the rental property is sold, the new owner or landlord is subject
to all the terms of this section. If the new owner does not immediately occupy
the property, the new owner shall register the rental property or update the
existing registration within ten days of the sale. If the new owner does not
intend to offer the property for rent and the property is not immediately
occupied, the property is subject to registration under §
161.05 Inspection and Registration of Real Property that is Vacant for as long
as the property meets the requirements of that section. Any and all previous
unpaid fees, fines, and penalties at the time initial registration and/or
renewal registrations were required and are subject to enforcement per this
section. The previous owner or landlord will not be released from the
responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties accrued
during that owner and/or landlord's involvement with the rental property. The
provisions of this section are cumulative with and in addition to other
available remedies. Moreover, the village is authorized and empowered to
collect on the previous owner and/or landlord's non-payment of previous fees,
fines, and penalties in any lawful manner.
   (F)   If the rental property is not registered, or either the registration
fee or the renewal fee is not paid within 30 days of when the registration or
renewal is required pursuant to this section, a late fee equivalent to 10% of
the registration fee shall be charged for every 30-day period, or portion
thereof, the property is not registered and shall be due and payable with the
registration. This section shall apply to the initial registration and
registrations required by subsequent owners and/or landlords of rental
property. Registrations delinquent greater than 30 days are also subject to
additional fines as described herein.
   (G)   Failure of the owner or landlord of record to properly register or to
modify the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by
this chapter is a violation of this section and shall be subject to enforcement
by any of the enforcement means available to the village.
   (H)   In registering a rental property, the form will indicate that
submission grants the village the authority to issue trespass warnings to
individuals who cannot demonstrate written authorization to be on the rental
property, including any common areas related to the rental property. The
landlord or owner can opt out of or revoke the village's authority to issue a
trespass warning by notifying the village on the registration form or in
writing, directed to the Sheriff, code enforcement, Village Council or special
magistrate.
   (I)   If any property is in violation of this section the village may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the property
for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any additional cost incurred to
the property into compliance.
   (J)   Registration of a rental property does not alleviate the owner and/or
landlord from obtaining all required licenses, permits and inspections required
by applicable code or state statutes.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.08 MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by
federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material,
or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned.
   (B)   Registrable property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches
the color of the exterior structure.
   (C)   Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, of registrable
property shall be maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the
time registration is required.
   (D)   Registrable yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative
rock or bark or artificial turf/sod. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or
landscape shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar
material.
   (E)   Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering,
irrigation, cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and
removal of all trimmings.
   (F)   Pools and spas of shall be maintained so the water remains free and
clear of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth
in the applicable code(s).
   (G)   Failure of the mortgagee, landlord, owner, and transferees to properly
maintain the property as required by this chapter may result in a violation of
the applicable code(s) and issuance of a citation or notice of violation in
accordance with the applicable code of the village. Pursuant to a finding and
determination by the Village Sheriff, Magistrate or a court of competent
jurisdiction, the village may take the necessary action to ensure compliance
with this section.
   (H)   In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in
accordance with the applicable code(s) of the village.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.09 SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
   (B)   A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure
and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure. Broken
windows, doors, gates, and other openings of such size that may allow a child
to access the interior of the property or structure must be repaired. Broken
windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the window.
   (C)   If a property is registrable, and the property has become vacant or
blighted, a property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee, owner, and/
or landlord to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance
with the applicable code(s), and the property manager must perform regular
inspections to verify compliance with the requirements of this chapter, and any
other applicable laws.
   (D)   In addition to the above, the property is required to be secured in
accordance with the applicable code(s) of the village.
   (E)   When a property subject to this chapter becomes vacant, it shall be
posted with the name and 24-hour contact telephone number of the property
manager. The property manager shall be available to be contacted by the village
Monday through Friday between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., legal holidays excepted.
The sign shall be placed in a window facing the street and shall be visible
from the street. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches and
shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of 45 feet. The posting
shall contain the following language with supporting information:
      THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY
                                                    
      AND IS INSPECTED ON A REGULAR BASIS
                                      
      THE PROPERTY MANAGER CAN BE CONTACTED                            
      BY TELEPHONE AT
                                                                           
      OR BY EMAIL AT
                                                                              
   (F)   The posting required in division (E) above shall be placed on the
interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so that it
is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/
structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible
from the street or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to
support the posting in a location that is at all times visible from the street
to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior
posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials.
   (G)   Failure of the mortgagee, owner, and/or landlord to properly inspect
and secure a property subject to this chapter, and post and maintain the
signage noted in this section, is a violation and shall be subject to
enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the village. The
village may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section,
and recover costs and expenses in support thereof.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.10 PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTAL.
   The provisions of this chapter are cumulative with and in addition to other
available remedies. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the
village from collecting on fees, fines, and penalties in any lawful manner; or
enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to,
injunction, abatement, or as otherwise provided by law or ordinance.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.11 PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   All registrable property is at risk of being a public nuisance and if vacant
or blighted can constitute a public nuisance, the abatement of which pursuant
to the police power is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare,
and safety of the residents of the village.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.12 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   If the Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a property
subject to the provisions of this chapter is posing a serious threat to the
public health, safety, and welfare, the code Enforcement Officer may
temporarily secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee, owner and/or
landlord, and may bring the violations before the code enforcement, Board of
Trustees or special magistrate as soon as possible to address the conditions of
the property. Nothing herein shall limit the village from abating any nuisance
or unsafe condition by any other legal means available to it.
   (B)   The Sheriff, code enforcement, Board of Trustees or special magistrate
shall have the authority to require the mortgagee, owner and/or landlord,
affected by this section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security
measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or
other openings, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as
may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the property.
   (C)   If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a
serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, then the Sheriff,
code enforcement, Board of Trustees or special magistrate may direct the
village to abate the violations and charge the mortgagee, owner and/or landlord
with the cost of the abatement.
   (D)   In registering a property as required by this chapter, and in order to
abate part of the harm caused by properties that pose a serious threat to the
public health, safety, and welfare of the village, the Sheriff, code
enforcement, Village Council or special magistrate is granted the authority to
issue a trespass warning to individuals on the properties, including any common
areas related to the rental properties, unless they can demonstrate authority
in writing to be on the property. The landlord, mortgagee, and/or owner can opt
out of or revoke the village's authority to issue a trespass warning by
notifying the village on the registration form or in writing, directed to the
Sheriff, code enforcement, Village Council or special magistrate.
   (E)   If the mortgagee, owner and/or landlord does not reimburse the village
for the cost of temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement directed
by the Sheriff, code enforcement officer, code enforcement, Board of Trustees
or special magistrate, within 30 days of the village sending the mortgagee,
owner and/or landlord the invoice then the village may lien the property with
such cost, along with an administrative fee as determined in the village's fee
ordinance to recover the administrative personnel services. In addition to
filing a lien the village may pursue financial penalties against the mortgagee,
owner and/or landlord.
   (F)   The village may contract with an entity to implement this chapter,
and, if so, any reference to the Enforcement Officer herein shall include the
entity the village contract with for that purpose.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.13 OPPOSING, OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; PENALTY.
   Whoever opposes obstructs or resists any Enforcement Officer or any person
authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as provided in
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in the applicable code(s) or a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.14 IMMUNITY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   Any Enforcement Officer or any person authorized by the village to enforce
the sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal,
for reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the discharge of
duties imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.15 AMENDMENTS.
   Registration fees and penalties outlined in this chapter may be modified by
resolution, administrative order, or an amendment to this section, passed and
adopted by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 161.99 PENALTY.
   Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, a violation of this chapter
is declared unlawful.
(Ord. 4427, passed 9-21-2020)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   AGREEMENTS
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS
      
III.   BONDS
      
IV.   FRANCHISES
      
V.   STREET NAME CHANGES
      
VI.   VACATIONS
      
VII.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
VIII.   ENTERPRISE ZONES
TABLE I: AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1504     8-4-1992    Indemnification agreement with the County of Cook in lieu
                     of insurance and surety bond requirements.
                     Agreement authorizing the lease of village owned tower
1512     11-16-1992  space and real property located at the northwest corner of
                     Cicero Avenue and 205th Street.
                     Agreement authorizing the restated lease of village owned
1528     4-19-1993   tower space and real property located at the northwest
                     corner of Cicero Avenue and 205th Street.
1529     5-17-1993   Agreement authorizing the lease of village owned space to
                     the Matteson Historical Society.
                     Intergovernmental agreement with the Jones Rate Regulation
1557     6-6-1994    Consortium concerning the Jones Intercable Franchise
                     Agreement.
1597     7-3-1995    Redevelopment agreement between the village and
                     Transcontinental Properties, Inc.
1602     8-7-1995    Redevelopment agreement between the village and Botaba
                     Realty Company, Ltd.
1640     11-20-1996  Amended redevelopment agreement for Redevelopment Project
                     Area No. 1.
                     Intergovernmental tax increment redevelopment agreements
1641     11-20-1996  with High School District 227 and School District 159 for
                     Redevelopment Project Area No. 1.
1676     7-7-1997    Development agreement between the village and Miller
                     Consolidated, Inc.
1683     9-2-1997    Development agreement between the village and Miller
                     Consolidated, Inc.
1722     12-21-1998  Intergovernmental agreement to execute a mutual aid box
                     alarm system agreement.
1739     9-7-1999    Economic development agreement between the village and
                     Matteson Hospitality, Inc.
1740     9-20-1999   Economic incentive agreement between the village and
                     Sutton Ford.
1741     9-20-1999   Economic incentive agreement between the village and South
                     Oak Dodge, Inc.
1746     10-4-1999   Intergovernmental agreement establishing the Butterfield
                     Creek Steering Committee.
1752     1-3-2000    Economic incentive agreement for the Toyota automobile
                     dealership.
1760     4-17-2000   Economic incentive agreement between the village and
                     Capitol Lincoln Mercury, Inc.
1768     6-5-2000    Intergovernmental agreement of the Southern Combined
                     Dispatch And Communications System (SOUTHCOM).
1772     7-17-2000   Economic incentive agreement between the village and
                     Shaver Imports, Inc.
1779     11-6-2000   Economic incentive agreement between the village and
                     Shaver Imports, Inc.
1780     11-6-2000   Economic incentive agreement between the village and Arnie
                     Bauer Cadillac-GMC Truck Company.
1835     12-17-2001  Predevelopment agreement between the village and CyberCity
                     Developers, Inc.
                     Intergovernmental cooperation contract with the Illinois
1893     9-24-2002   Municipal League Risk Management Association for
                     membership.
1870     10-7-2002   Economic incentive agreement between the village and KRCV
                     Corp.
1876     11-4-2002   Installment purchase agreement for the purpose of paying a
                     part of the cost of capital equipment acquisitions.
1879     12-16-2002  Economic incentive agreement between the village and
                     Hawkinson Nissan, LLC.
1892     2-3-2003    Economic incentive agreement between the village and
                     Hawkinson Nissan, LLC.
                     Intergovernmental agreement providing for the planning,
1933     10-15-2003  development and operation of the South Suburban Airport
                     and creation of the South Suburban Airport Commission.
                     IMLRMA minimum/maximum contribution agreement between
1955     1-20-2004   village and Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
                     Association.
                     Amending intergovernmental agreement providing for the
1965     2-17-2004   planning, development and operation of the South Suburban
                     Airport and creation of the South Suburban Airport
                     Commission.
1969     4-5-2004    Redevelopment agreement between the village and Realty
                     America Group (Lincoln Mall).
1976     5-17-2004   Economic incentive agreement between the village and
                     Hawkinson Nissan, LLC.
                     Economic incentive agreement between the village and
1989     6-21-2004   Enterprise Leasing Company of Chicago and Miller
                     Consolidated, Inc.
1994     8-16-2004   Boundary line agreement between the village and the
                     Village of Richton Park.
                     IMLRMA minimum/maximum contribution agreement between
2006     11-15-2004  village and Illinois Municipal League Risk Management
                     Association.
2014     1-18-2005   Authorizing agreement for the purchase of 137 acres of
                     real property from Matteson Investments, LLC.
                     Authorizing intergovernmental agreement for the purchase
2016     2-22-2005   of 37.4 acres of real property from Board of Education
                     Elementary School District No. 159.
2025     4-18-2005   Approving amended and restated development agreement for
                     the Majesky Automotive Group automobile dealership.
2026     4-18-2005   Approving amended and restated development agreement for
                     the Miller Consolidated automobile dealership.
2039     5-16-2005   Approving redevelopment agreement between the village and
                     Liberty Plaza, LLC (Liberty Plaza).
                     Approving revised intergovernmental agreement of the
2041     6-6-2005    Southern Combined Dispatch and Communications System
                     (SouthCom).
                     Authorizing execution of lease agreement with United
2052     9-6-2005    States Cellular Operating Company of Chicago, LLC, for
                     water tower and ground space for property located at 21607
                     Oak Street.
                     Approving first amendment to redevelopment agreement
2075     6-5-2006    between the village and Liberty Plaza, LLC (Liberty
                     Plaza).
                     Authorizing conveyance of and execution of contract for
2076     6-5-2006    sale of certain real property pursuant to Lincoln Highway/
                     Cicero Avenue RPA IV redevelopment plan and project.
                     Approving redevelopment agreement between the village,
2078     7-3-2006    Meritex Developments, Inc. and Meritex Enterprises, Inc.
                     (Southgate Commerce Center).
2080     8-7-2006    Approving economic incentive agreement for Hyundai of
                     Matteson, LLC automobile dealership.
2095     1-16-2007   Approving an economic incentive agreement for the J.C.
                     Penny Store.
                     Authorizing the execution of an agreement of termination
3038     1-22-2008   and mutual release of a contract to purchase certain real
                     estate from Hexion Specialty Chemicals, Inc.
3072     10-20-2008  Approving an economic incentive agreement with Bannockburn
                     Stonegate Development, LLC.
                     Authorizing execution of a real estate sale agreement for
3087     2-17-2009   the village to purchase certain real estate from Corporate
                     Lakes of Matteson, LLC.
4006     7-20-2009   Approving assignment of amendment to the assigned and
                     restated economic incentive agreement (Auto Mall Project).
4029     12-7-2009   Approving agreement between Gatso USA and the village
                     related to an automated traffic law enforcement system.
4043     5-17-2010   Approving an easement agreement between the village and
                     the Elgin, Joliet and Eastern Railway Company.
4060     7-12-2010   Approving an economic incentive agreement for Great Lakes
                     Sonic, LLC.
4069     9-7-2010    Approving an economic incentive agreement for Great Lakes
                     Sonic, LLC.
                     Approving a final planned unit development plan for
4073     11-8-2010   redevelopment of property located at the southwest corner
                     of Lincoln Highway and Cicero Avenue (Crossroads Plaza).
4087     1-3-2011    Approving an economic incentive agreement for Key
                     Development Partners, LLC.
                     Approving a final planned unit development plan for
4092     1-18-2011   redevelopment of property located at the southwest corner
                     of Gateway Drive and Cicero Avenue (Menards - Meritex).
4096     3-7-2011    Approving a redevelopment agreement for the Matteson Auto
                     Mall.
4102     5-16-2011   Approving the first amendment to the economic incentive
                     agreement with Key Development Partners, LLC.
                     Approving a final planned unit development plan for
4105     6-20-2011   redevelopment of property located at 20602 and 20606
                     Cicero Avenue (car wash and oil change facility).
                     Approving a final planned unit development plan for the
4111     8-1-2011    Matteson Shopping Center located at the northwest corner
                     of Lincoln Highway and Cicero Avenue.
                     Approving an economic incentive agreement by and between
4115     8-22-2011   the village and Matteson Hospitality Real Estate, LLC
                     (Matteson Holiday Inn).
4116     9-6-2011    Approving the second amendment to the economic incentive
                     agreement with Key Development Partners, LLC.
                     Approving amended final planned unit development plans for
4124     11-7-2011   redevelopment of property located at 20602 and 20606
                     Cicero Avenue (Jiffy Lube oil change facility).
                     Approving amended final planned unit development plans for
4132     12-19-2011  redevelopment of property located at the southwest corner
                     of Lincoln Highway and Cicero Avenue (Crossroads Plaza).
                     Amending Ord. 4073 by approving an amended final planned
4144     1-17-2012   unit development plan for the redevelopment of property
                     located at the southwest corner of Lincoln Highway and
                     Cicero Avenue (Crossroads Plaza - no awnings).
                     Approving an agreement and plan approval with the state
4163     7-31-2012   for intersections improvements at U.S. Route 30 and
                     Central Avenue.
                     Approving a contract with Simec d/b/a Southern Illinois
                     Municipal Electric Cooperative to serve as the village s
4181     2-4-2013    exclusive consultant for its electric aggregation program
                     and for the engagement of the lowest cost electric
                     wholesale supplier.
4182     2-19-2013   Approving an economic incentive agreement by and between
                     the village and Menards, Inc.
4183     2-19-2013   Approving an economic incentive agreement by and between
                     the village and Chiku Enterprises, Inc.
                     Approving a final planned unit development plan for the
4187     4-1-2013    development of the property located at 5546 South Miller
                     Circle Drive (Dish Network).
                     Approving a final planned unit development plan and a
4188     4-15-2013   restaurant drive-in facility special use for the
                     redevelopment of property located at 4630 West Lincoln
                     Highway (Dunkin Donuts).
                     Approving an amendment to the Lincoln Highway/Cicero
                     Business Development District development plan,
4199     8-12-2013   designating expanded boundaries as part of the Lincoln
                     Highway/Cicero Business Development District and imposing
                     a retailers service hotel operators occupation taxes.
4200     8-12-2013   Approving the economic incentive agreement with Rogers
                     Enterprises, Inc.
4201     9-9-2013    Approving the economic incentive agreement with KDP
                     Matteson II, LLC.
                     Approving the first amendment to the assigned and restated
4203     9-23-2013   economic incentive agreement (auto mall project) by and
                     among the village, Arnie Bauer, Inc., Miller Consolidated,
                     Inc. and Suburban Trust Company as trustee.
                     Approving a final development plan and authorizing a
4206     11-4-2013   special use for a planned unit development for property
                     commonly located at 4800 West 211th Street (KDP Matteson
                     II, LLC).
                     Amending Ord. 4206 by approving an amended final planned
4215     2-18-2014   unit development plan for the redevelopment of property
                     located at 4800 West 211th Street (Knockouts Plaza -
                     additional signage).
                     Approving a final development plan and authorizing a
4227     3-17-2014   special use for a planned use development for the Matteson
                     Public Library located at 801 School Avenue.
                     Approving a final development plan and authorizing a
4237     6-9-2014    special use for a planned use development for a multi-
                     family housing development for persons in need of mobility
                     features.
4240     9-15-2014   Approving an economic development incentive agreement with
                     MGOBlue, LLC.
                     Approving a final development plan and authorizing a
4242     9-15-2014   special use for a planned use development for an automated
                     car wash located at 4002 West 211th Street.
4244     10-6-2014   Authorizing an addendum to mutual aid box alarm system
                     agreement.
4265     4-13-2015   Approving an economic incentive agreement with South
                     Suburban Mitsubishi, Inc.
                     Approving a planned use development and amended special
                     use permits for Lots 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 in the Brookmere
4271     6-1-2015    Subdivision and incorporating an amended and restated
                     redevelopment agreement with the Ryland Group, Inc. within
                     an MXD Zoning District.
4273     6-1-2015    Approving an economic incentive agreement with Vequity LLC
                     Series XIX Matteson Applebees.
                     Approval of a redevelopment plan and project for the
                     designation of the North Cicero TIF #7 and redevelopment
4274     7-20-2015   project area and the adoption of tax increment allocation
                     financing, therefor, convening a joint review board,
                     calling for a public hearing in connection therewith.
4284     9-28-2015   Amending the Matteson Commons redevelopment project area
                     by removing property therefrom.
                     Approving a final development plan and authorizing a
4297     2-1-2016    special use for a planned use development for a two-tenant
                     commercial building with a drive-through located at 400
                     Town Center Drive.
                     Approving a final development plan and authorizing a
4319     7-18-2016   special use for a planned use development and expansion of
                     an existing nursing home facility (Applewood Nursing Care)
                     Located at 21020 Kostner Avenue.
                     Approving a purchase agreement between the Sears and
4320     9-6-2016    Roebuck Company and the village and further authorizing
                     the purchase of the property commonly known as 600 Lincoln
                     Mall Drive.
4323     9-19-2016   Approving a second amendment to the Lincoln Highway/Cicero
                     Business District development plan.
4351     9-5-2017    Authorizing and accepting the donation of real property
                     commonly known as 21900 Governor s Highway.
4377     10-15-2018  Intergovernmental agreement of the Southern Combined
                     Dispatch And Communications System (SOUTHCOM).
4384     4-1-2019    Approving the real estate purchase agreement between First
                     Midwest Bank and the village.
                     Authorizing and accepting the donation of real property
4387     5-28-2019   from the South Suburban Land Bank and Development
                     Authority.
                     Authorizing execution of a real estate sale agreement for
4402     11-25-2019  the village to sell 0 and 1001 Echelon Circle to Alexi
                     Development, LLC.
4406     3-2-2020    Approving a purchase agreement with South Suburban
                     Development LLC.
                     Approving an agreement between the village and the
4410     3-17-2020   Metropolitan Alliance of Police representing patrol
                     officers.
                     Approving an agreement between the village and the
4411     3-17-2020   Metropolitan Alliance of Police representing police
                     sergeants.
                     Approving parking lot license agreement between the
4418     5-18-2020   village and Western Golf Association for property located
                     at the Lincoln Mall, 208 Lincoln Mall Drive.
4457     6-21-2021   Approving a sales tax sharing agreement between the
                     village and Hyundai of Matteson, LLC.
4469     8-16-2021   Approving a sales tax sharing agreement between the
                     village and South Oak Dodge, Inc.
4472     9-20-2021   Approving and authorizing the execution of a development
                     agreement between the village and IL Grown Medicine, LLC.
                     Approving and authorizing the execution of an investment
4474     10-18-2021  grade and audit agreement between the village and
                     Honeywell International Inc.
4489     1-18-2022   Authorizing the execution of a purchase and sale agreement
                     of 5357 Miller Circle Drive and 5353 Miller Circle Drive.
4493     3-21-2022   Approving an economic incentive sales tax sharing
                     agreement.
4494     3-21-2022   Approving a sales tax sharing agreement between the
                     village and Sutton Ford.
4496     3-21-2022   Approving the purchase and sale agreement for the property
                     commonly known as 21715 Main Street.
4506     5-16-2022   Approving sale of 4600 Lincoln Highway, pursuant to a real
                     estate purchase and sales agreement.
                     Approving a sales tax sharing agreement between the
4512     7-18-2022   village and Unity Dollar Plus Furniture d/b/a Discount
                     Rugs and Furniture.
4513     7-18-2022   Approving a sales tax sharing agreement between the
                     village and Hawkinson Kia.
4514     7-18-2022   Approving a sales tax sharing agreement between the
                     village and Hawkinson Nissan.
                     Authorizing the lease of energy conservation equipment
4515     8-15-2022   pursuant to a master lease purchase agreement with
                     Pinnacle Public Finance, Inc.
4520     8-15-2022   Approving and authorizing the execution of an agreement
                     between the village and Honeywell International Inc.
4551     1-17-2023   Authorizing sale of Market Square Crossing.
4552     2-21-2023   Approving and authorizing the sale of real estate commonly
                     known as 21210 Shannon Drive.
4572     9-18-2023   Approving the sale of property commonly known as 5317
                     Miller Circle Drive.
4577     10-30-2023  Approving the Market Square Crossing tax increment
                     financing redevelopment plan.
                    
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
     8-3-   Annexing the west 50 feet of the east 125 feet of the west half of
1503 1992   Section 15, Township 35 North, Range 13 East of the Third Principal
            Meridian.
1523 4-6-   Annexing Lot 9 in Block 14 in Arthur T. McIntosh & Company’s Crawford
     1993   Countryside Unit No. 2.
1525 4-6-   Annexing the south 242.29 feet of Lot 8 in Block 14 in Arthur T.
     1993   McIntosh & Company’s Crawford Countryside Unit No. 2.
1558 6-6-   Annexing certain real estate in the Northwest Quarter of Section 29,
     1994   Township 35 North, Range 13, east of the third principal meridian.
1656 2-3-   Annexing the west 75 acres of the Northeast Quarter of Section 15,
     1997   Township 35 North, Range 13.
1665 5-19-  Annexing approximately 80.9 acres of territory located at the southeast
     1997   corner of Route 30 and Ridgeland Avenue.
1707 7-20-  Annexing approximately 21.91 acres of territory located in the Rich
     1998   Township portion of the Old Plank Road Trail.
1728 3-1-   Annexing approximately 0.44 acres commonly known as 6363 Lincoln
     1999   Highway in Rich Township.
1757 3-20-  Annexing approximately 2.8 acres commonly known as the southeast corner
     2000   of Cicero Avenue and 207th Street in Rich Township.
     3-5-   Annexing approximately 77.83 acres of territory located 1.325 feet east
1792 2001   of the southeast corner of Route 30 and Ridgeland Avenue in Rich
            Township.
     4-23-  Annexing approximately 903.22 acres of territory bounded by Ridgeland
1801 2001   Avenue, Vollmer Road, Harlem Avenue, and Lincoln Highway (U.S. 30) in
            Rich Township.
1812 6-4-   Annexing certain territory at 4230 West 207th Street in Rich Township.
     2001
     8-6-   Annexing approximately 77.52 acres of territory located north of Route
1818 2001   30 and approximately 1,325 feet east of the northeast corner of Route
            30 and Ridgeland Avenue in Rich Township.
1900 4-21-  Annexing approximately 76.33 acres located at the northeast corner of
     2003   Route 30 and Ridgeland Avenue in Rich Township.
1034 10-20- Annexing approximately 146.68 acres located at the southwest corner of
     2003   Route 30 and Ridgeland Avenue in Rich Township.
2009 12-20- Annexing approximately 78.5 acres located on the north side of Route 30
     2004   and west of Central Avenue in Rich Township.
     8-1-   Annexing approximately 38.5128 acres located on the south side of
2046 2005   Butterfield Creek and east of Butterfield Place Unit Three Subdivision,
            at approximately 207th Street and Cicero Avenue in Rich Township.
2072 5-15-  Annexing approximately seven acres located at 5700 West 211th Street in
     2006   Rich Township.
3027 8-20-  Annexing certain territory located at 20929 Homeland Road in Rich
     2007   Township.
3060 6-2-   Annexing approximately 1.38 acres of territory located at 20739 - 20811
     2008   South Cicero Avenue in Rich Township.
     7-21-  Authorizing execution of a second amendment to an annexation agreement
3065 2008   between the Catholic Bishop of Chicago and Manheim Services
            Corporation.
3077 10-20- Annexing approximately 36 acres located at the northeast corner of U.S.
     2008   Route 30 (Lincoln Highway) and Harlem Avenue, Rich Township.
4462 7-19-  Annexing property located at 20851 South Harlem Avenue.
     2021
4463 7-19-  Annexing property located at 7114 Lincoln Highway
     2021
           
 
TABLE III: BONDS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
1502 8-3-   Issuance of $2,570,000 general obligation bonds, Series 1992, and for the
     1992   levy of a direct annual tax.
1517 12-21- Issuance of $140,000 general obligation bonds, Series 1992A, and for the
     1992   levy of a direct annual tax.
1577 11-21- Issuance of $2,900,000 general obligation bonds for the purpose of
     1994   defraying the cost of water and sewer line extensions.
1581 1-17-  Issuance of $2,900,000 general obligation bonds for the purpose of
     1995   undertaking water and sewer line extensions.
1583 1-23-  Issuance of $920,000 general obligation bonds for the purpose of financing
     1995   various capital projects and acquisitions.
1598 7-14-  Issuance of $6,000,000 tax increment allocation revenue notes.
     1995
1601 7-17-  Issuance of $2,000,000 general obligation bonds for the purpose of
     1995   refunding a portion of a certain general obligation bond.
1600 8-1-   Issuance of $3,000,000 general obligation bonds and providing for the levy
     1995   and collection of a direct annual tax.
1603 8-7-   Issuance of up to $6,000,000 tax increment allocation revenue note
     1995   (Matteson Commons Redevelopment Project).
1633 7-16-  Issuance of $5,350,000 general obligation bonds for the purpose of paying
     1996   the cost of constructing a new Village Hall.
1642 11-20- Issuance of $5,000,000 general obligation bonds for the purpose of paying
     1996   the cost of constructing improvements.
1649 12-16- Issuance of $5,000,000 general obligation bonds.
     1996
1654 1-21-  Issuance of $5,000,000 general obligation bonds, Series 1997-A.
     1997
1655 1-21-  Issuance of $350,000 general obligation bonds, Series 1997-B.
     1997
1677 7-10-  Issuance of $3,585,000 general obligation bonds for the purpose of paying
     1997   the cost of constructing certain public improvements.
1689 10-20- Issuance of $3,585,000 general obligation bonds, Series 1997-C.
     1997
            Issuance of $2,900,000 general obligation bonds, Series 2001 for the
1790 2-5-   purpose of paying the cost of constructing and installing certain public
     2001   improvements, including a new central fire station and joint dispatch
            facilities.
1820 8-6-   Tax abatement on $2,900,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue
     2001   source) Series 1995.
1860 8-6-   Tax abatement on $2,900,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue
     2002   source) Series 1995.
1866 9-16-  Issuance of $665,000 general obligation refunding bonds, Series 2002A for
     2002   the purpose of refunding certain general obligation bonds.
1867 9-16-  Issuance of general obligation alternate refunding bonds, Series 2002B for
     2002   the purpose of refunding certain general obligation bonds.
1921 9-2-   Issuance of $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility tax alternate
     2003   revenue source), Series 2003A.
1924 9-15-  Issuance of $1,000,000 general obligation bonds (sales tax alternative
     2003   revenue source), Series 2003B.
1937 11-3-  Issuance of $4,345,000 general obligation refunding bonds (alternate
     2003   revenue source), Series 2003B.
1964 2-17-  Issuance of $1,000,000 general obligation bonds (sales tax alternate
     2004   revenue source), Series 2004.
1968 4-5-   Issuance of $1,000,000 general obligation bonds (sales tax alternate
     2004   revenue source), Series 2004.
2000 10-4-  Issuance of $3,305,000 general obligation refunding bonds (alternate
     2004   revenue source), Series 2004A.
2001 10-4-  Issuance of general obligation refunding bonds (alternate revenue source),
     2004   Series 2004B for the purpose of refunding certain general obligation bonds.
2003 10-4-  Issuance of $10,000,000 tax increment revenue bonds, Series 2004.
     2004
2034 5-16-  Tax abatement on $1,000,000 general obligation bonds (sales tax alternate
     2005   revenue source) Series 2004.
2035 5-16-  Tax abatement on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility tax alternate
     2005   revenue source) Series 2003A.
2036 5-16-  Tax abatement on $2,060,000 general obligation bonds (alternate refunding
     2005   bonds) Series 2002B.
2037 5-16-  Tax abatement on $3,305,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue
     2005   source) Series 2004A.
2038 5-16-  Tax abatement on $2,930,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue
     2005   source) Series 2004B.
     10-17- Issuance of water revenue bonds, or in lieu thereof, general obligation
2057 2005   bonds (alternate revenue source), in an aggregate principal amount not to
            exceed $3,500,000.
     3-6-   Issuance of $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks alternate
2066 2006   revenue source), Series 2006 for the purpose of providing for improvements
            to the waterworks system of the village.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2006 to pay the principal of and
2097 2007   interest on $3,305,000 general obligation refunding bonds (alternate
            revenue source), Series 2004A, of the village.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2006 to pay the principal of and
2098 2007   interest on $2,060,000 general obligation alternate refunding bonds, Series
            2002B, of the village.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2006 to pay the principal of and
2099 2007   interest on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility tax alternate
            revenue source), Series 2003A, of the village.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2006 to pay the principal of and
3000 2007   interest on $1,000,000 general obligation bonds (sales tax alternate
            revenue source), Series 2004, of the village.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2006 to pay the principal of and
3001 2007   interest on $2,930,000 general obligation refunding bonds (alternate
            revenue source), Series 2004B, of the village.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2006 to pay the principal of and
3002 2007   interest on $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks alternate
            revenue source), Series 2006, of the village.
            Issuance of not to exceed $40,000,000 of tax increment revenue developer
     5-7-   notes and providing the security therefor for the purpose of financing
3017 2007   certain eligible redevelopment project costs described in the village
            Lincoln Highway/Cicero Avenue RPA IV redevelopment plan and project of the
            village.
3039 1-22-  Issuance of general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source) of the
     2008   village in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $10,000,000.
     2-19-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2007 to pay the principal of and
3043 2008   interest on $2,055,000 general obligation bonds (sales tax alternate
            revenue source), Series 2002B, of the village.
     2-19-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2007 to pay the principal of and
3044 2008   interest on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility tax alternate
            revenue source), Series 2003A, of the village.
     2-19-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2007 to pay the principal of and
3045 2008   interest on $4,395,000 general obligation bonds (utility tax alternate
            revenue source), Series 2003B, of the village.
     2-19-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2007 to pay the principal of and
3046 2008   interest on $1,000,000 general obligation bonds (sales tax alternate
            revenue source), Series 2004, of the village.
     2-19-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2007 to pay the principal of and
3047 2008   interest on $2,930,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source),
            Series 2004B, of the village.
     2-19-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2007 to pay the principal of and
3048 2008   interest on $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks alternate
            revenue source), Series 2006, of the village.
     4-7-   Issuance of $10,000,000 general obligation bonds (utility tax alternate
3054 2008   revenue source), Series 2008 for the purpose of defraying the cost of
            certain public capital infrastructure costs.
     4-6-   Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2008 to pay the principal of and
3091 2009   interest on $350,000 general obligation bonds (tax increment finance
            revenue source), Series 1997B, of the village.
     4-6-   Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2008 to pay the principal of and
3092 2009   interest on $3,305,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source),
            Series 2004A, of the village.
     4-6-   Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2008 to pay the principal of and
3093 2009   interest on $7,150,000 general obligation bonds (tax increment finance
            revenue source), Series 2004C, of the village.
     4-6-   Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2008 to pay the principal of and
3094 2009   interest on $4,395,000 general obligation bonds (utility tax alternate
            revenue source), Series 2003B, of the village.
     4-6-   Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2008 to pay the principal of and
3095 2009   interest on $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks alternate
            revenue source), Series 2006, of the village.
     11-2-  Authorizing and providing for an installment contract, the issuance of an
4021 2009   aggregate $3,000,000 taxable general obligation debt certificates, Series
            2009, by and for the village.
     7-12-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal and
4050 2010   interest on $350,000 general obligation bonds (tax increment finance
            revenue source), Series 1997B, of the village.
     7-12-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal and
4051 2010   interest on $2,060,000 general obligation bonds (alternative revenue
            sources), Series 2002B of the village.
     7-12-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal and
4052 2010   interest on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternative
            revenue source), Series 2003A, of the village.
     7-12-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal and
4053 2010   interest on $4,395,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2003B, of the village.
     7-12-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal and
4054 2010   interest on $3,305,000 general obligation bonds (alternative revenue
            source), Series 2004A, of the village.
     7-12-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal and
4055 2010   interest on $10,000,000, general obligation bonds (utility alternative
            revenue source), Series 2008, of the village.
     7-12-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal and
4056 2010   interest on $2,930,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source)
            Series 2004B, of the village.
     7-12-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal and
4057 2010   interest on $10,000,000 general obligation bonds (tax increment finance
            revenue source), Series 2004C, of the village.
     7-12-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2009 to pay the principal and
4058 2010   interest on $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks alternate
            revenue source), Series 2006, of the village.
     12-13- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal and
4075 2010   interest on $3,000,000 taxable general obligation debt certificates, Series
            2009, of the village.
     12-13- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal and
4076 2010   interest on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2003A, of the village.
     12-13- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal and
4077 2010   interest on $350,000 general obligation bonds (tax increment finance
            revenue source), Series 1997B, of the village.
     12-13- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal and
4078 2010   interest on $2,060,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source),
            Series 2002B, of the village.
     12-13- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal and
4079 2010   interest on $4,395,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternative
            revenue source), Series 2003B, of the village.
     12-13- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal and
4080 2010   interest on $3,305,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source)
            Series 2004A, of the village.
     12-13- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal and
4081 2010   interest on $2,930,000 general obligation bonds (alternative revenue
            source), Series 2004B, of the village.
     12-13- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal and
4083 2010   interest on $3,5000,000 general obligation bonds (water works alternate
            revenue source), Series 2006, of the village.
     12-13- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2010 to pay the principal and
4084 2010   interest on $10,000,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2008, of the village.
     5-16-  Repealing Ord. 4072 authorizing and providing for the issuance of general
4100 2011   obligation refunding bonds (sales tax alternate revenue source) Series
            2010A, of the village.
     7-18-  Authorizing the issuance of one or more series of general obligation
4109 2011   refunding bonds (sales tax alternate revenue source) of the village, in the
            aggregate principal amount of not to exceed $2,600,000.
            Authorizing the issuance of one or more series of water revenue bonds of
4110 7-18-  the village, in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $5,000,000 or
     2011   in lieu thereof, general obligation bonds (waterworks system alternate
            revenue source), in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $5,000,000.
            Authorizing and providing for the issue of general obligation bonds (water
            works system alternate revenue source), Series 2011A, of the village, for
4113 8-22-  the purpose of providing improvements to the waterworks and sewerage system
     2011   of the village, prescribing the details of said bonds and providing for the
            imposition of taxes to pay the same, and for the collection, segregation
            and application of the waterworks and sewerage system revenues.
            Authorizing and providing for the issue of general obligation refunding
            bonds (sales tax alternate revenue source), Series 2011B, of the village,
4114 8-22-  for the purpose of refunding certain alternate bonds prescribing the
     2011   details of said bonds and providing for the imposition of taxes to pay the
            same, and for the collection, segregation and application of certain sales
            tax receipts to pay said bonds.
     12-19- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal and
4134 2011   interest on $2,060,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source),
            Series 2002B, of the village.
     12-19- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal and
4135 2011   interest on $350,000 general obligation bonds (tax increment finance
            revenue source), Series 1997B, of the village.
     12-19- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal and
4136 2011   interest on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source) Series 2003A, of the village.
            Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal and
4137 12-19- interest on $4,395,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
     2011   source,) Series 2003B general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 23003B, of the village.
     12-19- Abating the tax hereto levied fo the year 2011 to pay the principal and
4138 2011   interest on $3,305,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source),
            Series 2004A, of the village.
     12-19- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal and
4139 2011   interest on $10,000,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2008, of the village.
     12-19- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal and
4140 2011   interest on $2,930,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source),
            Series 2004B, of the village.
     12-19- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal and
4141 2011   interest on $3,500,000, general obligation bonds (water works alternate
            revenue source), Series 2006, of the village.
     12-19- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal and
4142 2011   interest on $3,000,000 taxable general obligation debt certificates, Series
            2009, of the village.
     4-30-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal and
4151 2012   interest on $4,655,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks system
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011A, of the village.
     4-30-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2011 to pay the principal and
4152 2012   interest on $2,295,000 general obligation refunding bonds (sales tax
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011B, of the village.
     12-10- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2012 to pay the principal and
4173 2012   interest on $350,000 general obligation bonds (tax increment finance
            revenue source), Series 1997B, of the village.
     12-10- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2012 to pay the principal and
4174 2012   interest on $4,395,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2003B of the village.
     12-10- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2012 to pay the principal and
4175 2012   interest on $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks alternate
            revenue source), Series 2006 of the village.
     12-10- Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2012 to pay the principal and
4176 2012   interest on $4,655,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks system
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011A of the village.
     3-17-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2013 to pay the principal of and
4218 2014   interest on $350,000 general obligation bonds (tax increment finance
            revenue source), Series 1997B, of the village.
     3-17-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2013 to pay the principal and
4219 2014   interest on $2,060,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source),
            Series 2002B, of the village.
     3-17-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2013 to pay the principal and
4220 2014   interest on $4,395,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2003B, of the village.
     3-17-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2013 to pay the principal and
4221 2014   interest on $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks alternate
            revenue source) Series 2006, of the village.
     3-17-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2013 to pay the principal and
4222 2014   interest on $4,655,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks system
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011A, of the village.
     3-17-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2013 to pay the principal and
4223 2014   interest on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate source),
            Series 2003A, of the village.
     3-17-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2013 to pay the principal and
4224 2014   interest on $2,930,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue
            sources), Series 2004B, of the village.
     3-17-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2013 to pay the principal and
4225 2014   interest on $10,000,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2008, of the village.
     3-17-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2013 to pay the principal and
4226 2014   interest on $2,295,000 general obligation refunding bonds (sales tax
            alternate revenue source) Series 2011B, of the village.
     3-16-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2014 to pay the principal and
4256 2015   interest on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2003A, of the village.
     3-16-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2014 to pay the principal and
4257 2015   interest on $4,345,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source),
            Series 2003B, of the village.
     3-16-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2014 to pay the principal and
4258 2015   interest on $2,930,000 general obligation bonds (alternative revenue
            source), Series 2004B, of the village.
     3-16-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2014 to pay the principal and
4259 2015   interest on $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks alternate
            revenue source), Series 2006, of the village.
     3-16-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2014 to pay the principal and
4260 2015   interest on $10,000,00 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2008, of the village.
     3-16-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2014 to pay the principal and
4261 2015   interest on $4,655,000 general obligation bonds (water works system
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011A, of the village.
     3-16-  Abating the tax hereto to levied for the year 2014 to pay the principal and
4262 2015   interest on $2,295,000 general obligation refunding bonds (sales tax
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011B, of the village.
     3-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2015 to pay the principal and
4305 2015   interest on $10,000,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source,) Series 2008, of the village.
            Providing for the issuance of not to exceed $9,550,000 limited obligation
4292 11-2-  tax increment revenue bond, Series 2015, of the village, and providing for
     2015   the security therefor, for the purpose of financing eligible redevelopment
            costs described in the village’s North Cicero redevelopment plan.
     3-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2015 to pay the principal and
4302 2016   interest on $2,295,000 general obligation refunding bonds (sales tax
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011B, of the village.
     3-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2015 to pay the principal and
4303 2016   interest on $2,295,000 general obligation refunding bonds (sales tax
            alternate revenue source) Series 2011B, of the village.
     3-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2015 to pay the principal and
4304 2016   interest on $4,655,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks system
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011A, of the village.
     3-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2015 to pay the principal and
4306 2016   interest on $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks alternate
            revenue source), Series 2006, of the village.
     3-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2015 to pay the principal and
4307 2016   interest on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2003A, of the village.
     3-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2015 to pay the principal and
4308 2016   interest on $2,930,000 general obligation bonds (alternate revenue source)
            Series 2004B, of the village.
     2-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2016 to pay the principal and
4331 2017   interest on $2,295,000 general obligation refunding bonds (sales tax
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011B, of the village.
     2-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2016 to pay the principal and
4332 2017   interest on $10,000,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source) Series 2008, of the village.
     2-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2016 to pay the principal and
4333 2017   interest on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2003A, of the village.
     2-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2016 to pay the principal and
4334 2017   interest on $4,655,000 general obligation bonds (water works system
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011A, of the village.
     2-21-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2016 to pay for the principal
4335 2017   and interest on $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks alternate
            revenue source), Series 2006, of the village.
            Providing for the issuance of not to exceed $2,000,000 general obligation
     4-3-   refunding limited bonds, Series 2017, of the village, and providing for the
4336 2017   security, therefor, for the purpose of refinancing a portion of its general
            obligation capital portion of its general obligation capital appreciation
            debt certificates (limited tax), Series 2010.
            Providing for the issuance of not to exceed $25,000,000 general obligation
     4-3-   limited tax refunding debt certificates, Series 2017, of the village and
4337 2017   providing for the security therefor, for the purpose of refinancing a
            portion of its general obligation capital appreciation debt certificates
            (limited tax), Series 2010.
            Providing for amendments to Ord. 4337 which provided for the issuance of
     4-24-  not to exceed $25,000,000 general obligation limited tax refunding debt
4340 2017   certificates, Series 2017, of the village, and provided for the security
            therefor for the purpose of refinancing a portion of its general obligation
            capital appreciation debt certificates (limited tax), Series 2010.
            Providing for amendments to Ord. 4336, which provided for the issuance of
     4-24-  not to exceed $2,000,000 general obligation refunding limited bonds, Series
4341 2017   2017, of the village, and provided for security therefor for the purpose of
            refinancing a portion of its general obligation capital appreciation debt
            certificates (limited tax), Series 2010.
     6-19-  Authorizing the issuance of not to exceed $2,500,000 general obligation
4343 2017   bonds (alternate revenue source) of the village for the purpose of
            financing improvements within Tax Increment Financing District No. 6.
     2-5-   Authorizing issuance of not to exceed $2,500,000 general obligation bonds
4355 2018   (alternate revenue source) of the village for the purpose of financing
            improvements within Tax Increment Financing District No. 6.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2017 to pay the principal and
4357 2018   interest on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2003A, of the village.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2017 to pay the principal and
4358 2018   interest on $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks alternate
            revenue source), Series 2006, of the village.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2017 to pay the principal and
4359 2018   interest on $10,000,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2008, of the village.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2017 to pay the principal and
4360 2018   interest on $4,655,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks system
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011A, of the village.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2017 to pay the principal and
4361 2018   interest on $2,295,000 general obligation bonds (sales tax alternate
            revenue source), Series 2011B, of the village.
     2-20-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2017 to pay the principal and
4362 2018   interest on $1,560,000 general obligation bond refunding limited bond,
            Series 2017, of the village.
4364 4-30-  Repealing Ord. 4362.
     2018
4365 6-18-  Authorizing issuance of a $2,000,000 general obligation senior lien income
     2018   tax bond, series 2018, of the village.
            Providing for the issuance of not to exceed $30,000,000 general obligation
     10-1-  limited tax refunding debt certificates, Series 2018, of the village and
4375 2018   providing for the security therefor, for the purpose of refinancing a
            portion of its general obligation capital appreciation debt certificates
            (limited tax), Series 2017.
            Providing for the issuance of not to exceed $2,000,000 general obligation
     10-1-  limited tax refunding debt certificates, Series 2018, of the village and
4376 2018   providing for the security therefor, for the purpose of refinancing a
            portion of its general obligation capital appreciation debt certificates
            (limited tax), Series 2017.
     2-19-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2018 to pay the principal and
4379 2019   interest on $2,250,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2003A, of the village.
     2-19-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2018 to pay the principal and
4380 2019   interest on $3,500,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks system
            alternate revenue source), Series 2006, of the village.
     2-19-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2018 to pay the principal and
4381 2019   interest on $10,000,000 general obligation bonds (utility alternate revenue
            source), Series 2008, of the village.
     2-19-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2018 to pay the principal and
4382 2019   interest on $4,655,000 general obligation bonds (waterworks system
            alternate revenue source), Series 2011A, of the village.
     2-19-  Abating the tax hereto levied for the year 2018 to pay the principal and
4383 2019   interest on $2,295,000 general obligation bonds (sales tax alternate
            revenue source), Series 2011B, of the village.
4445 3-15-  Abating taxes levied for general obligation bonds for the tax year 2020
     2021
     8-16-  Authorizing and providing for the issuance of not to exceed $10,500,000
4467 2021   general obligation refunding bonds (alternate revenue source), Series 2021,
            of the village.
4554 3-20-  Abating taxes levied for general obligation bonds for the tax year 2022.
     2023
           
 
TABLE IV: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1497     7-6-1992    Granting a franchise to the Illinois Bell Telephone
                     Company for a term of ten years.
1518     12-21-1992  Granting a franchise to Commonwealth Edison Company for a
                     term of 65 years.
1774     8-21-2000   Extending the term of the existing franchise agreement
                     between the village and AT&T Cable services.
1852     6-17-2002   Change of control of the cable television franchise from
                     AT&T Corporation to AT&T Comcast Corporation.
                     Authorizing Northern Illinois Gas Company to construction,
4548     11-28-2022  operate and maintain a gas distributing system in and
                     through the village.
                    
 
 
TABLE V: STREET NAME CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1539     9-20-1993   Changing the name of Partridge Road to Danielle Road.
1694     1-6-1998    Changing the Sidwell Map street names to the existing,
                     actually used names.
1730     4-5-1999    Changing the Sidwell Map streets 205th Place and 205th
                     Street to Village Commons.
                     Changing the Sidewell Map streets Shannon Drive (from
1869     9-16-2002   Patricia Drive southeasterly to Megan Court) to Shannon
                     Avenue and Whitney Drive (from Patricia Drive
                     southwesterly to Old Plank Boulevard) to Whitney Avenue.
1938     11-3-2003   Changing the name of Corporate Lake Drive and Drayton
                     Boulevard to Matteson Avenue.
1949     1-5-2004    Changing street name in Gleneagle Trail to Cornfield Road.
1958     2-17-2004   Changing street name from Bristol Drive to Newbury Lane.
1970     4-19-2004   Changing street name from Post Avenue to Dewitt Drive.
3034     11-19-2007  Renaming Hanson Lane to Southwick Drive.
                    
 
 
TABLE VI: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
1584     2-6-1995    Vacating a public alley located west of Locust Street.
1587     5-1-1995    Vacating a part of Locust Street.
1591     6-19-1995   Vacating the south half of 214th Street.
1688     10-20-1997  Vacating a part of Lincoln Frontage Road.
3016     5-7-2007    Vacating 211th Parkway.
3066     7-21-2008   Vacating a part of Maplewood Lane.
4040     4-26-2010   Vacating a portion of North Street.
4042     5-3-2010    Vacating a portion of Oak Street.
4093     1-18-2011   Vacating a portion of the Gateway Drive right-of-way.
4204     10-21-2013  Providing for the vacation of a portion of the public
                     right-of-way at the New Faith Baptist Chuch.
                    
 
 
TABLE VII: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
1509 9-9-   Rezoning a certain tract of land from C-1 Local Business District to R-6 High
     1992   Density Residential District.
1511 10-21- Rezoning a certain tract of land from S Special Judicial Permit District to R-
     1992   2 Low to Moderate Density Residential District.
1521 3-18-  Rezoning a certain tract of land from I-3 Planned Industrial District to I-
     1993   1 Service District.
1524 4-6-   Rezoning a certain tract of land from R-1 Low Density Residential District to
     1993   R-7 Residential Estate District.
1526 4-6-   Rezoning a certain tract of land from R-1 Low Density Residential District to
     1993   R-7 Residential Estate District.
1533 6-7-   Rezoning a certain tract of land from R-2 Low to Moderate Density Residential
     1993   District to R-6 High Density Residential District.
1559 6-6-   Rezoning a certain tract of land from R-1 Single Family Residential District to
     1994   R-6 High Density Residential District.
1570 10-3-  Rezoning a certain tract of land from a Special Judicial Permit District to R-
     1994   2 Single Family Residential District.
     6-19-  Rezoning a certain tract of land from I-2 Light Industrial District and R-
1592 1995   2 Single Family Residential District to R-4 Medium Density Residential
            District.
1599 7-17-  Rezoning a certain tract of land from C-4 Highway Commercial District to R-
     1995   2 Single Family Residential District.
1604 8-7-   Rezoning a certain tract of land permitting certain food service in the C-
     1995   4 Highway Commercial District.
1634 7-15-  Rezoning a certain tract of land from C-4 Highway Commercial District to C-
     1996   2 Office District.
1657 2-3-   Rezoning a certain tract of land from R-1 Single Family Residential District to
     1997   R-2 Single Family Residential District.
1663 5-5-   Rezoning a certain tract of land from C-4 Highway Commercial District to R-
     1997   4 Medium Density Residential District.
1699 3-16-  Rezoning a certain tract of land from C-4 Highway Commercial District to R-
     1998   2 Low to Moderate Density Residential District.
     1-19-  Rezoning Lot 1 (except the south nine feet thereof) and Lot 2 (except the East
1723 1999   75 feet thereof) in J. W. McCormack’s Lincoln Hill Homeland from R-1 Low
            Density Residential District to C-4 Highway Commercial District.
1729 3-1-   Rezoning 6363 Lincoln Highway from R-1 Single Family Residential District to C-
     1999   4 Highway Commercial District.
1758 3-20-  Rezoning the southeast corner of Cicero Avenue and 207th Street from R-1 Single
     2000   Family Residential District to C-4 Highway Commercial District.
     11-20- Rezoning Detention Lot 3 and Lot 2 (except the north 170 feet of Lot 2) in the
1782 2000   Plat of Corporate Lakes Unit Two from a MXD District to aN I-1 Service
            District.
            Rezoning Parcel R-2 of the east half of the southwest quarter and the west half
            of the southeast quarter of Section 20, Township 35 North, Range 13 east of the
1793 3-5-   Third Principal Meridian and Parcel R-4 of the east half of the southwest
     2001   quarter of Section 20, Township 35 North, Range 13 east of the Third Principal
            Meridian to R-1 Single Family Residential District to a R-4 Residential
            District.
     4-23-  Rezoning certain property upon annexation to the village from R-1 Single Family
1803 2001   Residential District to a C-4 Highway Commercial, I-1 Service Industrial and
            MXD Mixed Use Zoning Districts.
1819 8-6-   Rezoning certain property upon annexation to the village from R-1 Single Family
     2001   Residential District to a R-2 Low-to-Moderate Density Residential District.
     12-2-  Rezoning certain property upon annexation to the village from a C-4 Highway
1878 2002   Commercial District and a R-6 High Density Residential District to a R-2 Low-
            to-Moderate Density Residential District.
     4-21-  Rezoning approximately 28.70 acres of Ridgeland Manor Phase IV and V from R-
1899 2003   4 Medium Density Residential District to R-2 Low-to-Moderate Density
            Residential District.
     12-20- Rezoning approximately 78.5 acres located on the north side of Route 30 and
2010 2004   west of Central Avenue in Rich Township to R-2 Low-to-Moderate Density
            Residential District.
     8-1-   Rezoning approximately 38.5128 acres south of Butterfield Creek and east of
2047 2005   Butterfield Place Unit Three Subdivision to R-2 Low-to-Moderate Density
            Residential District.
2067 3-20-  Rezoning certain property owned by Matteson Development Partners from R-2 Low-
     2006   to-Moderate Density Residential District to C-4 Highway Commercial District.
2073 5-15-  Rezoning certain property upon annexation to the village from R-1 Single Family
     2006   Residential District to R-4 Medium Density Residential Zoning District.
     3-5-   Rezoning approximately 189 acres of vacant land, located on the east side of
3005 2007   Cicero Avenue opposite Gateway Drive, from R-2 Low-to-Moderate Density
            Residential Zoning District to MXD Mixed Use Zoning District.
            Rezoning approximately 3.1 acres, located on the northwest corner of Lincoln
3007 3-19-  Highway (Route 30) and Central Avenue and commonly known as 5600-5660 West
     2007   Lincoln Highway (Route 30), from R-3 Moderate Density Zoning District to C-
            4 Highway Commercial Zoning District.
     11-5-  Rezoning approximately 17,700 square feet of vacant land, commonly known as
3032 2007   3763 216th Place, from R-5 Medium High Density Residential Zoning District to
            R-3 Low to Moderate Density Residential Zoning District.
     6-2-   Rezoning approximately 1.38 acres, located at 20739-20811 South Cicero Avenue,
3061 2008   from R-1 Single Family Residential District to C-4 Highway Commercial Zoning
            District.
3067 7-21-  Rezoning approximately 1.9 acres, located at 21141 Governors Highway, from C-
     2008   2 Office Zoning District to C-4 Highway Commercial Zoning District.
     10-20- Rezoning approximately 13.3 acres, located at the southeast corner of Ridgeland
3071 2008   Avenue and Lincoln Highway, from C-4 Highway Commercial Zoning District to MXD
            Mixed-Use Zoning District.
3076 10-20- Rezoning certain property upon annexation to the village from R-1 Single Family
     2008   Residential District to MXD Mixed Use Zoning District.
     8-23-  Amending the official land use intensity map to reclassify certain property
4065 2010   generally located at the southwest corner of Lincoln Highway and Governors
            Highway (a portion of Matteson Plaza).
4416 5-18-  Rezoning property located at the southwest intersection of Lincoln Avenue and
     2020   Governors Highway (4055; 4167 Lincoln Highway) from R-2 to C-3.
4490 2-22-  Rezoning the property commonly known as 20909 South Cicero Avenue from C-4 to
     2022   C-3.
4517 8-15-  Rezoning the properties commonly known as 5525, 5527, 5533, 5535, 5539, 5545
     2022   and 5565 Miller Circle Drive from MXD to I-1.
           
 
TABLE VIII: ENTERPRISE ZONES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
4247     11-17-2014  Establishment of an enterprise zone subject to the
                     Enterprise Zone Act (20 ILCS 655/1 et seq.).
4315     6-20-2016   Amending the boundaries of the Will-Cook Enterprise Zone.
                     Establishing an Enterprise Zone in cooperation with the
4558     4-17-2023   Village of Park Forest, the Village of Richton Park, The
                     Village of University Park, the County of Cook, and the
                     County of Will.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to 2000 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Cite Code Section
ILCS Cite                        Code Section
5 ILCS 70/1.01                   10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.02                   10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.03                   10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.04                   10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.05                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.07                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.08                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.09                   10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.10                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.11                   10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.12                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.15                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.16                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.17                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.20                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.24                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.28                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.29                   10.02
5 ILCS 70/2                      10.04
5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.             30.02,
                                 30.15
5 ILCS 120/2.02                  30.02
5 ILCS 120/2.03                  30.02
5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.           40.01
5 ILCS 430/1-5                   32.135,
                                 32.150
5 ILCS 430/5-15                  40.01
5 ILCS 430/10-10—10-40         40.01
5 ILCS 430/15-10                 Ch. 39, App. A
5 ILCS 430/50-5                  40.01
5 ILCS 430/70-5                  40.01
5 ILCS 430/70-5(a)               40.01
5 ILCS 430/70-5(c)               40.01
10 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.            30.02
20 ILCS 655/1 et seq.            TSO VIII
20 ILCS 1605/1 et seq.           135.02
20 ILCS 2910/0.01 et seq.        137.02
20 ILCS 3125/1 et seq.           150.105
                                 32.110,
20 ILCS 3305                     32.120,
                                 32.123
20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.           32.110
30 ILCS 405/1 et seq. (repealed) 51.001
35 ILCS 105/2                    37.080
35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.            37.200
35 ILCS 120/2-27                 113.060
35 ILCS 120/3                    37.002
35 ILCS 130/1 et seq.            119.03
35 ILCS 130/1                    119.01
35 ILCS 135/1 et seq.            119.03
35 ILCS 143/10-5                 119.01
35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.            113.060,
                                 113.063
35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.            113.060
35 ILCS 635/10                   113.060
35 ILCS 636/5-1                  37.185
35 ILCS 638/1 et seq.            113.060
35 ILCS 645                      100.04
40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.          34.40
40 ILCS 5/3-128 et seq.          34.41
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.             113.085,
                                 113.086
50 ILCS 105/2                    31.001
50 ILCS 220/1—220/7            30.47
50 ILCS 451                      37.117
50 ILCS 750/0.01 et seq.         32.110
55 ILCS 5/3-9005                 137.02
55 ILCS 5/5-1127                 70.001
                                 10.02,
65 ILCS 5                        31.005,
                                 31.127,
                                 154.004
65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.          30.16,
                                 113.060
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2                  10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                  10.99,
                                 30.40
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1 et seq.        38.08
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1                10.99,
                                 37.999
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.5                140.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2-2                  30.41
65 ILCS 5/1-2-3                  30.46
65 ILCS 5/1-2-4                  30.44
65 ILCS 5/1-2-5                  30.45
65 ILCS 5/1-2-9                  30.40
65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq.        38.02,
                                 38.08
65 ILCS 5/1-2.14                 70.081
65 ILCS 5/1-3-1 et seq.          116.01
65 ILCS 5/1-3-1                  30.47
65 ILCS 5/1-3-2                  30.47
65 ILCS 5/1-21.1                 37.999
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5(a)            31.001
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-5(b)            31.001
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-6               31.001
                                 31.002,
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25              31.067,
                                 36.02
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-30              31.002,
                                 36.02
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-35              31.128
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-40              31.003,
                                 31.036
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-45              31.036
                                 30.02,
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-50              31.020,
                                 31.035
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-55              31.020
65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-65              31.020
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-5               31.020
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-10              31.020
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-20              31.021,
                                 31.036
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25              31.021
65 ILCS 5/3.1-20-25              31.001
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-5               30.02
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-10              30.02
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-75(b)           31.001
65 ILCS 5/3.1-25-90              31.035
65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5               31.125
65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-5(d)            31.006
65 ILCS 5/3.1-30-10              31.036
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-5               31.021
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-10              31.005
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-20              31.021
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-30              31.021
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-35              31.021
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-90              31.036
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-115             31.036
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-130             31.036
65 ILCS 5/3.1-35-135             31.036
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-5               30.03
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-10              30.03
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-15              30.03
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-25              30.03
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-30              30.03
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-40              30.42
65 ILCS 5/3.1-40-45              30.43
                                 30.01,
65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-5               30.03,
                                 31.021
65 ILCS 5/3.1-45-10              31.126
65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-5               31.004
65 ILCS 5/3.1-50-10              31.004
65 ILCS 5/3.1-55-5               31.127
65 ILCS 5/4-1-1 et seq.          30.43
65 ILCS 5/5-1-1 et seq.          30.43
65 ILCS 5/5-2-2                  31.001
65 ILCS 5/5-2-11                 31.001
65 ILCS 5/8-1-1 et seq.          30.44
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9                  36.01
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1                36.02
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.2                36.03
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.3                36.04
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.4                36.01
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.5                36.05
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.6                36.06
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.7                36.07
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.9                36.08
                                 37.050,
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1                 37.065,
                                 37.146,
                                 37.167
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2                 37.097,
                                 37.165
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2(d)              37.148
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.3               37.235
65 ILCS 5/8-11-5                 37.050,
                                 37.065
65 ILCS 5/8-11-6                 37.080
65 ILCS 5/8-11-7                 37.001
65 ILCS 5/8-11-8                 37.015
65 ILCS 5/10-1-1 et seq.         31.036
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.       32.030
65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 et seq.        33.40,
                                 33.42
65 ILCS 5/11-10-1                33.42,
                                 33.44
65 ILCS 5/11-12-4 et seq.        32.094
65 ILCS 5/11-12-4                32.090
65 ILCS 5/11-12-5                32.093
65 ILCS 5/11-12-6                157.01
65 ILCS 5/11-12-8                32.095
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12               32.095,
                                 157.03
65 ILCS 5/11-13-3                32.045
65 ILCS 5/11-20-6                99.16
65 ILCS 5/11-20-7                99.17,
                                 99.18
65 ILCS 5/11-20-11               99.01
65 ILCS 5/11-20-12               99.03
65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-3 et seq.      38.02
65 ILCS 5/11-42-11               113.003
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2            36.20,
                                 36.21
65 ILCS 5/11-80-3                98.44
65 ILCS 5/11-141-1               10.02
70 ILCS 1205/3-9                 70.001
210 ILCS                         120.04
210 ILCS 45/1-101 et seq.        132.01
220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.         53.05
220 ILCS 5/3-105                 102.03
220 ILCS 5/9-221                 113.060,
                                 113.063
220 ILCS 5/9-222                 113.060,
                                 113.063
220 ILCS 5/9-222.1               113.060,
                                 113.063
220 ILCS 5/16-102                102.03
220 ILCS 5/16-108.5(i)           102.03
220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.        100.05
220 ILCS 5/21-201(v)             100.02
220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)             113.081,
                                 113.082
220 ILCS 5/21-401                100.02,
                                 113.080
220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6)          113.081
220 ILCS 5/21-801                113.080
220 ILCS 5/21-801(b)             113.080
220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(l)(vi)      113.080
220 ILCS 5/21-801(d)             113.080
                                 113.100,
220 ILCS 5/22-501 et seq.        113.102,
                                 113.103
220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.            100.16
220 ILCS 65/4                    100.05
225 ILCS 90/1 et seq.            120.04
225 ILCS 320/3(1)                52.061
225 ILCS 447/5-5 et seq.         137.02
225 ILCS 460/1 et seq.           115.29
230 ILCS 10/1 et seq.            135.02
230 ILCS 15/1 et seq.            135.02
230 ILCS 20/1 et seq.            135.02
230 ILCS 25/1 et seq.            135.02
                                 112.20,
230 ILCS 30/1 et seq.            112.21,
                                 135.02
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.            135.02
235 ILCS 5/1 et seq.             139.02,
                                 140.01
235 ILCS 5/11-1 et seq.          111.22,
                                 111.24
320 ILCS 20/1 et seq.            132.01
325 ILCS 5/4                     132.01
405 ILCS 2511, et seq.           140.02
                                 122.01,
410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.           122.02,
                                 122.20
415 ILCS 5/3.360                 136.01,
                                 136.02
415 ILCS 105/3                   136.01
415 ILCS 105/4                   136.02,
                                 136.99
415 ILCS 105/5                   136.03,
                                 136.99
415 ILCS 105/6                   136.04,
                                 136.99
                                 136.02—
415 ILCS 105/8                   136.04,
                                 136.07,
                                 136.99
415 ILCS 105/9                   136.05
415 ILCS 105/10                  136.06,
                                 136.99
430 ILCS 65/0.01 et seq.         72.45
430 ILCS 65/0.01—65/16.3       Ch. 137
430 ILCS 66/1 et seq.            137.02
510 ILCS 72/1 et seq.            92.01
515 ILCS 5                       137.03
520 ILCS 5                       137.03
525 ILCS 30/3.11                 131.02
605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.         100.02
605 ILCS 120/1 et seq.           70.035
605 ILCS 120/50                  136.07,
                                 136.99
625 ILCS 5                       72.25,
                                 72.26
                                 38.02,
                                 38.15,
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.         70.002,
                                 73.087,
                                 136.01
625 ILCS 5/1-102                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-105                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-106                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-107                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-108                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-111.8               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-112                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-113                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-116                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-117.7               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-120                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-125                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-126                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-130                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-131                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-132                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-135                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-136                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-137                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-138                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-139.1               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-140                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-141                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-145.001             70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-146                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-147                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-148.2               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-148.3               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-151                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-153                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-154                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-155                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-156                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-157                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-157.5               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-158                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-158.2               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-159.1               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-162                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-162.5               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-163                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-166                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-166.1               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-167                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-168                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-169                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-171                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-171.6               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-171.8               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-172                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-174                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-176                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-177                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-178                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-179                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-181                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-182                 70.001,
                                 71.01
625 ILCS 5/1-187                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-187.1               70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-188                 10.02,
                                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-193                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-194                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-195                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-196                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-197                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-199                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-200                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-201                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-203                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-205                 70.001
                                 70.001,
625 ILCS 5/1-205.1               72.07,
                                 72.13
625 ILCS 5/1-207                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-208                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-209                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-210.01              70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-211                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-211.01              70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-212                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-214                 70.001
625 ILCS 5/1-214.8               70.001
                                 70.001,
625 ILCS 5/1-217                 72.07,
                                 72.13,
                                 131.02
625 ILCS 5/3-101(d)              70.001
625 ILCS 5/3-609                 72.11
625 ILCS 5/3-616                 72.11
625 ILCS 5/4-101                 90.01
625 ILCS 5/4-201—5/4-207       90.01
625 ILCS 5/4-208                 133.05
625 ILCS 5/4-208(B)              90.01
625 ILCS 5/4-209—5/4-211       90.01
625 ILCS 5/4-213                 90.01
625 ILCS 5/4-214                 90.01
625 ILCS 5/6-100 et seq.         72.45
625 ILCS 5/6-113                 72.45
625 ILCS 5/6-204                 38.02
625 ILCS 5/6-205                 72.45
625 ILCS 5/6-206                 72.45
625 ILCS 5/6-303                 72.45
625 ILCS 5/11-100 et seq.        70.016
625 ILCS 5/11-203                70.015
625 ILCS 5/11-204                70.016
625 ILCS 5/11-205                70.016
625 ILCS 5/11-206                70.017
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3              38.03,
                                 38.06
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3(b)(l)        70.082
625 ILCS 5/11-301                70.001
625 ILCS 5/11-302                70.041
625 ILCS 5/11-305                70.030
                                 70.031,
625 ILCS 5/11-306                70.076,
                                 70.078
625 ILCS 5/11-307                70.032
625 ILCS 5/11-308                70.033
625 ILCS 5/11-309                70.034
625 ILCS 5/11-310                70.035
625 ILCS 5/11-311                70.036
625 ILCS 5/11-312                70.037
625 ILCS 5/11-313                70.038
625 ILCS 5/11-401 et seq.        70.016
625 ILCS 5/11-500 et seq.        70.016
625 ILCS 5/11-501                71.01
625 ILCS 5/11-501(a)             72.45
625 ILCS 5/11-501.1              72.45
625 ILCS 5/11-501.2              71.01
625 ILCS 5/11-604                71.04
625 ILCS 5/11-903                74.02
625 ILCS 5/11-1001               74.01
625 ILCS 5/11-1002               74.02
625 ILCS 5/11-1003               74.03
625 ILCS 5/11-1003.1             74.04
625 ILCS 5/11-1004               74.04
625 ILCS 5/11-1004.1             74.13
625 ILCS 5/11-1005               74.06
625 ILCS 5/11-1006               74.07
625 ILCS 5/11-1006(c)            115.29
625 ILCS 5/11-1007               74.08
625 ILCS 5/11-1008               74.09
625 ILCS 5/11-1009               74.10
625 ILCS 5/11-1010               74.11
625 ILCS 5/11-1011               74.12,
                                 74.99
625 ILCS 5/11-1204               70.041
625 ILCS 5/11-1306               38.06
625 ILCS 5/11-1403               73.010
625 ILCS 5/12-215                70.016
625 ILCS 5/12-601                74.10
625 ILCS 5/15-101                75.03
625 ILCS 5/15-105                75.06
625 ILCS 5/15-109                75.07
625 ILCS 5/15-111                75.03
625 ILCS 5/15-316                75.01,
                                 75.03
625 ILCS 5/18c-7201              102.03
625 ILCS 25/1 et seq.            75.13
625 ILCS 540                     70.001
705 ILCS 405                     132.03
705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.         38.22
720 ILCS 5                       130.20
720 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.           130.20
720 ILCS 5/2-2                   130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-3                   130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-4                   130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-7                   72.45
720 ILCS 5/2-8                   72.45
720 ILCS 5/2-12                  130.01
720 ILCS 5/2-31                  72.45
720 ILCS 5/4-4                   130.02
720 ILCS 5/4-5                   130.03
720 ILCS 5/4-6                   130.04
720 ILCS 5/4-7                   130.05
720 ILCS 5/8-4                   130.06,
                                 130.20
720 ILCS 5/11 et seq.            72.45
720 ILCS 5/11-0.1                134.01
720 ILCS 5/11-5—5/11-22        120.08
720 ILCS 5/11-9                  139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 5/11-14 et seq.         139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 5/11-20                 134.02
720 ILCS 5/11-30                 134.01
720 ILCS 5/12-1                  140.01
720 ILCS 5/12-1 et seq.          139.02
720 ILCS 5/12-1(a)               130.20
720 ILCS 5/12-3(a)               130.20
720 ILCS 5/12-5.1                139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 5/12-15 et seq.         139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 5/12C-30(a)             130.20
720 ILCS 5/16-1(a)               130.20
720 ILCS 5/16-1(a)(4)            130.20
720 ILCS 5/16-3(a)               130.20
720 ILCS 5/16-3(b)               130.20
720 ILCS 5/16-25                 130.20
720 ILCS 5/17-50                 135.01
720 ILCS 5/20-1(b)               131.03
720 ILCS 5/21-1 et seq.          139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 5/21-1(a)(8)            131.01
720 ILCS 5/21-1(1)               131.03
720 ILCS 5/21-1.3(a)             130.20
720 ILCS 5/21-1.4                131.04
720 ILCS 5/21-2                  130.20
720 ILCS 5/21-3                  131.02
                                 72.45,
720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.          139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)               137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(6)            137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(7)            137.01,
                                 137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(9)            137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1(c)(2)            137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2                139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1.5                139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 5/24-1.9                137.01
720 ILCS 5/24-2                  137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-2(c)               137.02
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1                137.03
720 ILCS 5/24-6                  137.04
720 ILCS 5/25-1                  139.02 ,
                                 140.01
                                 132.01,
720 ILCS 5/26-1                  139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 5/26.5-0.1 et seq.      130.20
                                 135.02,
720 ILCS 5/28-1                  139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(4)            135.02
720 ILCS 5/28-2                  135.01
720 ILCS 5/28-3                  135.03
720 ILCS 5/28-5(a)               135.04
720 ILCS 5/28-5(b)               135.04
720 ILCS 5/31-1                  130.99,
                                 133.01
720 ILCS 5/31-8                  133.02
720 ILCS 5/32-9                  133.03
720 ILCS 535/1                   137.15
720 ILCS 535/2                   137.16
720 ILCS 535/3                   137.17
720 ILCS 535/4                   137.18,
                                 137.19
720 ILCS 535/5                   137.19
720 ILCS 535/6                   137.20
720 ILCS 535/7                   137.17
720 ILCS 545/0.01—545/7        Ch. 137
720 ILCS 550                     133.04,
                                 133.05
                                 71.01,
                                 72.45,
720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.           136.21,
                                 139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 570                     133.04,
                                 133.05
720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.         71.01,
                                 72.45
720 ILCS 570/401 et seq.         139.02 ,
                                 140.01
720 ILCS 690/0.01 et seq.        71.01
725 ILCS 5/100-1 et seq          37.999
725 ILCS 5/112A-3(7)             131.02
725 ILCS 5/112A-14(b)(2)         131.02
725 ILCS 210/1 et seq.           137.02
730 ILCS 5/5-5-3                 71.01
735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.         37.999
735 ILCS 5/2-203                 160.05
735 ILCS 5/3-1010 et seq.        111.24
735 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.        38.09
740 ILCS 174/15(a)               Ch. 39, App. A
740 ILCS 174/15(b)               Ch. 39, App. A
750 ILCS 5                       132.03
760 ILCS 100/1 et seq.           93.01
775 ILCS 5/6-101                 Ch. 39, App. A
775 ILCS 5/8-101 et seq.         94.25
805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.          120.05
815 ILCS 398                     115.01
820 ILCS 5/3(d)                  110.17
820 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq.        39.01
820 ILCS 305/1 et seq.           100.08
820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.           31.068
                                 
 
REFERENCES TO 2000 CODE
2000 Code Section 2018 Code Section
2000 Code Section 2018 Code Section
10.01             10.01
10.02             10.02
10.03             10.03
10.04             10.04
10.05             10.05
10.06             10.06
10.07             10.07
10.08             10.08
10.09             10.09
10.10             10.10
10.11             10.11
10.12             10.12
10.13             10.13
10.14             10.14
10.15             10.15
10.16             10.16
10.17             10.17
10.18             10.18
10.99             10.99
30.01             30.01
30.02             30.02
30.03             30.03
30.04             30.04
30.20             30.15
30.21             30.16
30.22             30.17
30.23             30.18
30.24             30.19
30.40             30.40
30.41             30.41
30.42             30.42
30.43             30.43
30.45             30.44
30.46             30.45
30.47             30.46
30.48             30.47
30.60             30.60
30.61             30.61
30.62             30.62
30.63             30.63
31.01             31.001
31.02             31.002
31.03             31.003
31.04             31.004
31.05             31.005
31.06             31.006
31.07             31.007
31.20             31.020
31.21             31.021
31.22             31.022
31.35             31.035
31.36             31.036
31.37             31.037
31.40             31.050
31.41             31.051
31.50             31.065
31.51             31.066
31.52             31.067
31.53             31.068
31.54             31.069
31.65             31.080
31.66             31.081
31.75             31.095
31.76             31.096
31.77             31.097
31.80             31.110
31.81             31.111
31.85             31.125
31.86             31.126
31.87             31.127
31.88             31.128
32.001            32.001
32.002            32.002
32.040            32.030
32.041            32.031
32.042            32.032
32.043            32.033
32.044            32.034
32.080            32.045
32.081            32.046
32.120            32.060
32.121            32.061
32.122            32.062
32.123            32.063
32.135            32.090
32.136            32.091
32.137            32.092
32.138            32.093
32.139            32.094
32.140            32.095
32.141            32.096
32.142            32.097
32.155            32.110
32.156            32.111
32.157            32.112
32.158            32.113
32.159            32.114
32.160            32.115
32.161            32.116
32.162            32.117
32.163            32.118
32.164            32.119
32.165            32.120
32.166            32.121
32.167            32.122
32.168            32.123
33.01             33.01
33.02             33.02
33.03             33.03
33.04             33.04
33.05             33.05
33.06             33.06
33.07             33.07
33.08             33.08
33.09             33.09
33.10             33.10
33.11             33.11
33.20             33.25
33.21             33.26
33.22             33.27
33.23             33.28
33.35             33.40
33.36             33.41
33.37             33.42
33.38             33.43
33.39             33.44
33.40             33.45
33.41             33.46
34.01             34.01
34.02             34.02
34.03             34.03
34.04             34.04
34.05             34.05
34.06             34.06
34.07             34.07
34.08             34.08
34.20             34.20
34.21             34.21
34.22             34.22
34.23             34.23
34.24             34.24
34.25             34.25
34.35             34.40
34.36             34.41
34.37             34.42
34.38             34.43
35.01             35.01
35.99             35.99
36.01             36.01
36.02             36.02
36.03             36.03
36.04             36.04
36.05             36.05
36.06             36.06
36.07             36.07
36.08             36.08
36.20             36.20
36.21             36.21
37.001            37.001
37.002            37.002
37.003            37.003
37.015            37.015
37.016            37.016
37.045            37.050
37.046            37.051
37.060            37.065
37.061            37.066
37.075            37.080
37.076            37.081
37.085            37.095
37.086            37.096
37.087            37.097
37.088            37.098
37.089            37.099
37.090            37.100
37.091            37.101
37.092            37.102
37.105            37.115
37.106            37.116
37.107            37.117
37.108            37.118
37.109            37.119
37.110            37.120
37.111            37.121
37.112            37.122
37.113            37.123
37.114            37.124
37.115            37.125
37.116            37.126
37.117            37.127
37.118            37.128
37.119            37.129
37.120            37.130
37.121            37.131
37.122            37.132
37.125            37.145
37.126            37.146
37.127            37.147
37.128            37.148
37.129            37.149
37.130            37.150
37.131            37.151
37.132            37.152
37.133            37.153,
                  37.999
37.134            37.154
37.135            37.165
37.136            37.166
37.137            37.167
37.138            37.168
37.139            37.169
37.140            37.170
37.141            37.171
37.142            37.172
37.143            37.173,
                  37.999
37.144            37.174
37.145            37.185
37.999            37.999
39.01             39.01
39.15             39.15
39.16             39.16
39.17             39.17
39.18             39.18
39.19             39.19
39.20             39.20
40.01             40.01
50.01             50.001
50.15             50.015
50.16             50.016
50.17             50.017
50.18             50.018
50.19             50.019
50.20             50.020
50.21             50.021
50.22             50.022
50.35             50.035
50.36             50.036
50.37             50.037
50.50             50.050
50.51             50.051
50.52             50.052
50.53             50.053
50.54             50.054
50.55             50.055
50.65             50.085
50.66             50.086
50.67             50.087
50.99             50.999
53.01             53.01
53.02             53.02
53.03             53.03
53.04             53.04
53.05             53.99
53.06             53.05
70.01             70.001
70.02             70.002
70.11             70.016
70.12             70.017
70.13             70.018
70.30             70.030
70.32             70.032
70.33             70.033
70.34             70.034
70.35             70.035
70.36             70.036
70.37             70.037
70.38             70.038
70.39             70.039
70.40             70.040
70.41             70.041
70.55             70.055
70.56             70.056
70.57             70.057
70.58             70.058
70.59             70.059
70.60             70.060
71.01             71.01
71.02             71.02
71.03             71.03
71.04             71.04
71.05             71.05
71.99             71.99
72.01             72.01
72.02             72.02
72.03             72.03
72.04             72.04
72.05             72.05
72.06             72.06
72.07             72.07
72.08             72.08
72.09             72.09
72.11             72.10
72.12             72.11
72.13             72.12
72.25             72.25
72.26             72.26
72.27             72.27
72.28             72.28
72.29             72.29
72.30             72.30
72.31             72.31
72.32             72.32
72.33             72.33
72.34             72.34
72.99             72.99
73.01             73.001
73.02             73.002
73.03             73.003
73.04             73.004
73.05             73.005
73.06             73.006
73.07             73.007
73.08             73.008
73.09             73.009
73.10             73.010
73.11             73.011
73.20             73.025
73.21             73.026
73.22             73.027
73.23             73.028
73.24             73.029
73.25             73.030
73.26             73.031
73.27             73.032
73.28             73.033
73.29             73.034
73.30             73.035
73.31             73.036
73.32             73.037
73.45             73.050
73.46             73.051
73.47             73.052
73.48             73.053
73.49             73.054
73.50             73.055
73.60             73.070
73.61             73.071
73.65             73.085
73.66             73.086
73.67             73.087
73.68             73.088
73.99             73.999
74.01             74.01
74.02             74.02
74.03             74.03
74.04             74.04
74.05             74.05
74.06             74.06
74.07             74.07
74.08             74.08
74.09             74.09
74.10             74.10
74.11             74.11
74.12             74.12,
                  74.99
74.13             74.13
75.01             75.01
75.02             75.02
75.03             75.03
75.04             75.04
75.05             75.05
75.06             75.06
75.07             75.07
75.08             75.08
75.09             75.09
75.10             75.10
75.11             75.11
75.12             75.12
75.13             75.13,
                  75.99
75.99             75.99
Ch. 76, Sch. I    Ch. 76, Sch. I
Ch. 77, Sch. I    Ch. 77, Sch. I
Ch. 77, Sch. II   Ch. 77, Sch. II
90.01             90.01
91.01             91.01
91.02             91.02
91.07             91.09
93.01             93.01
94.01             94.01
94.02             94.02
94.03             94.03
94.04             94.04
94.05             94.05
94.06             94.06
94.07             94.07
94.08             94.08
94.09             94.09
94.10             94.10
94.11             94.11
94.12             94.12
94.25             94.25
94.26             94.26
94.27             94.27
94.28             94.28
94.29             94.29
94.30             94.30
94.31             94.31
94.32             94.32
94.33             94.33
94.34             94.34
94.35             94.35
94.36             94.36
94.37             94.37
94.38             94.38
94.99             94.99
96.01             96.01
96.02             96.02
96.10             96.15
96.11             96.16
96.12             96.17
96.13             96.18
96.14             96.19
96.15             96.20
96.16             96.21
96.17             96.22,
                  96.99
96.18             96.23
96.19             96.24
96.20             96.25
97.00             97.01
97.01             97.02
97.02             97.03
97.03             97.04
97.04             97.05
97.05             97.06
97.06             97.07
97.07             97.08
97.08             97.09
97.09             97.10
97.10             97.11
97.11             97.12
97.12             97.13
97.13             97.14
97.14             97.15
97.15             97.16
97.16             97.17
97.17             97.18
97.18             97.19
97.19             97.20
97.20             97.21
97.21             97.22
97.22             97.23
97.23             97.24
97.24             97.25
97.25             97.26
97.26             97.27
97.27             97.28
97.28             97.29
97.99             97.99
98.01             98.01
98.02             98.02
98.03             98.03
98.04             98.04
98.05             98.05
98.06             98.06
98.08             98.08
98.09             98.09
98.10             98.10
98.11             98.11
98.12             98.12
98.25             98.25
98.26             98.26
98.35             98.40
98.36             98.41
98.37             98.42
98.38             98.43
98.39             98.44
98.50             98.55
98.51             98.56
98.52             98.57
98.53             98.58
98.54             98.59
98.55             98.60
98.99             98.99
99.01             99.01
99.02             99.02
99.03             99.03
99.15             99.15
99.16             99.16
99.17             99.17
99.18             99.18
100.01            100.01
100.02            100.02
100.03            100.03
100.04            100.04
100.05            100.05
100.06            100.06
100.07            100.07
100.08            100.08
100.09            100.09
100.10            100.10
100.11            100.11
100.12            100.12
100.13            100.13
100.14            100.14
100.15            100.15
100.16            100.16
100.17            100.17
100.18            100.18
100.19            100.19
100.20            100.20
100.21            100.21
100.22            100.22
100.99            100.99
110.01            110.01
110.02            110.02
110.03            110.03
110.04            110.04
110.05            110.05
110.06            110.06
110.07            110.07
110.08            110.08
110.09            110.09
110.10            110.10
110.11            110.11
110.12            110.12
110.13            110.13
110.14            110.14
110.15            110.15
110.20            110.30
111.01            111.01
111.02            111.03
111.03            111.04
111.04            111.05
111.05            111.07
111.06            111.08
111.07            111.09
111.08            111.10
111.09            111.11
111.10            111.12
111.11            111.13
111.12            111.14
111.13            111.15
111.14            111.16
111.15            111.17
111.25            111.35
111.26            111.36
111.27            111.37
111.28            111.38
111.28.1          111.39
111.29            111.40
111.30            111.41
111.31            111.43
111.32            111.45
111.33            111.46
111.33.1          111.47
111.34            111.25
112.01            112.01
112.02            112.02
112.03            112.03
112.04            112.04
112.05            112.05
112.06            112.06
112.15            112.20
112.16            112.21
113.01            113.001
113.02            113.002
113.03            113.003
113.04            113.004
113.05            113.005
113.06            113.006
113.07            113.007
113.08            113.008
113.09            113.009
113.10            113.010
113.11            113.011
113.12            113.012
113.13            113.013
113.14            113.014
113.15            113.015
113.16            113.016
113.17            113.017
113.18            113.018
113.19            113.019
113.20            113.020
113.21            113.021
113.22            113.022
113.23            113.023
113.24            113.024
113.25            113.025
113.26            113.026
113.27            113.027
113.28            113.028
113.29            113.029
113.30            113.030
113.31            113.031
113.32            113.032
113.33            113.033
113.34            113.034
113.35            113.035
113.36            113.036
113.37            113.037
113.38            113.038
113.39            113.039
113.40            113.040
113.41            113.041
113.42            113.042
113.43            113.043
113.44            113.044
113.45            113.045
113.46            113.046
113.47            113.047
113.55            113.060
113.56            113.061
113.57            113.062
113.58            113.063
113.59            113.064
113.60            113.065
113.61            113.066
113.62            113.067
113.70            113.080
113.71            113.081
113.72            113.082
113.73            113.083
113.74            113.084
113.75            113.085
113.76            113.086
113.85            113.100
113.86            113.101
113.87            113.102
113.88            113.103
113.99            113.999
114.20            114.01
114.21            114.02
114.22            114.03
114.30            114.15
114.31            114.16
114.32            114.17
114.33            114.18
114.34            114.19
114.35            114.20
114.36            114.21
114.37            114.22
114.38            114.23
114.45            114.35
114.46            114.36
114.47            114.37
114.48            114.38
114.49            114.39
114.60            114.55
114.61            114.56
114.62            114.57
115.25            115.20
115.26            115.21
115.27            115.22
115.28            115.23
115.29            115.24
115.30            115.25
115.31            115.26
115.32            115.27
115.34            115.28
115.35            115.29
115.45            115.45
115.46            115.46
115.47            115.47
115.48            115.48
115.49            115.49
115.50            115.50
115.51            115.51
116.01            116.01
116.02            116.02
116.03            116.03
116.04            116.04
116.05            116.05
116.06            116.06
116.07            116.07
116.08            116.08
116.09            116.09
116.10            116.10
116.11            116.11
116.12            116.12
116.13            116.13
116.14            116.14
116.15            116.15
116.16            116.16
116.17            116.17
116.19            116.18
116.20            116.19
116.21            116.20
116.22            116.21
116.23            116.22
116.99            116.99
117.01            117.01
117.02            117.02
117.03            117.03
117.04            117.04
117.05            117.05
117.06            117.06
117.07            117.07
117.09            117.08
119.01            118.01
120.01            119.01
120.02            119.02
120.03            119.03
120.04            119.04
120.99            119.99
121.01            120.01
121.02            120.02
121.03            120.03
121.04            120.04
121.05            120.05
121.06            120.06
121.07            120.07
121.08            120.08
121.09            120.09
121.10            120.10
121.11            120.11
121.12            120.12
121.13            120.13
121.14            120.14
121.15            120.15
121.16            120.16
121.17            120.17
122.01            121.01
122.02            121.02
122.03            121.03
122.04            121.04
122.05            121.05
122.06            121.06
122.07            121.07
122.08            121.08
122.09            121.09
122.10            121.10
122.11            121.11
122.12            121.12
122.13            121.13
122.14            121.14
130.01            130.01
130.02            130.02
130.03            130.03
130.04            130.04
130.05            130.05
130.06            130.06
130.07            130.07
130.99            130.99
131.01            131.01
131.02            131.02
131.03            131.03
131.04            131.04
132.01            132.01
132.03            132.03,
                  132.99
132.04            132.04,
                  132.99
132.05            132.05,
                  132.99
132.06            132.06
132.07            132.07,
                  132.99
133.01            133.01
133.02            133.02
133.03            133.03
133.04            133.04
133.05            133.05
134.01            134.01
134.02            134.02
135.01            135.01
135.02            135.02
135.03            135.03
135.04            135.04
136.01            136.01
136.02            136.02,
                  136.99
136.03            136.03,
                  136.99
136.04            136.04,
                  136.99
136.05            136.05
136.06            136.06,
                  136.99
136.07            136.07
136.20            136.20,
                  136.99
136.21            136.21,
                  136.99
136.22            136.22,
                  136.99
137.01            137.01
137.02            137.02
137.03            137.03
137.04            137.04
137.10            137.15
137.11            137.16
137.12            137.17
137.13            137.18
137.14            137.19
137.15            137.20
150.001           150.001
150.002           150.002
150.003           150.003
150.004           150.004
150.015           150.015
150.016           150.016
150.025           150.030
150.027           150.031
150.040           150.045
150.041           150.046
150.050           150.060
150.090           150.075
150.091           150.076
150.999           150.999
151.01            151.01
151.02            151.02
151.03            151.03
151.04            151.04
153.01            152.01
153.02            152.02
154.01            153.01
154.02            153.02
154.03            153.03
154.15            153.15
154.16            153.16
154.17            153.17
154.18            153.18
154.19            153.19
154.20            153.20
154.21            153.21
154.22            153.22
154.23            153.23
154.35            153.35
154.36            153.36
154.37            153.37
154.38            153.38
154.39            153.39
154.40            153.40
154.50            153.55
154.51            153.56
154.52            153.57
154.99            153.99
155.001           154.001
155.002           154.002
155.003           154.003
155.004           154.004
155.005           154.005
155.006           154.006
155.007           154.007
155.015           154.020
155.016           154.021
155.017           154.022
155.018           154.023
155.019           154.024
155.020           154.025
155.030           154.040
155.031           154.041
155.032           154.042
155.033           154.043
155.045           154.055
155.046           154.056
155.047           154.057
155.048           154.058
155.049           154.059
155.060           154.070
155.061           154.071
155.062           154.072
155.063           154.073
155.064           154.074
155.065           154.075
155.066           154.076
155.067           154.077
155.068           154.078
155.069           154.079
155.070           154.080
155.071           154.081
155.080           154.095
155.081           154.096
155.082           154.097
155.083           154.098
155.084           154.099
155.095           154.110
155.096           154.111
155.097           154.112
155.098           154.113
155.110           154.125
155.111           154.126
155.999           154.999
156.01            155.01
158.01            157.01
158.02            157.02
158.03            157.03
159.01            158.01
                  
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
202      8-14-1923   96.02
308      8-5-1940    98.01 -
                     98.06
322      8-4-1941    155.01
354      3-4-1946    98.55 -
                     98.60
358      6-3-1946    96.01
                     110.02 -
                     110.14,
                     112.01 -
                     112.04,
                     114.01 -
381      8-1-1949    114.03,
                     114.35 -
                     114.39,
                     114.55,
                     114.56,
                     115.45 -
                     115.51
401      10-1-1951   114.15 -
                     114.23
407      5-19-1952   Ch. 76, Sch. I
422      4-5-1954    32.045,
                     32.046
                     98.01,
                     98.25,
427      10-4-1954   98.26,
                     98.40 -
                     98.43
460      6-3-1957    Ch. 77, Sch. I
461      8-5-1957    99.01,
                     99.02
                     32.090,
484      12-17-1958  32.091,
                     32.093 -
                     32.097
                     32.090,
502      3-7-1960    32.091,
                     32.093 -
                     32.097
533      5-1-1961    32.030 -
                     32.034
554      7-16-1962   99.15
                     111.05,
                     111.07,
                     111.08,
                     111.10,
                     111.11,
596      2-3-1964    111.14,
                     111.16,
                     111.35 
                     111.38,
                     111.40,
                     111.41
621      6-22-1965   Ch. 77, Sch. I
671      7-1-1968    34.01 -
                     34.07
691      2-3-1969    Ch. 77, Sch. I
700      4-7-1969    34.20 -
                     34.24
698      4-14-1969   111.35
702      5-19-1969   Ch. 77, Sch. I
708      9-2-1969    37.050,
                     37.051
709      9-2-1969    37.065,
                     37.066
727      4-5-1970    Ch. 77, Sch. I
739      9-1-1970    72.08
714      11-16-1970  Ch. 77, Sch. I
754      1-18-1971   75.09,
                     75.10
761      4-5-1971    Ch. 77, Sch. I
                     115.20 -
794      4-17-1972   115.22,
                     115.24 -
                     115.29
                     70.055 -
                     70.060,
                     71.01 -
                     71.04,
                     72.01 -
                     72.06,
                     72.09,
                     72.10,
817      3-5-1973    73.001 -
                     73.011,
                     73.025 -
                     73.037,
                     73.050 -
                     73.055,
                     75.01,
                     75.02,
                     75.04 -
                     75.08
820      4-16-1973   32.002
855      9-3-1974    Ch. 77, Sch. I
860      11-18-1974  37.080,
                     37.081
865      2-3-1975    34.40 -
                     34.43
873      7-7-1975    112.05
                     154.001 -
                     154.006,
                     154.020 -
                     154.024,
                     154.040 -
                     154.043,
                     154.055 -
                     154.059,
876      8-4-1975    154.070 -
                     154.081,
                     154.095 -
                     154.097,
                     154.099,
                     154.110 
                     154.113,
                     154.125,
                     154.126
886      12-15-1975  Ch. 77, Sch. I
891      1-19-1976   154.081
932      3-7-1977    151.01 -
                     151.04
956      12-19-1977  112.06
957      12-19-1977  110.01
967      5-15-1978   30.63
973      6-19-1978   Ch. 77, Sch. I
977      8-7-1978    Ch. 77, Sch. I
981      9-18-1978   99.17
983      9-18-1978   94.25
985      10-2-1978   117.01 -
                     117.08
988      12-4-1978   91.01,
                     91.02
1001     4-16-1979   72.11,
                     72.12
                     114.18,
1024     10-1-1979   114.19,
                     114.23
1025     10-1-1979   136.20,
                     136.99
1034     12-3-1979   Ch. 77, Sch. I
1042     1-7-1980    111.17
1049     3-3-1980    111.43
1054     5-19-1980   110.15
1068     8-18-1980   Ch. 77, Sch. I
1072     8-18-1980   70.058,
                     70.060
1089     2-17-1981   32.002
1102     5-18-1981   30.62
1125     1-4-1982    37.015,
                     37.016
1126     1-4-1982    37.001 -
                     37.003
1127     1-18-1982   111.45
1132     3-15-1982   31.065 -
                     31.069
1134     3-15-1982   115.22 -
                     115.28
1137     4-5-1982    110.07
                     111.07,
                     111.35 -
                     111.38,
1138     4-5-1982    111.40,
                     111.41,
                     111.43,
                     111.45 -
                     111.46
1139     4-5-1982    112.05,
                     119.01
1140     4-19-1982   94.25
                     153.01 -
                     153.03,
                     153.15,
                     153.16,
                     153.18 -
1141     5-17-1982   153.23,
                     153.35 -
                     153.40,
                     153.55 -
                     153.57,
                     153.99
                     31.095,
                     31.097,
1147     6-7-1982    98.02,
                     98.03,
                     154.021,
                     154.024
1150     7-19-1982   136.21,
                     136.99
1163     11-15-1982  34.04
1167     1-17-1983   30.62
1169     2-7-1983    154.006
1172     4-4-1983    119.01
1202     12-19-1983  Ch. 77, Sch. I
1205     2-6-1984    Ch. 77, Sch. I
                     94.02 -
                     94.04,
                     94.07 -
                     94.12,
1207     4-2-1984    94.26 -
                     94.28,
                     94.30 -
                     94.38,
                     94.99
1211     6-7-1984    154.999
1227     8-20-1984   91.01,
                     91.02
1242     1-7-1985    136.22,
                     136.99
1253     6-3-1985    72.25 -
                     72.34
1264     8-5-1985    94.25
1265     8-5-1985    112.05,
                     119.01
1274     9-16-1985   154.098
1287     3-17-1986   32.060 -
                     32.063
1298     6-16-1986   115.45 -
                     115.51
1310     12-1-1986   37.999
                     94.04,
1311     1-5-1987    94.05,
                     94.36
                     111.36 -
                     111.38,
                     111.40,
1315     3-16-1987   111.41,
                     111.43,
                     111.45,
                     111.46
1322     7-6-1987    32.061
1327     7-20-1987   32.001
1337     10-5-1987   72.12
1344     3-7-1988    36.01 -
                     36.08
                     110.01,
1348     4-18-1988   114.02,
                     114.38
1350     6-6-1988    70.058 -
                     70.060
1356     7-5-1988    115.48
1366     10-17-1988  153.17
1375     1-17-1989   37.095 -
                     37.102
1377     2-21-1989   71.05,
                     71.99
1379     2-21-1989   35.01,
                     35.99
                     97.02 -
1381     2-21-1989   97.29,
                     97.99
1385     3-20-1989   32.116,
                     32.117
1394     4-3-1989    112.20,
                     112.21
1400     5-15-1989   91.02
1411     10-16-1989  115.29
                     33.01 
1413     11-20-1989  33.11,
                     33.25 -
                     33.28
                     111.36 
                     111.38,
1424     3-19-1990   111.40,
                     111.41,
                     111.43
                     73.070,
1426     4-2-1990    73.071,
                     73.999
                     50.001,
                     50.015 -
                     50.022,
                     50.035 -
                     50.037,
1431     6-4-1990    50.050 -
                     50.055,
                     50.085 -
                     50.087,
                     50.999,
                     130.07
1440     8-6-1990    32.060
1444     9-17-1990   112.05
1450     9-17-1990   150.002
1452     10-1-1990   30.62
1453     10-1-1990   50.999
1456     12-3-1990   71.01
1458     1-28-1991   32.002
1471     7-3-1991    152.01
1476     8-19-1991   31.080,
                     31.081
1479     9-3-1991    110.01
1480     9-16-1991   150.002
                     34.02,
1487     12-16-1991  34.04,
                     34.05
1488     12-16-1991  72.07
1489     3-2-1992    91.02
1497     7-6-1992    TSO IV
1502     8-3-1992    TSO III
1503     8-3-1992    TSO II
1504     8-4-1992    TSO I
1509     9-9-1992    TSO VII
1511     10-21-1992  TSO VII
1512     11-16-1992  TSO I
1517     12-21-1992  TSO III
1518     12-21-1992  TSO IV
1521     3-18-1993   TSO VII
1523     4-6-1993    TSO II
1524     4-6-1993    TSO VII
1525     4-6-1993    TSO II
1526     4-6-1993    TSO VII
1527     4-6-1993    72.99
1528     4-19-1993   TSO I
1529     5-17-1993   TSO I
1533     6-7-1993    TSO VII
1539     9-20-1993   TSO V
1541     11-1-1993   Ch. 77, Sch. II
                     94.02,
1545     12-20-1993  94.25,
                     94.26
1550     2-22-1994   90.01
1553     4-18-1994   39.15 -
                     39.20
1557     6-6-1994    TSO I
1558     6-6-1994    TSO II
1559     6-6-1994    TSO VII
1570     10-3-1994   TSO VII
1571     10-17-1994  98.44
1574     10-17-1994  70.056
1577     11-21-1994  TSO III
1581     1-17-1995   TSO III
1583     1-23-1995   TSO III
1584     2-6-1995    TSO VI
1585     2-21-1995   111.12,
                     111.25
1586     3-6-1995    70.059
1587     5-1-1995    TSO VI
1591     6-19-1995   TSO VI
1592     6-19-1995   TSO VII
1597     7-3-1995    TSO I
1598     7-14-1995   TSO III
1599     7-17-1995   TSO VII
1601     7-17-1995   TSO III
1600     8-1-1995    TSO III
1602     8-7-1995    TSO I
1603     8-7-1995    TSO III
1604     8-7-1995    TSO VII
1622     2-7-1996    33.08,
                     33.10
1624     2-7-1996    70.058
1634     7-15-1996   TSO VII
1633     7-16-1996   TSO III
1640     11-20-1996  TSO I
1641     11-20-1996  TSO I
1642     11-20-1996  TSO III
1643     12-2-1996   150.001,
                     150.002
1644     12-2-1996   150.045,
                     150.046
1645     12-2-1996   150.015,
                     150.016
1649     12-16-1996  TSO III
1650     1-6-1997    150.030,
                     150.031
1654     1-21-1997   TSO III
1655     1-21-1997   TSO III
1656     2-3-1997    TSO II
1657     2-3-1997    TSO VII
                     110.01,
                     110.08,
1659     2-18-1997   112.06,
                     114.02,
                     114.38
1663     5-5-1997    TSO VII
1665     5-19-1997   TSO II
1669     5-19-1997   154.007
1676     7-7-1997    TSO I
1677     7-10-1997   TSO III
                     113.001 -
1678     7-21-1997   113.047,
                     113.999
                     114.18,
                     114.19,
1680     8-18-1997   114.23,
                     116.01 -
                     116.22,
                     116.99
1683     9-2-1997    TSO I
1685     9-15-1997   32.092
1688     10-20-1997  TSO VI
1689     10-20-1997  TSO III
1692     11-17-1997  113.060 -
                     113.067
1694     1-6-1998    TSO V
1699     3-16-1998   TSO VII
1701     5-4-1998    111.09
1702     6-15-1998   33.10
1707     7-20-1998   TSO II
1608     10-2-1998   72.99
1710     10-19-1998  32.034
1711     11-16-1998  111.09
1715     12-7-1998   132.04,
                     132.99
1716     12-7-1998   132.05,
                     132.99
1717     12-7-1998   75.13,
                     75.99
1718     12-7-1998   132.03,
                     132.99
1719     12-7-1998   132.06
1720     12-7-1998   132.07,
                     132.99
                     119.01 -
1721     12-7-1998   119.04,
                     119.99
1722     12-21-1998  TSO I
1723     1-19-1999   TSO VII
1728     3-1-1999    TSO II
1729     3-1-1999    TSO VII
1730     4-5-1999    TSO V
                     53.01 -
1737     8-16-1999   53.04, 53.06,
                     53.99
1739     9-7-1999    TSO I
1740     9-20-1999   TSO I
1741     9-20-1999   TSO I
1744     9-20-1999   111.09
1746     10-4-1999   TSO I
1752     1-3-2000    TSO I
1757     3-20-2000   TSO II
1758     3-20-2000   TSO VII
1759     4-17-2000   116.05,
                     116.20
1760     4-17-2000   TSO I
1768     6-5-2000    TSO I
1772     7-17-2000   TSO I
1774     8-21-2000   TSO IV
1778     10-16-2000  152.02
1779     11-6-2000   TSO I
1780     11-6-2000   TSO I
1782     11-20-2000  TSO VII
1787-A   1-2-2001    37.115 -
                     37.132
1790     2-5-2001    TSO III
1792     3-5-2001    TSO II
1793     3-5-2001    TSO VII
1795     3-19-2001   111.09
1796     3-19-2001   36.20,
                     36.21
1797     4-2-2001    111.09
1801     4-23-2001   TSO II
1802     4-23-2001   158.01
1803     4-23-2001   TSO VII
1804     5-7-2001    150.016
1812     6-4-2001    TSO II
1813     6-4-2001    31.007
1815     6-18-2001   111.09
1816     6-18-2001   33.10
1818     8-6-2001    TSO II
1819     8-6-2001    TSO VII
1820     8-6-2001    TSO III
1823     9-17-2001   111.09,
                     111.47
1824     9-17-2001   158.01
1825     10-15-2001  111.09
1826     10-15-2001  119.04
1827     11-19-2001  120.01 -
                     120.17
1833     12-3-2001   158.01
1835     12-17-2001  TSO I
1836     3-4-2002    111.09
                     30.04,
1837     3-18-2002   31.022,
                     31.037,
                     32.002
1838     4-1-2002    111.09
1852     6-17-2002   TSO IV
1860     8-6-2002    TSO III
1865     9-3-2002    158.01
1866     9-16-2002   TSO III
1867     9-16-2002   TSO III
1869     9-16-2002   TSO V
1893     9-24-2002   TSO I
1870     10-7-2002   TSO I
1877     10-21-2002  121.01 -
                     121.14
1875     11-4-2002   158.01
1876     11-4-2002   TSO I
1878     12-2-2002   TSO VII
1879     12-16-2002  TSO I
1888     1-6-2003    158.01
1889     1-6-2003    111.43
1892     2-3-2003    TSO I
1894     2-18-2003   32.061,
                     94.25
1895     3-3-2003    158.01
1896     3-3-2003    158.01
                     34.02,
1897     4-7-2003    34.04,
                     34.05
                     111.36 -
                     111.38,
                     111.40,
1898     4-7-2003    111.41,
                     111.43,
                     111.45,
                     111.47
1899     4-21-2003   TSO VII
1900     4-21-2003   TSO II
1901     4-21-2003   158.01
                     116.02,
                     116.04,
                     116.06,
1903     4-21-2003   116.10,
                     116.11,
                     116.13,
                     116.17 -
                     116.20
                     91.01,
1904     4-21-2003   91.02,
                     91.09
                     33.10,
                     50.018,
                     70.058,
                     110.01,
                     110.07,
1905     4-21-2003   114.02,
                     114.15 -
                     114.17,
                     114.19,
                     114.38,
                     154.022
                     37.145 -
1907     4-28-2003   37.154,
                     37.999
                     37.165 -
1908     4-28-2003   37.174,
                     37.999
1909     4-28-2003   37.185
1912     5-5-2003    110.30
1916     5-19-2003   111.09
                     37.165 -
1917     6-2-2003    37.174,
                     37.999
                     37.165 -
1919     6-16-2003   37.174,
                     37.999
1921     9-2-2003    TSO III
1924     9-15-2003   TSO III
1926     10-6-2003   150.003,
                     150.004
1927     10-6-2003   150.001,
                     150.002
1928     10-6-2003   150.076
1929     10-6-2003   150.045,
                     150.046
                     150.015,
1930     10-6-2003   150.016,
                     150.030,
                     150.031
1933     10-15-2003  TSO I
1034     10-20-2003  TSO II
1935     10-20-2003  158.01
1936     10-20-2003  158.01
1937     11-3-2003   TSO III
1938     11-3-2003   TSO V
1948     1-5-2004    111.09
1949     1-5-2004    TSO V
1951     1-20-2004   70.058
1952     1-20-2004   133.04,
                     133.05
1954     1-20-2004   150.004
1955     1-20-2004   TSO I
1956     2-2-2004    154.007,
                     154.110
1957     2-2-2004    70.058
1958     2-17-2004   TSO V
1964     2-17-2004   TSO III
1965     2-17-2004   TSO I
1966     3-1-2004    111.09
1967     3-22-2004   37.185
1968     4-5-2004    TSO III
1969     4-5-2004    TSO I
1970     4-19-2004   TSO V
1976     5-17-2004   TSO I
1977     5-17-2004   40.01
1989     6-21-2004   TSO I
1994     8-16-2004   TSO I
2000     10-4-2004   TSO III
2001     10-4-2004   TSO III
2003     10-4-2004   TSO III
                     30.04,
2004     10-4-2004   31.022,
                     31.037,
                     32.002
2005     10-4-2004   31.004
2006     11-15-2004  TSO I
2007     12-6-2004   70.058
2009     12-20-2004  TSO II
2010     12-20-2004  TSO VII
2012     12-20-2004  120.01,
                     120.06
2013     12-20-2004  158.01
2014     1-18-2005   TSO I
                     73.085 -
2015     2-22-2005   73.088,
                     73.999
2016     2-22-2005   TSO I
2020     3-21-2005   33.10
2021     3-21-2005   31.004
2022     4-4-2005    98.44
2023     4-18-2005   150.030,
                     150.031
2025     4-18-2005   TSO I
2026     4-18-2005   TSO I
2033     5-16-2005   30.62
2034     5-16-2005   TSO III
2035     5-16-2005   TSO III
2036     5-16-2005   TSO III
2037     5-16-2005   TSO III
2038     5-16-2005   TSO III
2039     5-16-2005   TSO I
2040     6-6-2005    111.09
2041     6-6-2005    TSO I
2044     7-5-2005    158.01
2046     8-1-2005    TSO II
2047     8-1-2005    TSO VII
2052     9-6-2005    TSO I
2054     9-19-2005   158.01
2057     10-17-2005  TSO III
2058     11-21-2005  111.09
2066     3-6-2006    TSO III
2067     3-20-2006   TSO VII
2072     5-15-2006   TSO II
2073     5-15-2006   TSO VII
2075     6-5-2006    TSO I
2076     6-5-2006    TSO I
2078     7-3-2006    TSO I
2080     8-7-2006    TSO I
2090     11-20-2006  150.004
2094     1-16-2007   111.09
2095     1-16-2007   TSO I
                     96.15,
                     96.16,
2096     2-20-2007   96.19,
                     96.21 -
                     96.25,
                     96.99
2097     2-20-2007   TSO III
2098     2-20-2007   TSO III
2099     2-20-2007   TSO III
3000     2-20-2007   TSO III
3001     2-20-2007   TSO III
3002     2-20-2007   TSO III
3005     3-5-2007    TSO VII
3007     3-19-2007   TSO VII
3009     3-19-2007   70.058
3016     5-7-2007    TSO VI
3017     5-7-2007    TSO III
                     154.006,
3020     6-18-2007   154.024,
                     154.025,
                     154.999
3022     7-16-2007   150.060
3027     8-20-2007   TSO II
3032     11-5-2007   TSO VII
3033     11-19-2007  33.10
3034     11-19-2007  TSO V
3036     12-3-2007   158.01
                     96.15 -
3037     1-22-2008   96.25,
                     96.99
3038     1-22-2008   TSO I
3039     1-22-2008   TSO III
3040     2-19-2008   113.100 -
                     113.103
3041     2-19-2008   113.080 -
                     113.086
                     100.01 -
3042     2-19-2008   100.22,
                     100.99
3043     2-19-2008   TSO III
3044     2-19-2008   TSO III
3045     2-19-2008   TSO III
3046     2-19-2008   TSO III
3047     2-19-2008   TSO III
3048     2-19-2008   TSO III
3050     3-17-2008   111.09
                     114.19,
3053     4-7-2008    150.004,
                     154.098
3054     4-7-2008    TSO III
3058     5-5-2008    152.02
3060     6-2-2008    TSO II
3061     6-2-2008    TSO VII
3065     7-21-2008   TSO II
3066     7-21-2008   TSO VI
3067     7-21-2008   TSO VII
3071     10-20-2008  TSO VII
3072     10-20-2008  TSO I
3076     10-20-2008  TSO VII
3077     10-20-2008  TSO II
3083     12-1-2008   111.09
3085     12-15-2008  111.09
3086     2-2-2009    158.01
3087     2-17-2009   TSO I
3091     4-6-2009    TSO III
3092     4-6-2009    TSO III
3093     4-6-2009    TSO III
3094     4-6-2009    TSO III
3095     4-6-2009    TSO III
3099     5-11-2009   97.01,
                     97.02
                     31.065,
4000     5-11-2009   31.066,
                     31.069,
                     31.080
                     31.065,
                     31.066,
4001     5-11-2009   31.068,
                     31.080,
                     31.081
4003     6-1-2009    111.09,
                     111.39
4004     6-15-2009   39.01
4005     7-20-2009   111.09
4006     7-20-2009   TSO I
4008     7-20-2009   Ch. 77, Sch. I
4013     9-21-2009   38.01 -
                     38.22
4014     9-21-2009   72.45 -
                     72.51
4015     9-21-2009   70.002
4018     10-5-2009   158.01
4021     11-2-2009   TSO III
4023     11-2-2009   33.10
4025     11-2-2009   158.01
                     94.01,
4027     12-7-2009   94.02,
                     94.25
4029     12-7-2009   TSO I
4030     12-21-2009  158.01
4034     2-1-2010    33.40 -
                     33.46
4035     2-16-2010   111.09,
                     111.44
4037     3-15-2010   101.01 -
                     101.05
4040     4-26-2010   TSO VI
4041     5-3-2010    111.09
4042     5-3-2010    TSO VI
4043     5-17-2010   TSO I
4044     6-7-2010    158.01
                     30.03,
4047     6-21-2010   30.15 -
                     30.26
4048     6-21-2010   31.008
4049     6-21-2010   39.01
4050     7-12-2010   TSO III
4051     7-12-2010   TSO III
4052     7-12-2010   TSO III
4053     7-12-2010   TSO III
4054     7-12-2010   TSO III
4055     7-12-2010   TSO III
4056     7-12-2010   TSO III
4057     7-12-2010   TSO III
4058     7-12-2010   TSO III
4060     7-12-2010   TSO I
                     30.04,
4062     8-2-2010    31.022,
                     31.037,
                     32.002
4065     8-23-2010   TSO VII
4069     9-7-2010    TSO I
                     111.02 
                     111.06,
4071     9-20-2010   111.13,
                     111.15,
                     111.18 -
                     111.24
4070     10-4-2010   10.98
4073     11-8-2010   TSO I
4075     12-13-2010  TSO III
4076     12-13-2010  TSO III
4077     12-13-2010  TSO III
4078     12-13-2010  TSO III
4079     12-13-2010  TSO III
4080     12-13-2010  TSO III
4081     12-13-2010  TSO III
4083     12-13-2010  TSO III
4084     12-13-2010  TSO III
4085     12-13-2010  31.098
                     31.098,
4086     1-3-2011    153.02,
                     154.006
4087     1-3-2011    TSO I
4092     1-18-2011   TSO I
4093     1-18-2011   TSO VI
4094     2-7-2011    32.091
4095     2-22-2011   158.01
4096     3-7-2011    TSO I
                     32.045,
4099     5-2-2011    32.046,
                     32.091,
                     32.092
4100     5-16-2011   TSO III
4102     5-16-2011   TSO I
4103     5-16-2011   39.01
4105     6-20-2011   TSO I
4106     6-20-2011   111.09,
                     111.38
                     51.001 -
                     51.009,
                     51.020 -
                     51.023,
                     51.035 -
                     51.042,
                     51.055 -
                     51.063,
                     51.075 -
                     51.077,
                     51.090 -
                     51.102,
                     51.115 -
                     51.124,
4107     6-20-2011   51.135 -
                     51.141,
                     51.155 -
                     51.157,
                     51.170 -
                     51.172,
                     Ch. 51, App. A, § 1,
                     Ch. 51, App. A, § 2,
                     52.001 -
                     52.003,
                     52.015,
                     52.016,
                     52.030 -
                     52.041,
                     52.085 -
                     52.087
4108     7-18-2011   111.38
4109     7-18-2011   TSO III
4110     7-18-2011   TSO III
4111     8-1-2011    TSO I
4113     8-22-2011   TSO III
4114     8-22-2011   TSO III
4115     8-22-2011   TSO I
4116     9-6-2011    TSO I
4118     9-18-2011   32.135 -
                     32.138
                     50.001,
                     50.015 -
4120     10-17-2011  50.020,
                     50.051,
                     50.070
4121     11-7-2011   158.01
4124     11-7-2011   TSO I
4125     11-7-2011   158.01
4127     11-21-2011  111.15,
                     130.20
4128     11-21-2011  38.02,
                     132.06
4131     12-5-2011   52.032
4132     12-19-2011  TSO I
4134     12-19-2011  TSO III
4135     12-19-2011  TSO III
4136     12-19-2011  TSO III
4137     12-19-2011  TSO III
4138     12-19-2011  TSO III
4139     12-19-2011  TSO III
4140     12-19-2011  TSO III
4141     12-19-2011  TSO III
4142     12-19-2011  TSO III
4143     1-17-2012   111.09
4144     1-17-2012   TSO I
4146     2-21-2012   111.09
4147     2-21-2012   34.08
4148     3-12-2012   31.050,
                     31.051
4149     3-12-2012   31.068,
                     31.069
4151     4-30-2012   TSO III
4152     4-30-2012   TSO III
                     92.01 -
4154     4-30-2012   92.26,
                     92.99
4157     5-14-2012   111.09
4158     6-18-2012   101.06
4159     7-31-2012   Ch. 77, Sch. I
4163     7-31-2012   TSO I
4164     9-4-2012    135.02,
                     135.05
4166     10-15-2012  158.01
4167     10-15-2012  10.99
4168     10-15-2012  41.01
4169     10-15-2012  52.055 -
                     52.074
                     110.01,
                     114.02,
                     114.20,
                     114.38,
4170     10-29-2012  114.57,
                     115.46,
                     116.04,
                     120.06,
                     121.05
4171     11-5-2012   111.09
4173     12-10-2012  TSO III
4174     12-10-2012  TSO III
4175     12-10-2012  TSO III
4176     12-10-2012  TSO III
4178     1-22-2013   111.09
4179     1-22-2013   111.09
4180     1-22-2013   70.058
4181     2-4-2013    TSO I
4182     2-19-2013   TSO I
4183     2-19-2013   TSO I
4184     3-4-2013    54.01 -
                     54.08
                     95.01 
                     95.04,
                     95.99,
                     150.001 
                     150.004,
4186     4-1-2013    150.015,
                     150.045,
                     150.046,
                     150.075,
                     150.090,
                     150.091
4187     4-1-2013    TSO I
4188     4-15-2013   TSO I
4191     6-3-2013    33.10
4192     6-3-2013    111.09
4193     6-3-2013    111.09
4194     7-1-2013    39.01
4196     7-1-2013    111.09
4198     8-12-2013   101.04
4199     8-12-2013   TSO I
4200     8-12-2013   TSO I
4201     9-9-2013    TSO I
                     51.140,
4202     9-23-2013   51.157,
                     52.040
4203     9-23-2013   TSO I
4204     10-21-2013  TSO VI
4205     11-4-2013   158.01
4206     11-4-2013   TSO I
4208     12-16-2013  72.49,
                     72.52
4209     12-16-2013  31.068
4212     12-16-2013  111.09
4210     12-17-2013  111.09
4213     1-21-2014   111.09
4214     1-21-2014   111.09
4215     2-18-2014   TSO I
4216     3-17-2014   111.09
4217     3-17-2014   111.09
4218     3-17-2014   TSO III
4219     3-17-2014   TSO III
4220     3-17-2014   TSO III
4221     3-17-2014   TSO III
4222     3-17-2014   TSO III
4223     3-17-2014   TSO III
4224     3-17-2014   TSO III
4225     3-17-2014   TSO III
4226     3-17-2014   TSO III
4227     3-17-2014   TSO I
4228     4-21-2014   70.061
4232     5-12-2014   72.52
4233     5-12-2014   111.13,
                     111.43
4234     6-9-2014    111.09
4236     6-9-2014    39.01
4237     6-9-2014    TSO I
4276     7-20-2014   39.01
4239     8-18-2014   111.09
4240     9-15-2014   TSO I
4242     9-15-2014   TSO I
4243     9-15-2014   158.01
4244     10-6-2014   TSO I
                     138.01 
4246     11-17-2014  138.09,
                     138.99
4247     11-17-2014  TSO VIII
                     70.075 
4248     12-15-2014  70.090,
                     70.999
4249     12-15-2014  51.140
4250     12-15-2014  37.166
4252     3-2-2015    111.09
4255     3-2-2015    50.070,
                     91.03
4256     3-16-2015   TSO III
4257     3-16-2015   TSO III
4258     3-16-2015   TSO III
4259     3-16-2015   TSO III
4260     3-16-2015   TSO III
4261     3-16-2015   TSO III
4262     3-16-2015   TSO III
4305     3-21-2015   TSO III
4264     4-13-2015   33.10
4265     4-13-2015   TSO I
4266     4-27-2015   51.140
4270     5-4-2015    139.01 
                     139.04
4271     6-1-2015    TSO I
                     91.01 
4272     6-1-2015    91.09,
                     91.99
4273     6-1-2015    TSO I
4274     7-20-2015   TSO I
4275     7-20-2015   136.35,
                     136.99
4277     7-20-2015   111.09
4279     7-20-2015   50.016,
                     50.017
4281     9-8-2015    32.075,
                     32.076
4284     9-28-2015   TSO I
4288     10-5-2015   95.02
                     31.096,
4289     10-5-2015   31.110,
                     31.111
4290     10-19-2015  111.09
4291     10-19-2015  111.09
4292     11-2-2015   TSO III
4293     11-16-2015  111.09
                     150.030,
4296     2-1-2016    150.031,
                     150.999
4297     2-1-2016    TSO I
4298     2-16-2016   158.01
4299     2-16-2016   111.15
4302     3-21-2016   TSO III
4303     3-21-2016   TSO III
4304     3-21-2016   TSO III
4306     3-21-2016   TSO III
4307     3-21-2016   TSO III
4308     3-21-2016   TSO III
4309     3-21-2016   111.09
4312     4-28-2016   32.076
4315     6-20-2016   TSO VIII
4317     6-20-2016   39.01
4318     7-18-2016   158.01
4319     7-18-2016   TSO I
4320     9-6-2016    TSO I
4323     9-19-2016   TSO I
4324     10-17-2016  111.09
4326     12-19-2016  111.09
4328     2-21-2017   72.08,
                     72.13
                     75.03,
4329     2-21-2017   75.11,
                     75.12,
                     75.99
4331     2-21-2017   TSO III
4332     2-21-2017   TSO III
4333     2-21-2017   TSO III
4334     2-21-2017   TSO III
4335     2-21-2017   TSO III
4336     4-3-2017    TSO III
4337     4-3-2017    TSO III
4339     4-24-2017   111.09
4340     4-24-2017   TSO III
4341     4-24-2017   TSO III
4343     6-19-2017   TSO III
4344     6-19-2017   110.16
4345     6-19-2017   39.01
4346     6-26-2017   110.17
4347     7-17-2017   111.09,
                     111.42
4349     8-21-2017   111.09
4351     9-5-2017    TSO I
4354     1-8-2018    39.30,
                     Ch. 39, App. A
4355     2-5-2018    TSO III
4356     2-20-2018   111.09
4356     2-20-2018   TSO III
4357     2-20-2018   TSO III
4358     2-20-2018   TSO III
4359     2-20-2018   TSO III
4360     2-20-2018   TSO III
4361     2-20-2018   TSO III
4362     2-20-2018   TSO III
4364     4-30-2018   TSO III
4365     6-18-2018   TSO III
4366     6-18-2018   39.01
4367     6-18-2018   31.004
4368     7-16-2018   38.99
4369     7-16-2018   75.25
4370     5-7-2018    33.10
4375     10-1-2018   TSO III
4376     10-1-2018   TSO III
4377     10-15-2018  TSO I
4379     2-19-2019   TSO III
4380     2-19-2019   TSO III
4381     2-19-2019   TSO III
4382     2-19-2019   TSO III
4383     2-19-2019   TSO III
4384     4-1-2019    TSO I
4385     4-1-2019    39.40
4387     5-28-2019   TSO I
4390     7-22-2019   111.09
4391     7-22-2019   111.09
                     37.030 -
4394     8-20-2018   37.037,
                     37.999
4396     8-19-2019   30.15
4397     8-19-2019   31.068
4399     10-21-2019  37.220 
                     37.223
4402     11-25-2019  TSO I
4406     3-2-2020    TSO I
4407     3-16-2020   35.01
4408     3-16-2020   135.05
4409     3-17-2020   111.09
4410     3-17-2020   TSO I
4411     3-17-2020   TSO I
                     122.01 
                     122.08,
4412     3-16-2020   122.20 
                     122.25,
                     122.99
4413     3-16-2020   158.01
4415     5-18-2020   111.09
4416     5-18-2020   TSO VII
4418     5-18-2020   TSO I
4420     7-20-2020   111.09
4422     8-17-2020   111.42
4424     9-21-2020   111.09
4425     9-21-2020   37.235 
                     37.237
                     161.01 
4427     9-21-2020   161.15,
                     161.99
                     111.09,
4431     11-16-2020  111.25,
                     111.48,
                     111.49
4432     11-16-2020  111.09
4433     11-16-2020  111.09
4435     12-14-2020  111.09
4436     12-14-2020  111.09
4440     1-19-2021   102.01 
                     102.06
                     160.01 
4443     2-16-2021   160.05,
                     160.99
                     119.01,
4444     2-16-2021   119.03,
                     119.05
4445     3-15-2021   TSO III
4446     3-15-2021   156.01,
                     156.02
4447     4-26-2021   111.09
4454     6-21-2021   119.04
4455     6-21-2021   158.01
4456     6-21-2021   158.01
4457     6-21-2021   TSO I
4459     6-21-2021   31.004
                     38.09,
4461     7-19-2021   51.157,
                     52.040,
                     99.18
4462     7-19-2021   TSO II
4463     7-19-2021   TSO II
4467     8-16-2021   TSO III
4469     8-16-2021   TSO I
4472     9-20-2021   TSO I
4473     10-18-2021  111.50
4474     10-18-2021  TSO I
                     91.01 
4475     10-18-2021  91.10,
                     91.99
                     150.001 
                     150.005,
                     150.010,
                     150.011,
                     150.015,
                     150.016,
                     150.030,
                     150.031,
                     150.045,
4476     10-18-2021  150.046,
                     150.060,
                     150.075,
                     150.076,
                     150.090,
                     150.091,
                     150.105,
                     150.120,
                     150.121,
                     150.999
                     95.01 
4477     10-18-2021  95.04,
                     95.99
4481     11-15-2021  158.01
4484     12-20-2021  110.01,
                     110.07
4486     12-20-2021  111.48,
                     111.49
4489     1-18-2022   TSO I
4490     2-22-2022   TSO VII
4492     2-22-2022   32.150 -
                     32.153
4493     3-21-2022   TSO I
4494     3-21-2022   TSO I
4496     3-21-2022   TSO I
4499     4-18-2022   135.05
4502     5-16-2022   50.070,
                     91.03
4506     5-16-2022   TSO I
4510     6-20-2022   99.15,
                     99.17
4512     7-18-2022   TSO I
4513     7-18-2022   TSO I
4514     7-18-2022   TSO I
4515     8-15-2022   TSO I
4517     8-15-2022   TSO VII
4518     8-15-2022   158.01
4519     8-15-2022   158.01
4520     8-15-2022   TSO I
                     37.050,
4523     8-15-2022   37.051,
                     37.065,
                     37.066
4524     8-15-2022   70.058 -
                     70.060
                     37.030,
4526     8-15-2022   37.036,
                     37.037
4528     9-26-2022   33.08,
                     33.10
4529     9-26-2022   52.031
4530     9-26-2022   158.01
4540     9-26-2022   37.400 -
                     37.406
4542     10-17-2022  158.01
4543     10-17-2022  158.01
4548     11-28-2022  TSO IV
4550     12-19-2022  33.09
4551     1-17-2023   TSO I
4552     2-21-2023   TSO I
4554     3-20-2023   TSO III
4556     3-20-2023   118.01
4557     3-20-2023   119.04
4558     4-17-2023   TSO VIII
4560     5-15-2023   150.016
4561     5-15-2023   34.05
4570     9-18-2023   140.00 -
                     140.02
4572     9-18-2023   TSO I
4577     10-30-2023  TSO I
4586     12-18-2023  39.02
                     70.100 -
4589     12-18-2023  70.107,
                     70.999
                    
 
 
