MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-49 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. CO-2025-25, passed 8-19-2025; and
State legislation current through 2025 Illinois Legislative Service, Pamphlet
#1
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588  www.amlegal.com
VILLAGE OFFICIALS
Village President
Village President
Nathaniel George Booker
Acting Village Clerk
Tori-Love Garron
Village Trustees
Isiah Brandon
Miguel Jones
Asia Ousley
Steven Smiley
Rahmaan "Ray" Williams
Antonio Sanchez
Village Manager
Francis Torres
Acting Village Manager
James Krischke
Village Attorney
Michael Jurusik
 
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter
   
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of Code
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Section headings
   
10.04   Rules of construction
   
10.05   Official time
   
10.06   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.07   Reference to other sections
   
10.08   Conflicting provisions
   
10.09   Amendments to Code
   
10.10   Severability
   
10.11   Reference to public office or officer
   
10.12   Errors and omissions
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Ordinances saved
   
10.16   Technical codes
   
10.17   Historical and statutory references
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification by and for the Village of Maywood shall be designated as
the Maywood Village Code and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Code the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or VILLAGE BOARD. The Board of Trustees of the Village.
   COUNTY. Cook County, Illinois.
   COUNTY BOARD. The County Board of Cook County, Illinois. (5 ILCS 70/1.07)
   COURT. Construed to mean any court of competent jurisdiction.
   DECREE. Synonymous with JUDGMENT. (5 ILCS 70/1.24)
   ELECTORS. Persons qualified to vote for elective officers at municipal
elections. (65 ILCS 5/1-1-2(3))
   EXECUTIVE OFFICER. Words used for an executive or ministerial officer may
include any deputy or other person performing the duties of such officer,
either generally or in special cases. (5 ILCS 70/1.08)
   HERETOFORE or HEREAFTER.  HERETOFORE means any time previous to the day on
which the ordinance, resolution, or statute takes effect; HEREAFTER means at
any time after that date. (5 ILCS 70/1.17)
   HIGHWAY, ROAD, or STREET. May include any road laid out by authority of the
United States, or of this state, or of any town or county of this state, and
all bridges thereupon. (5 ILCS 70/1.16)
   ILCS. Illinois Compiled Statutes, 2002, as heretofore and hereafter amended.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves, or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of an incorporeal nature.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MAYOR. The President of the Village of Maywood.
   MONTH. A calendar month. (5 ILCS 70/1.10)
   MUNICIPAL CODE. The Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.
   OATH. Includes affirmation, and SWEAR includes affirm. (5 ILCS 70/1.12)
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner,
purchaser and seller under a contract and/or deed, or tenant in common of the
whole or part of the property, and includes any beneficiary of a land trust
which owns property.
   PERSON. Any legal person; includes associations, partnerships, corporations,
joint ventures, and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals. (5
ILCS 70/1.05)
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real.
   POLICE OFFICERS. Police officers employed by the Village of Maywood.
   POLICE FORCE or POLICE DEPARTMENT shall be construed to include such persons
in the employ of a Village as members of the Department of Police, who are or
shall hereafter be appointed and sworn as police officers. (5 ILCS 70/1.20)
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and other interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes school districts; units of legal government; the
Village, county, state, or federal governments, officers and agencies thereof,
or any commissions or committees thereof; or any duly authorized public
official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians. (625 ILCS 5/1-188)
   SPECIAL DISTRICTS. The meaning ascribed in Article VII of the Constitution
of the State of Illinois of 1970. (5 ILCS 70/1.29)
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   STREET. Where the context admits, includes alleys, lanes, courts,
boulevards, squares, and other public thoroughfares.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANC ES. The Village Code hereby adopted, and
as hereinafter modified by amendment, revision, and by the adoption of new
titles, chapters, or sections.
    UNITS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The meaning established in Section 1 of Article
VII of the Constitution of the State of Illinois of 1970. (5 ILCS 70/1.28)
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Maywood.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. Includes printing, electronic, and any other mode of
representing words and letters; but when the written signature of any person is
required by law on any official or public writing or bond, required by law, it
shall be:
      (1)   The proper handwriting of that person, or in case he or she is
unable to write, his or her proper mark; or
      (2)   An electronic signature as defined in the Uniform Electronic
Transactions Act, 5 ILCS 175/1-101 et seq., except as otherwise provided by
law.
(5 ILCS 70/1.15)
   YEAR. A calendar year unless otherwise expressed; and the word YEAR alone is
equivalent to the expression “Year of Our Lord.” (5 ILCS 70/1.10)
Editor’s note:
   5 ILCS 175 was repealed by P.A. 102-38
§ 10.03 SECTION HEADINGS.
   Headings and captions used in this Code are employed for reference purposes
only, and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.04 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Words and phrases shall be read in context and construed according to
the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and phrases that have acquired a
technical or particular meaning, whether by legislative or judicial definition
or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
   (B)   As used in this Code, unless the context otherwise requires, the
following rules will be followed.
      (1)   The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include
the singular. (5 ILCS 70/1.03)
      (2)   Words of one gender shall include the other genders. (5 ILCS 70/
1.04)
      (3)   Words in the present tense shall include the future. (5 ILCS 70/
1.02)
      (4)   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the context admits.
   (C)   The time within which any act provided by law is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last, unless the last day
is Saturday or Sunday or is a holiday as defined or fixed in any statute now or
hereafter in force in this state, and then it shall also be excluded. If the
day succeeding Saturday, Sunday, or a holiday is also a holiday or a Saturday
or Sunday, then the succeeding day shall also be excluded. (5 ILCS 70/1.11)
   (D)   When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as well be
done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be construed to
include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Words purporting to give joint authority to 3 or more municipal
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving authority to a majority
of the officers or persons.
(5 ILCS 70/1.09)
   (F)   These rules of construction shall not apply to any provision of this
Code which shall contain any express provision excluding that construction, or
when the subject matter or context of this Code may be repugnant thereto.
   (G)   All general provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions shall be
liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the President
and Board of Trustees may be fully carried out.
(5 ILCS 70/1.01)
   (H)   The provisions of any ordinance, in so far as they are the same as
those of any prior ordinance, shall be construed as a continuation of the prior
provisions, and not as a new enactment. (5 ILCS 70/2)
§ 10.05 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time for the Village shall be as set by federal law.
§ 10.06 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed, nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not do any
of the following, except as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder.
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder.
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment. The
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
§ 10.07 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, the reference shall be construed to
mean a violation of any provision of the section or sections included in the
reference.
   (B)   References in this Code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of this Code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this Code.
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision and the context
clearly indicates that the reference to the section as amended or revised was
not intended.
§ 10.08 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of these
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the conflicting provisions
bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be construed so as to be
consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the subject
matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.09 AMENDMENTS TO CODE.
   All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal, or in any
way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections, and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, the repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by the omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as
numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie
evidence of subsequent ordinances until this Code of Ordinances and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are re- adopted as a new Code of Ordinances by
the Board of Trustees.
§ 10.10 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of these codified ordinances or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the
invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the section or
related sections which can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application, and to this end the provisions are severable.
§ 10.11 REFERENCE TO PUBLIC OFFICE OR OFFICER.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the Village exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. Such references
shall also include the designee or agent of any such officer or office, unless
the law or the context clearly requires otherwise.
§ 10.12 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any word
or words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached, or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected, and
the word or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   Except for any Code amendments passed by the Village Board of Trustees in
2001, 2002, 2003 and 2004, this Code, from and after its effective date, shall
contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects
herein enumerated and embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects
treated by this Code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this Code of Ordinances.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature (including, but not limited
to tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming, or vacating streets, alleys, or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the Village; and all special ordinances) as well as any
other ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this
Code of Ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein
repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the Board
of Trustees or a certain Village officer or employee to make additional
regulations for the purpose of carrying out the intent of the ordinance, all
regulations of a similar nature serving that purpose effected prior to the
codification and not inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect and are
saved.
§ 10.16 TECHNICAL CODES.
   Whenever any technical codes are incorporated herein by reference, any
subsequent amendments or revisions to such technical codes shall automatically
become a part of this Code and shall be made available for public inspection by
the Village. Further, to the extent of any conflict between the technical
provisions of this Code and any technical codes adopted by reference, the most
restrictive provision shall prevail.
§ 10.17 HISTORICAL AND STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the Code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent 3 amending ordinances, if
any, are listed following the text of the Code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   An “ILCS” cite included in the history indicates that the text of the
section reads either verbatim or substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (65 ILCS 5/3.1-2-1) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-
85). An “ILCS” cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text of
the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for further
information. Example:
      § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   The Village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all
public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
   Freedom of Information Act, see 5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   General. 
      (1)   Unless another penalty is specifically provided for, any person
violating any provision of this Code or any provision of any code adopted
herein by reference or any provision of any other ordinance of the Village
shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$1,000 for each offense.
      (2)   In addition to, or in lieu of, any fine or penalty, which may be
imposed for violation of an ordinance of the Village, a disposition of
supervision may be entered by the court upon a plea of guilty or a stipulation
by the defendant of the facts supporting the charge, or a finding of guilty.
Pursuant to such disposition of supervision the court may defer further
proceedings and the imposition of a sentence and enter an order for supervision
of the defendant.
      (3)   SUPERVISION means a disposition of conditional and revocable
release without probationary supervision, but under such conditions and
reporting requirements as are imposed by the court, at the successful
conclusion of which disposition the defendant is discharged and a judgment
dismissing the charges is entered.
   (B)   Commitment. The person upon whom any fine or penalty is imposed for
violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the Village, upon
order of the court before whom the conviction is had, may be committed to the
county jail as provided by ordinance for the incarceration of offenders until
the fine, penalty, and costs are fully paid. No imprisonment, however, shall
exceed 6 months for any one offense.
   (C)   Revocation of license. The revocation of a license or permit shall not
be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any penalty being enforced.
   (D)   Each day of violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which a
violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
   (E)   Applicability. The penalty provided by this section applies to the
amendment of any section of this Code or a code adopted herein by reference
whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance.
   (F)   Reference to sections. Reference to a section of this Code shall be
understood also to refer to and include the penalty section relating thereto,
unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (G)   Failure of officers to perform duties. The failure of an officer or
employee of the Village to perform an official duty imposed by this Code shall
not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed for violation of
this Code, unless a penalty is specifically provided in the section creating
the duty.
(1997 Code, § 1.08) (Ord. 81-10, passed 6-25-1981; Am. Ord. 82-5, passed 2-11-
1982; Am. Ord. C0-00-13, passed 11-20-2000)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to imprison for certain ordinance
    violations, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1
   Limitations on penalties, see 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1
Cross-reference:
   Administrative adjudications of violations, see
Ch. 39
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
Chapter
   
30.   VILLAGE ADMINISTRATION
   
31.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
   
32.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
   
33.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
   
34.   FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES
   
35.   PERSONNEL MATTERS
   
36.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
   
37.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
   
38.   VILLAGE POLICIES
   
39.   ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATIONS OF VIOLATIONS
   
40.   PSEBA BENEFIT ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 30: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATION
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   President
   
30.02   Clerk
   
30.03   Treasurer
   
30.04   Village Manager
   
30.05   Corporation Counsel; Department of Law
   
30.06   New officers and employees, residency in Village
   
30.07   Department heads, residency
   
30.08   Employees uniform reimbursement
   
30.09   Temporary appointments by Village President
   
30.10   Reserved
   
30.11   Village Library
   
30.12   Standing committees
   
30.13   Assistant Village Managers
   
30.14   Independent Inspector General
   
30.15   Use of Village seal, logo and letterhead
Board of Trustees
   
30.25   Government of Village
   
30.26   Elections and terms of Board of Trustees
   
30.27   Compensation of Trustees
   
30.28   Regular meetings
   
30.29   Special meetings
   
30.30   Quorum
   
30.31   Notice of meetings
   
30.32   Rules
   
30.33   Record and memorandum of ordinances
   
30.34   Proof of ordinances
   
30.35   Enacting style of ordinances
   
30.36   Participation in meetings via telephone conference call or other
electronic means
   
30.37   Rules governing public comment at public meetings
   
30.38   Approval of minutes
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 PRESIDENT.
   (A)   Board of Trustees President. The President shall be President of the
Board of Trustees as provided by statute. The President may also be referred to
as Mayor of the Village.
   (B)   Duties and powers. The President is the official head of the Village.
They shall preside at all meetings of the Board of Trustees. They shall have
such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be provided for by
statute or ordinance.
   (C)   Bond and oath. Before entering upon the duties of office the President
shall give a surety bond conditioned upon their faithful performance of their
duties, in the sum of $3,000. The President shall take the oath of office
prescribed by statute and shall receive such compensation as may be set from
time to time by the Board.
   (D)   Appointments. The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees, those officers who they are authorized by
statute to appoint; and whenever a vacancy occurs in any office which by law
they are empowered and required to fill, they shall within 30 days after the
happening of such vacancy, communicate to the Board the name of their appointee
to such office, and pending the concurrence of the Board in such appointment,
they may designate some suitable person to discharge the functions of such
office; provided, however, that no temporary appointee shall hold any office
for more than 60 calendar days. A temporary appointee holding office for 60
calendar days shall not be able to succeed themselves at any time thereafter
nor hold the same or like office except upon the express majority vote or
consent of the corporate authorities.
   (E)   Removal of officers. Except where otherwise provided by law, the
President shall have the power to remove any officer appointed by hem on any
formal charge whenever they are of the opinion that the interests of the
Village demand such removal. They shall report the reasons for such removal to
the Board at a meeting to be held not less than 5 days, nor more than 10 days
after such removal. If the President shall fail or refuse to file with the
Clerk a statement of the reasons for such removal or if the Board, by a two-
thirds vote of all its members authorized by law to be elected, by “yeas” and
“nays,” to be entered upon its record, disapprove of such removal, such officer
shall thereupon become restored to the office from which they were removed, but
they shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall be
removed a second time for the same offense.
   (F)   Signature. The President shall sign all Village warrants, commissions,
permits and licenses granted by authority of the Board, except as otherwise
provided, and such other acts and deeds as law or ordinance may require their
official signature.
   (G)   Peace officer. The President may exercise within the Village limits
the powers conferred upon sheriffs by law to suppress disorder and keep the
peace.
   (H)   President Pro-Tem. During the temporary absence or disability of the
President, the Board shall elect one of its number to act as President Pro-Tem,
who during the absence or disability of the President shall perform the duties
of the office.
   (I)   Compensation. The President shall receive as compensation $15,600 per
year payable in biweekly increments of $600. Any President first assuming the
duties of office following their election to office at the municipal elections
held in April, 2025, or first assuming the duties of office following their
election or appointment after any subsequent municipal election, shall receive
as compensation $65,000 per year payable in biweekly increments of $2,500 and
shall be eligible to participate in the Village’s health insurance plan on the
same terms and conditions as other Village employees.
(1997 Code, § 3.01) (Ord. 79-2, passed 3-8- 1979; Am. Ord. CO-94-11, passed 12-
27-1994; Am. Ord. 29, passed 9-19-2006; Am. Ord. CO-2024-43, passed 10-1-2024)
§ 30.02 CLERK.
   (A)   Election and term. The Village Clerk shall be elected and serve for a
4 year term and until their successor is elected and qualified, as provided by
statute.
   (B)   Oath; bond. The Clerk before entering upon the duties of their office
shall take the oath of office prescribed by law and shall execute a bond to the
Village in the penal sum of $2,000 or such amount as may be fixed by
resolution, with sureties as shall be approved by the President and Board of
Trustees, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their
office, and the payment of all moneys that may be received by them, according
to law and ordinance. The bond shall be filed with the Treasurer.
   (C)   Office. The Clerk shall keep their office in the Village Hall or at
such other place as the Board of Trustees may direct.
   (D)   Minutes; notices; website. The Clerk shall attend all meetings of the
Board of Trustees and the Legal, License and Ordinance Committee, including
executive sessions, and shall keep in a suitable book a full and faithful
record of those proceedings, except if the Clerk is the subject matter of the
executive session and their presence creates a conflict of interest. They shall
issue and cause to be served upon all members of the Board of Trustees notices
of all special meetings of the Board and the Legal, License and Ordinance
Committee; they shall also issue and cause to be served notices to the members
of different committees of the Board and to all other persons whose attendance
may be required before any such committee when so directed by the chairman
thereof. The Village Clerk shall within no more than 10 days after each meeting
of the Board supply to each member a typewritten copy of the minutes. If the
Village has a website that is maintained by a full-time Village employee, then
the Village Clerk or their designee shall, within no more than 10 days after
approval of minutes of a meeting, post the approved minutes on the Village’s
website.
   (E)   Custody of seal and records. The Clerk shall be the keeper and
custodian of the corporate seal of the Village. They shall carefully preserve
in their office all books, records, papers, maps and effects of every
description belonging to the Village or pertaining to their office and not in
actual use and possession of other Village officers. Upon the expiration of
their official term he shall deliver all such records, books, papers and
effects to their successor in office.
   (F)   Record of ordinances. The Clerk shall record and properly index in a
book kept for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the Board, within 5 days
after passage and approval by the President, and at the foot of each ordinance
so recorded they shall make a memorandum showing dates of passage.
   (G)   Delivery of papers to officers. The Clerk shall, without delay, upon
the adjournment of each meeting of the Board, deliver to the several committees
of the Board and to the officers of the city, all petitions, communications,
reports, resolutions, orders, claims and other papers referred to those
committees or officers by the Board. They shall also, without delay, deliver to
the President all ordinances or resolutions in their charge, which are required
to be approved or otherwise acted upon by the President.
   (H)   Preparation of documents. The Clerk shall prepare all commissions,
licenses, permits and other
official documents required to be issued by them under the laws and ordinances
of the Village and shall attest the same with the corporate seal; and they
shall in like manner attest all deeds for the sale or transfer of real estate
owned by the Village and all bonds issued by the Village.
   (I)   Purchase of supplies. The Clerk shall, by and with the advice and
consent of the Board, purchase all necessary office and election supplies.
   (J)   Record of licenses. The Clerk shall number in numerical order all
licenses made out by him, and before delivery thereof, shall register them in
like order in a book kept for that purpose, giving number, date, period of time
for which issued, to whom issued, for what purpose, fee, and definite location
of business of licensee. He shall also on May 1 of each year prepare and mail
notices for renewal of licenses and payment of fees to the Village to all
persons engaged in or carrying on a business or occupation required to be
licensed by this Code.
   (K)   Moneys received. The Clerk shall receive all moneys due to the
Village, except tax, special improvement assessments and motor fuel tax
refunds, which are paid direct to the Treasurer.
   (L)   Other duties. In addition to the duties set forth in this section, the
Clerk shall perform all other duties pertaining to their office as are and may
be imposed upon him by law or resolution of the Board of Trustees.
   (M)   Duties generally. The Clerk shall:
      (1)   Issue notices to the members of the Board of Trustees and to all
officers and other persons, when directed to do so by the Board;
      (2)   He shall without delay deliver to the officers of the Village all
resolutions and communications referred to those officers by that body;
      (3)   They shall without delay deliver to the President all ordinances or
resolutions under their charge which may require to be approved or otherwise
acted upon by the President, with all papers on which the same were founded;
      (4)   They shall, within 5 days after the result of any election is
declared or appointment made, notify such persons so elected or appointed to
any Village office of their election or appointment, and unless such persons
shall qualify, respectively, within 10 days after such notice, the office shall
become vacant.
   (N)   Compensation. The Village Clerk shall receive as compensation for
their services an annual salary of $12,700 payable in monthly increments of
$488.46. The Village Clerk shall receive no other compensation for their
services. Any Village Clerk first assuming the duties of the office following
their election to office at the municipal elections held in April, 2025, or
first assuming the duties of office following their election or appointment
after any subsequent municipal election, shall receive as compensation $25,000
per year payable in biweekly increments of $961.54 and shall be eligible to
participate in the Village’s health insurance plan on the same terms and
conditions as other Village employees.
   (O)   Deputy Clerk. The Clerk may appoint a deputy, who, in the absence of
the Clerk from the place where the Clerk’s office is maintained, in case of
sickness or otherwise, shall have the authority to exercise all the powers and
duties of the Clerk. In order for the Deputy Clerk to have the authority to
exercise the power and duties of the Clerk, it is only necessary that the Clerk
be absent from the place where the Clerk’s office is maintained. It is not
necessary either that the Clerk give written direction to the Deputy Clerk to
exercise the powers and duties of the Clerk. Neither is it necessary that the
Village’s corporate authorities determine by resolution that the Clerk is
temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform the functions of the office
of Clerk, before the Deputy Clerk can perform the duties and exercise
the powers of the Village Clerk. The Clerk shall make recommendations to the
Board of Trustees concerning compensation for the appointed office of Deputy
Clerk.
(1997 Code, § 3.02) (Ord. 79-2, passed 3-8- 1979; Am. Ord. 86-10, passed 8-14-
1986; Am. Ord. CO-94-12, passed 12-27-1994; Am. Ord. CO-04-02, passed 2-23-
2004; Am. Ord. 29, passed 9-19-2006; Am. Ord. CO-2010-26, passed 12-21-2010;
Am. Ord. CO-2024-43, passed 10-1-2024)
§ 30.03 TREASURER.
   (A)   Office created. There is hereby created the office of Treasurer of the
Village.
   (B)   Appointment. The President, at the first regular meeting in the month
of May of each year, shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees, some competent citizen of the Village, Treasurer for the
ensuing fiscal year.
   (C)   Oath; bond. The Treasurer, before entering upon the duties of the
office, shall take the oath prescribed by law, and shall execute a surety bond
to the Village in a penal sum required by statute.
   (D)   Money; warrants. The Treasurer shall receive all moneys belonging to
the Village corporation and shall pay all warrants signed by the President and
countersigned by the Clerk. They shall keep a separate account of each fund or
appropriation, and all the debits and credits belonging thereto. They shall
give to every person paying money into the treasury a receipt therefor
specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid, and shall file
copies of such receipts with the records of the Treasurer’s office with the
Clerk at the time of making monthly reports of such office.
   (E)   Register of warrants. The Treasurer shall keep an accurate register of
all warrants redeemed and paid, showing the number, date and amount of each,
the fund from which paid, and the name of the person to whom and when paid; and
shall cancel all warrants as soon as redeemed.
   (F)   Lost warrants. When any Village warrant is lost or destroyed, so that
it cannot be presented to the Treasurer for payment by the person entitled
thereto, such person shall apply by petition to the Board of Trustees for
relief. The Board may order the Clerk to issue a duplicate warrant to the
person so entitled to payment upon their filing an affidavit of the loss or
destruction of the original and giving bond and security to the Village to
refund the amount of such warrant and pay all costs in case the original or
lost warrant should be presented and the Village compelled to pay the same.
   (G)   Special assessments. All money received by the Treasurer as a special
tax or assessment shall be held as a special fund, to be applied to the payment
of
the improvement for which such special tax or special assessment was made, and
the money so received shall be used for no other purpose except to reimburse
the Village for money expended for such improvement.
   (H)   Separation of funds. The Treasurer shall keep all moneys in his hands
belonging to the Village separate and distinct at all times from personal money
or funds, and he is prohibited from using directly or indirectly the Village
money or warrants in his custody and keeping for personal use or benefit, or
that of any other person. Any violation of this provision shall subject the
Treasurer to immediate removal from office by the President and Board Trustees,
who may declare the office vacant and appoint a successor for the unexpired
portion of the term in the manner prescribed for regular appointment.
   (I)   Reports. The Treasurer shall prepare for the President and Board of
Trustees, as often as required, a full and detailed report of all receipts and
expenditures of the corporation, as shown by the books of their office, up to
the time of the report. They shall annually as required by law prepare and file
with the Clerk a full and detailed report of all receipts and expenditures of
all accounts of the office during the preceding fiscal year. The report shall
reflect the state of the treasury at the close of the fiscal year. The Clerk
shall keep the report on file in their office for the inspection of the general
public.
   (J)   Delinquent officers. The Treasurer shall report to the President and
Board of Trustees any officer authorized to receive money for the use of the
Village who fails to make a return of the monies received by them at the time
required by law or ordinance.
   (K)   Accounts. The Treasurer shall keep their books and accounts in such
manner as to show with accuracy all moneys received and disbursed by them for
the Village, stating from whom and on what account received, and to whom and
what account paid out, and in such way that the books and accounts may be
readily investigated and understood. Such books and accounts and all files and
papers of their office shall be at all times open to examination by the
President or Board of Trustees.
   (L)   Compensation. The Village Treasurer shall receive as compensation for
their services an annual salary payable in biweekly increments as determined by
the Board of Trustees. The Village Treasurer shall receive no other
compensation for their services.
(1997 Code, § 3.03) (Am. Ord. —, passed - - 19–; Am. Ord. —, passed - -20–)
§ 30.04 VILLAGE MANAGER.
   (A)   Appointment.
      (1)   The Board of Trustees shall appoint a Village Manager who shall be
the administrative head of the Village and who shall be responsible for the
efficient administration of all departments. The Village Manager shall be
appointed without regard to their political beliefs but solely on their fitness
for the position. The Village Manager, or their designee, shall serve as the
Personnel Officer for the Village of Maywood.
      (2)   The Village Manager need not be a resident of the Village when
appointed but during their tenure of office they shall reside within the
corporate boundaries of the Village or within a 15-mile radius of the corporate
boundaries of the Village. During the absence, disability, or during such
period of time that the Village Board is seeking a qualified person to fill the
office of Manager, the Board may designate some properly qualified person to
act as Village Manager pro tempore and to perform the duties of that office.
   (B)   Term of office. The term of office of the Village Manager shall be
indefinite but they may be removed at any time by a majority vote of the Board.
   (C)   Bond. Before entering upon the duties of their office, the Village
Manager shall execute an oath of office and shall furnish a surety bond in such
amount and form as is approved by the Board, such bond to be conditioned upon
the faithful performance of their duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid
by the Village.
   (D)   Compensation. The Village Manager shall receive such compensation as
the Board shall fix from time to time by ordinance.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Village Manager shall be the chief
administrative officer of the Village. They shall be responsible to the Board
for the proper administration of all affairs of the Village. As such
administrative officer, they shall have the management and control of all
matters and things pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the
properties of the Village and of all departments of the Village, including the
Department of Public Works, the Fire Department, the Police Department, the
Community Development Department, the Building and Code Enforcement Department,
and the Department of Finance and the general offices of the Village. They
shall also have supervision of such other agencies, departments and offices as
may be created by the Board, unless the management and control of such
departments and offices is expressly delegated elsewhere. Specifically, but not
in limitation of the above, they shall have the following additional powers and
duties:
      (1)   To enforce the laws and ordinances within the Village;
      (2)   To appoint, suspend or remove all department heads. Such
appointments, suspensions or removals shall be based upon merit and fitness and
shall be without regard to political belief or affiliation;
      (3)   To exercise control and authority over all departments and
divisions thereof now in existence or that may hereafter be created by the
Board except as may be specifically limited or restricted by ordinance;
      (4)   Make recommendations to the Board concerning compensation for each
appointive office and position in the Village, including minimum, intermediate
and maximum rates, except that for the appointed office of Deputy Clerk, the
Village Clerk shall make such recommendations;
      (5)   Recommend to the Board the creating, consolidating and combining of
officers, positions, departments or units of the administrative and executive
departments of the Village;
      (6)   Investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the
administration of the government of the Village and services maintained by the
public utilities in the Village, and they shall see that all franchises,
permits and privileges granted by the Village are faithfully observed;
      (7)   The Village Manager shall sign on behalf of the Village any
contract authorized by the Board, except where the Board or statutes of the
state directs that some other officer shall do so. It shall be the duty of the
Village Manager to see that all terms of any contract to which the Village is a
party are fully performed by all parties thereto;
      (8)   Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the
Village and location of such property. They shall be responsible for the care
and custody of all Village property which is not by law assigned to some other
officer or body for care and control;
      (9)   Attend all meetings of the Board. They shall have the right to take
part in the discussion of all matters coming before the Board, but shall have
no right to vote. They shall be entitled to notice of all special and regular
meetings of the Board;
      (10)   Recommend to the Board such measures as in their judgment he deems
to be in the best interest of the Village;
      (11)   Devote their entire time to the discharge of his official duties;
      (12)   They shall have the power to issue on behalf of the Village all
licenses and permits where not otherwise specifically delegated to other
authority by ordinance;
      (13)   They shall have the power to appoint and to discharge any employee
of the Village, except those under civil service. Upon discharging any
employee, they shall submit at the next Board meeting following such removal a
statement concerning the removal and the reasons therefor;
      (14)   In their sole discretion and where deemed necessary or advisable
in order to facilitate the conveyance of real estate where such conveyance is
in the best interests of the Village, to approve a reduction in the dollar
amount or waive the dollar amount and execute releases of Village liens filed
against real estate of up to a cumulative total of $25,000 per real estate
transaction;
      (15)   To perform such other duties as may be required of them by the
Board consistent with the Village ordinances and the statutes of the state.
   (F)   Compensation. The initial salary of the Village Manager shall be
established by the Board based upon and up to the amounts duly appropriated for
that position by the appropriation ordinance now in effect, or as may otherwise
be provided by ordinance.
   (G)   Dealings of elected officials with administration. Except for the
purpose of inquiry, the elected officials of the Village shall deal with the
administrative service only through the Village Manager, and such officials
shall not give orders to any subordinates of the Village Manager, either
publicly or privately.
(1997 Code, § 3.04) (Ord. passed 8-14-1952; Ord. 77-17, passed 12-27-1977; Am.
Ord. 80-8, passed 6-12-1980; Am. Ord. C0-04-02, passed 2- 23-2004; Am. Ord. C0-
05-36, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord. C0-06-39, passed 11-8-2006; Am. Ord. CO-09-
27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2022-
25, passed 12-6-2022)
§ 30.05 CORPORATION COUNSEL; DEPARTMENT OF LAW.
   (A)   Creation and composition. There is hereby created an executive
department of the municipal government of the Village which shall be known as
the Department of Law and which shall embrace the Corporation Counsel and such
assistants and clerks as may be provided for in the annual appropriation
ordinance and the Prosecuting Attorney.
   (B)   Corporation Counsel appointment. There is hereby created the office of
Corporation Counsel, an executive office of the Village. The Corporation
Counsel shall be appointed by the Village President, with the consent of the
Board of Trustees, and shall be the head of the Department of Law of the
Village.
   (C)   Duties. The Corporation Counsel shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Superintend and, with their assistants and clerks, conduct all the
law business of the Village;
      (2)   Appear for and protect the rights and interests of the Village in
all actions, suits and proceedings brought by or against it or any Village
officer, board, commission, or department, including actions for damages when
brought against such officer in his official capacity;
      (3)   Attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees and all meetings of
the Board of Local Improvements;
      (4)   Enforce all judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of
the Village, and of all similar interlocutory orders, and to take such action
as may be necessary to accomplish the same;
      (5)   Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the
Village is a party or otherwise interested in and shall approve, as to form,
all bonds required to be submitted to the Village;
      (6)   Draft and prepare such ordinances and resolutions as may be
required of them by the Board of Trustees or by any committee thereof;
      (7)   Attend to all suits, actions, matters and proceedings in which the
Village may be legally interested.
   (D)   Duty to render advice. The Corporation Counsel shall be advisor to,
and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the Village whenever
requested to do so by the President, the Board of Trustees, the Village
Manager, and all other officers, boards, commissions and departments of the
Village. Upon request, they shall reduce such opinion to writing. No officer,
except the President, members of the Board of Trustees and the Manager shall
request a legal opinion from the Corporation Counsel without first obtaining
the consent of the Village Manager.
   (E)   Assistant Corporation Counsel. The Corporation Counsel may, at their
sole discretion and choice, employ an assistant to aid and assist the
Corporation Counsel in performing the duties required of them and who shall be
known as the Assistant Corporation Counsel and shall be the acting head of the
Department of Law in the absence of the Corporation Counsel.
   (F)   Special assessment and condemnation proceedings. It shall be the duty
of the Corporation Counsel to carry through to completion all special
assessment proceedings and condemnation proceedings for which he shall receive
additional compensation based upon the fair and reasonable value of his
services.
   (G)   Compensation. The compensation of the Corporation Counsel shall be as
fixed by the President and Board of Trustees and if no such compensation is
fixed, he shall be entitled to the fair and reasonable value for his services.
   (H)   Prosecuting Attorney appointment.
      (1)   There is hereby created the office of Prosecuting Attorney, to be
appointed by the Village Manager. The compensation of the Prosecuting Attorney
shall be fixed at the time of such appointment, and he shall perform such
services to the Village as may be prescribed by the Village Manager.
      (2)   The bond of the Prosecuting Attorney shall be fixed by the Board at
the time of his appointment.
      (3)   The Prosecuting Attorney shall prosecute all ordinance violations
and appeals thereof to which the Village may be a party or in which it may be
interested. He shall also perform such other and further legal services as the
Village Manager may direct.
(1997 Code, § 3.05) (Ord. 60-10, passed 7-28-1960)
§ 30.06 NEW OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES, RESIDENCY IN VILLAGE.
   (A)   All new employees, department heads, supervisory and administrative
personnel and appointed officers, paid either on an hourly or a salaried basis,
and all employees, department heads, supervisory and administrative personnel
and appointed officers, paid either on an hourly or salaried basis who, on the
enactment of this section, shall reside within the corporate boundaries of the
Village or within a 15-mile radius of the corporate boundaries of the Village
throughout their terms of office, and/or length of employment, but with the
express exclusion of those persons supplying services on a limited contractual
basis who are actually in the employ of another governmental unit and/or
private organization.
   (B)   This section shall apply only to employees and appointed officers of
the Village who reside in the Village on the date of the enactment of this
section and to all newly hired employees and appointed officers. All newly
hired employees and appointed officers shall be required to establish residency
within the Village no later than 1 year after the initial date of their
employment and/or appointment, or if the employee's employment or appointment
is for a probationary period, then no later than 1 month prior to the
expiration of the probationary period. For purposes of this section and §
30.07, an employee or officer shall be considered to be a resident of the
Village if his actual permanent and principal home is within the Village and
his legal domicile is also in the Village.
   (C)   Noncompliance with the residency requirements set forth in this
section by any officer or employee of the Village shall constitute grounds for
immediate dismissal. The Village Manager is hereby directed to invoke such
penalty of immediate dismissal and to take such other actions as is necessary
to accomplish dismissal upon failure to comply with the terms prescribed in
division (B) above.
   (D)   All requirements set forth in the Village of Maywood Personnel Manual,
except where they conflict with the terms of this section, continue in full
force and effect.
   (E)   The Board of Trustees, at their discretion, or by recommendation of
the Village Manager, may waive any residency requirement for any officer or
employee due to documented extenuating circumstances or where such office or
employment requires special technical training or knowledge. Under no
circumstances shall the residency requirement be waived for more than 3 years
without formal approval by the Board of Trustees.
   (F)   Enforcement of this section shall be solely under the jurisdiction of
the Village Manager in his capacity as chief administrative officer of the
Village, and the Village Manager shall inform all officers and employees, in
writing, of the full terms of this section. (1997 Code, § 3.06) (Ord. 75-8,
passed 8-14-1975; Am. Ord. 75-17, passed 11-13-1975; Am. Ord. 79-4, passed 6-
28-1979; Am. Ord. 82-26, passed 12-23-1982; Am. Ord. C0-06-39, passed 11-8-
2006)
§ 30.07 DEPARTMENT HEADS, RESIDENCY.
   (A)   All persons appointed to serve or employed by the Village as the head
of a department of the Village government are required and shall continue to be
required to reside within the corporate boundaries of the Village or within a
15-mile radius of the corporate boundaries of the Village throughout the term
of their office or length of employment as a department head.
   (B)   The residency requirement of this section shall not apply to those
persons who supply services to the Village on a limited contractual basis who
are actually in the employ of another governmental unit and/or private entity.
   (C)   Any person holding a position as a department head with the Village
who is not a resident of the Village on the date of the enactment of this
section shall be required to establish residency in the Village within 60 days
therefrom.
   (D)   Any person appointed or employed to serve as a department head who at
the time of his appointment or employment is not a resident of the Village
shall be required to establish residency within the Village not later than 90
days from the first date that he is appointed to or employed in the position of
a department head.
   (E)   Noncompliance with the residency requirements set forth in this
section by any department head of the Village shall constitute grounds for
immediate dismissal. The Village Manager is hereby directed to invoke such
penalty of immediate dismissal or to take such action as is necessary to bring
about dismissal upon failure to comply with the terms prescribed in this
section.
   (F)   All requirements set forth in the Village of Maywood Personnel Manual,
except where they conflict with the terms of this section, are in full force
and effect.
(1997 Code, § 3.07) (Ord. 78-12, passed 7-27-1978; Am. Ord. C0-06-39, passed
11-8-2006)
§ 30.08 EMPLOYEES UNIFORM REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   The employment of all employees of the Village shall be subject to the
following terms and conditions.
   (B)   Such terms and conditions shall be a part of the employment contract
which each employee has with the Village:
      (1)   If an employee of the Village within 1 year after his employment by
the Village in any position where the Village bears the cost of educating or
training the employee or clothing the employee, either: (a) voluntarily
terminates his employment in that position, or (b) is dismissed from employment
with the Village because he or she failed to comply with the residency
requirements which the Village imposes on its employees, then that employee
shall be required to reimburse the Village for any and all costs the Village
incurred in educating or training the employee and any and all costs incurred
by the Village in providing the employee with uniforms and other items of
clothing;
      (2)   The Village shall have the right to withhold from an employee’s
wages or salary the amount which the employee is required to reimburse the
Village under the provisions of subsection (1) above.
(1997 Code, § 3.08) (Ord. 79-5, passed 6-28-1979)
§ 30.09 TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS BY VILLAGE PRESIDENT.
   (A)   The Village President shall not make any temporary appointment to any
office for a term to exceed 60 calendar days.
   (B)   Each such temporary appointee, heretofore or hereafter appointed by
the Village President, after completing the 60 calendar day term of office,
shall not be able to succeed himself or herself in office at any time
thereafter nor hold the same or like office without the express majority vote
of consent by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   As an exercise of its legislative functions as set forth in the
Illinois Municipal Code, the Board of Trustees shall set an appropriate salary
for each temporary appointee on an individual basis as they see fit based upon
budgetary and other important considerations, such salary to be paid to the
temporary appointee for a period not to exceed the 60 calendar day term as
heretofore set forth.
   (D)   As an exercise of its legislative functions as set forth in the
Illinois Municipal Code and the 1970 Illinois Constitution, the Board of
Trustees shall designate the duties, functions and powers of each temporary
appointee, such duties, functions and powers to become immediately null and
void upon expiration of the 60 calendar day term as heretofore set forth.
(1997 Code, § 3.09) (Ord. 77-15, passed 11-22-1977)
§ 30.10 RESERVED.
§ 30.11 VILLAGE LIBRARY.
   (A)   Establishment; name. There is established a free public library and
reading rooms for the use of the inhabitants of the Village, which shall be
called “The Maywood Public Library.”
   (B)   Directors. The library shall be governed by 6 library directors
elected in the manner provided by 75 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.
   (C)   Injuring property. No person shall wilfully or maliciously cut, write
upon, injure, deface, tear or destroy any book, newspaper, plate, picture,
engraving or other thing of value belonging to the Maywood Public Library, or
shall wilfully or maliciously commit any injury upon the ground, building,
furniture, fixtures or other property thereof.
   (D)   Failure to return books. No person shall fail to return any book
belonging to the Maywood Public Library, according to the requirements of the
bylaws made and adopted by the directors of such library for the government
thereof.
(1997 Code, § 3.21)
§ 30.12 STANDING COMMITTEES.
   (A)   Membership, duties, and appointment. Standing committees of the
Village Board of Trustees are established to assist the Village President and
Board of Trustees in reviewing various Village policies, issues, and proposed
legislation. All standing committees shall consist of 2 Trustees at least 1
Department Head or a Village staff liaison or the Village Clerk, except for the
Committee of the Whole of the Board of Trustees, which shall consist only of
the members of the Board of Trustees. All standing committee members shall be
appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. Each appointment to a standing committee shall be for 1 year term, or
until replacement appointments are made by the Village President and approved
by the Board of Trustees. Vacancies, if any occur, shall be filled in the same
manner. Each Trustee will serve as a Chair on 1 of the standing committees. The
Chair of each standing committee shall be designated by the Village President
and the Chair shall continue to serve as Chair until his/her replacement is
selected by the Village President. The assignment of the Department Head to the
standing committees is provided for below in this section. Village residents
and community advocates are encouraged to participate in standing committees
and/or ad-hoc committees of interest voluntarily.
   (B)   Meetings. All standing committees shall meet monthly at a time and
place determined by its members, or as otherwise set forth in this section.
   (C)   Limitations on authority. Standing committees are advisory,
recommending bodies only and may not take final action on any matter. Standing
committees are not authorized to administer the day-to-day operations of the
Village or its departments, which will remain the duty of the Village Manager
and Village staff. Each standing committee shall be available to receive any
matters that may be referred to it by the Village Board for study and
recommendation. Where the responsibilities or objectives of a standing
committee overlap regarding a specific project or event, the Mayor will
determine which committee or committees will work on that policy item,
initiative, project or event. In no event shall a committee member meet to
discuss committee business without informing the other committee members of the
time and purpose of the meeting. All standing committees are subject to the
provisions of the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120). Standing committees
shall not send correspondence to any person, other than to a department head,
without prior approval of the Village Manager.
   (D)   Standing committees established.  The following shall be the standing
committees of the Village Board of Trustees:
      (1)   Committee of the Whole of the Board of Trustees.  A Committee of
the Whole of the Board of Trustees shall exist as a standing committee. Said
Committee of the Whole of the Board of Trustees shall consist of the Village
President and all Trustees currently holding office and the Village President
shall serve as its Chairperson. The Chief of Police, Corporation Counsel,
Village Attorney, Village Prosecutor and Business Regulations Officer shall be
ex officio members of the Committee. The Committee shall meet as necessary at a
time and place to be determined by the members. The Committee of the Whole of
the Board of Trustees shall have the following powers and duties:
         (a)   The Committee shall have the power to review policies and
recommend changes to the Board of Trustees. In addition, the Committee shall
have the power to require Village department heads and employees, including the
Village Manager, and other Committee and Commission members to appear before it
and answer questions and assist the Committee in its deliberations.
         (b)   The Committee shall review and advise the Board of Trustees in
relation to policies and legislation relating to the Village, this Code of
Ordinances, licenses and license fees of the Village, including the following:
            1.   Investigate and make studies of all Village departments and
divisions thereof, including all departments now in existence and those
hereinafter created by the Board, relative to the operational and personnel
needs and policies of said departments, and make recommendations to the Board
of Trustees relative thereto.
            2.   Investigate and make studies of all committees and commissions
and divisions thereof, including all committees and commissions now in
existence and those hereinafter created by the Board, relative to the
operational and personnel needs and policies of said committees and
commissions, and make recommendations to the Board of Trustees relative
thereto.
            3.   Advise on policy and legislative matters related to parks and
recreation, including Village-sponsored or co-sponsored recreational activities
and events, buildings and equipment related to recreational activities,
management of green space or open spaces used for recreational purposes and
Village-owned parks, and other matters of concern related to recreation, health
and wellness of the Village residents.
            4.   Advise on policy and legislative matters related to land use
planning, zoning, economic development, sale and purchase of Village-owned
property, transportation systems, and other matters of concern related to the
Department of Community Development or the Plan Commission and Zoning Board of
Appeals, including amendments to the comprehensive land use plans and related
transit-oriented development plans or other land use planning documents and
policies, amendments to and enforcement of the zoning code.
            5.   Advise on policy and legislative matters related to the
general management of the Police Department, Fire Department, Emergency
Services and Disaster Planning, and other matters of concern related to public
safety.
            6.   Advise on policy and legislative matters related to
enforcement of the provisions of the Village Code including inspections and
enforcement of the building code and other related structural codes, matters
relating to licensing and permits, and amendments to and enforcement of the
public health and safety codes.
            7.   Advise on policy and legislative matters related to public
works, including the general management of municipal services departments
related to streets, sewerage systems, water production, distribution, treatment
and storage, and advise on short and long term maintenance and repair needs
related to Village infrastructure, waterworks, and public buildings, and other
matters of concern related to public works and the Department of Public Works.
            8.   Review and advise the Board of Trustees regarding crime within
the Village and prosecution thereof, and on traffic violation prosecutions.
            9.   Review and advise the Board of Trustees on the operations and
policies of the Department of Homeland Security and Emergency Management of the
Village.
            10.   Periodically review and advise the Board of Trustees as to
the funding and equipment needs of all of the Village departments and divisions
thereof, including all departments now in existence and those hereinafter
created by the Board.
            11.   Periodically review and advise the Board of Trustees as to
the funding and equipment needs of all of the committees and commissions and
divisions thereof, including all committees and commissions now in existence
and those hereinafter created by the Board.
            12.   Perform detail work and prepare suggested texts of
ordinances.
            13.   Periodically review this Village Code and recommend
amendments, additions and repeals of Code provisions to the Board of Trustees.
            14.   Review the procedure for issuance of licenses and make
recommendations to the Board of Trustees relative thereto.
            15.   Review the number and types of licenses outstanding and make
recommendations thereon to the Board of Trustees.
            16.   Periodically review license fees and make recommendations
thereon to the Board of Trustees.
            17.   Review general policy matters related to the operation and
management of the Village and make recommendations thereon to the Board of
Trustees.
            18.   Review risk management, insurance or self-insurance matters
and intergovernmental matters and make recommendations thereon to the Board of
Trustees.
         (c)   The order of business and agenda format of the Committee of the
Whole of the Board of Trustees meetings shall be as follows:
            1.   Order of business. A quorum shall proceed to transact the
business before the Committee of the Whole of the Board of Trustees in the
following order, unless the same be temporarily suspended by unanimous consent:
               a.   Call to order;
               b.   Roll call of members;
               c.    Invocation;
               d.    Pledge of allegiance to the flag;
               e.    Approval of minutes;
               f.    Public comments;
               g.    Mayor’s report;
               h.    Village Manager’s report;
               i.    Village Staff/Department Head reports;
               j.    Village Attorney report;
               k.    Trustee Committee reports;
                  i.    Planning and development;
                  ii.    Fiscal accountability and government transparency;
                  iii.    Community policing and public safety;
                  iv.    Engagement and communications;
                  v.    Infrastructure and sustainability;
                  vi.    Ordinance and policy;
               l.    New business (discussion and recommendation only);
               m.   Old business (discussion and recommendation only);
               n.    Other matters;
               o.    Committee member comments/information;
               p.   For information only;
               q.    Closed meeting session;
               r.    Adjournment.
            2.   The agenda preparation protocol for the Committee of the Whole
of the Board of Trustee meetings and the process for members to place agenda
items on the agenda shall be the same protocol and process as set forth in Rule
8 (Agenda Preparation) of §
30.32 (Rules) of this Code.
      (2)   Planning and Development Committee. The Planning and Development
Committee shall work on matters relating to business retention and attraction,
residential development and redevelopments, capital improvement matters, code
inspections, code enforcement, zoning matters, review of annual budgets and
review of public property maintenance, inventory and disposal. The assigned
Department Head for this Committee is the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation.
      (3)   Fiscal Accountability and Government Transparency Committee. The
Fiscal Accountability and Government Transparency Committee shall review annual
budgets, audits, insurance (employee and Village) matters, risk management
matters, employment matters and labor negotiations, financial matters such as
accounts payable, purchasing policies and cost-saving measures, review of
annual budget and capital plans. The Committee shall also serve as an impartial
and informal forum to hear residents’ complaints, problems, concerns,
suggestions and comments related to water service and billing and to provide
the Water Department with an opportunity to respond. The Committee does not
have the authority to lower or otherwise modify a specific water bill, but may
make written findings and recommendations, as it deems appropriate, to the
Finance Director, the Water Department and the Board of Trustees concerning
general matters relating to water service and billing, as well as findings and
recommendations concerning specific cases. When such written findings and
recommendations of the Committee are forwarded to the Finance Director and the
Water Department, the Finance Director and/or the Water Department shall,
within 14 calendar days of receipt of such findings and recommendations, submit
a report on any action taken in response to the findings and recommendations to
the Committee, the Board of Trustees, and if appropriate, to the resident who
brought the matter before the Committee. The assigned Department Head for this
Committee is the Director of Finance.
      (4)   Community Policing and Public Safety Committee. The Community
Policing and Public Safety Committee shall work with the Police and Fire
Departments, on matters concerning staffing levels and equipment acquisition
and replacement for effective operations of those Departments, reports and
events, increasing community policing engagement, traffic safety and review of
annual budgets and capital plans. The assigned Department head for this
Committee is the Chief of Police and the Chief of Fire.
      (5)   Engagement and Communications Committee. The Engagement and
Communications Committee shall work on matters relating to public health,
education, recreation for all residents, especially youth and seniors, matters
relating to the library, park district, school district and other organizations
that impact the Village, prepare and deliver reports on special events, social
interests, community groups, clubs, website and public relations and review of
annual budgets and capital plans. The assigned Village staff liaison for this
Committee is the Community Engagement Specialist.
      (6)   Infrastructure and Sustainability Committee. The Infrastructure and
Sustainability Committee shall work with Public Works, Street and Water
Departments, community service and Village engineers; review annual budget and
capital plans and matters relating to Village-owned buildings and grounds,
forestry matters, including advise and consult with the Village Arborist on any
matter pertaining to the Maywood Tree Ordinance and its enforcement, including
amendments to the Code, and alterations or revisions to the Arboricultural
Specifications Manual, and alterations or revisions of the Urban Forestry Plan,
policies concerning selection, planting, maintenance and removal of trees,
shrubs and other plants within the Village, establishment of educational and
informational programs; commuter facilities, water production and distribution,
treatment and storage, and related equipment and vehicles, garage collection,
sewer system, alleys, maintenance, equipment, sidewalks, lighting and
personnel. The assigned Department Head for this Committee is the Director of
Public Works.
      (7)   Ordinance and Policy Committee. The Ordinance and Policy Committee
shall work with the Clerk’s Office, Building Department and the Code
Enforcement Department, and other Departments to identify areas of innovation,
updating, and/or recommendations of the new Village practices as well as
provide reports on current ordinances, update recommendations, and introduction
of new ordinances and policies and review of annual budgets and capital plans.
The assigned Department Head for this Committee is the Village Clerk.
(Ord. CO-04-04, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. CO-05-16, passed 5-16-2005; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-31, passed 11-16-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 30.13 ASSISTANT VILLAGE MANAGERS.
   (A)   Creation; appointment. There are hereby created two positions of
Assistant Village Manager of the Village. The Assistant Village Managers shall
be appointed by the Village Manager and shall be under the jurisdiction and
control of the Village Manager.
   (B)   Duties. The Assistant Village Managers shall be responsible for
performing those administrative, professional and supervisory duties, as
assigned by the Village Manager from time to time, in order to assist the
Village Manager in directing the day-to-day operations of the Village.
   (C)   Bond. The Assistant Village Managers shall give bond to the Village in
an amount to be determined at the time of their appointment.
   (D)   At-will employee. The Assistant Village Managers are at-will employees
and shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Manager.
(Ord. CO-2013-24, passed 4-16-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-04, passed 2-6-2018; Am. Ord.
CO-2023-38, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 30.14 INDEPENDENT INSPECTOR GENERAL.
   (A)   Office of Independent Inspector General created. There is hereby
created the office of Independent Inspector General (“OIG”) for the Village of
Maywood.
   (B)   Designation of Cook County Sheriff. The Office of the Cook County
Sheriff is designated to serve as the Independent Inspector General ("OIG").
The Office of the Cook County Sheriff shall serve as the OIG for the Village
until such time as either party provides the other party with written notice
that terminates this arrangement. The Village may terminate this designation by
written notice approved by a majority vote of the corporate authorities of the
Village or by the adoption of an ordinance that repeals this Section of the
Maywood Village Code. The OIG shall serve without compensation.
   (C)   Purpose of office. The purpose of the OIG is to detect, deter and
prevent corruption, fraud, waste, mismanagement, unlawful political
discrimination, unlawful activity and/or misconduct in the operation of Village
government (collectively referred to elsewhere in this section as
“misconduct”). UNLAWFUL POLITICAL DISCRIMINATION shall include, but not be
limited to basing the terms and conditions of a non-exempt employee’s
employment such as hiring, firing, transfer, discipline or termination on
political reasons and factors.
   (D)   Powers and duties of OIG. The OIG shall have the following powers and
authorities:
      (1)   To receive and register complaints concerning misconduct in the
operation of Village government, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Misconduct in connection with the Village’s award of any
contract, license, or benefit;
         (b)   Misconduct of any Village employee;
         (c)   Misconduct of any elected or appointed official of the Village
in the performance of his or her official duties;
         (d)   Misconduct of contractors, vendors, and professional service
providers who furnish goods and services to the Village; and
         (e)   Misconduct of persons and businesses seeking to do business with
the Village.
         (f)   Retaliation against any Village employee or elected or appointed
officials of the Village based upon their cooperation with the OIG.
      (2)   To investigate misconduct in the operation of Village government,
either in response to such complaints or on the OIG’s own initiative. The OIG
acknowledges that it has read and understands the applicable provisions in
state law (e.g., the Uniform Peace Officers’ Disciplinary Act, 50 ILCS 725/1 et
seq.), the Village’s Police Department General Orders and Procedures and its
collective bargaining agreements that govern conducting internal investigations
for Village Police Department personnel and that failure to comply with the
time periods and notice provisions regarding these internal investigations can
result in Village management being barred from prosecuting a Police Department
employee for misconduct. It is agreed by the OIG and the Village that
investigations of Police Department employees by the OIG are subject to the
applicable internal investigation provisions of state law, the Village Police
Department General Orders and Procedures and its collective bargaining
agreements. In conducting its investigations of alleged misconduct, the OIG
agrees to cooperate with and assist the Village Manager and/or the Police
Chief, as warranted and appropriate, including providing information, witness
statements and other evidence, to allow the Village to pursue disciplinary
action against Village employees under applicable state law (e.g., Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners Act, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1 et seq.), the Village’s
Personnel Policy Manual, the Department General Orders and Procedures and its
collective bargaining agreements. The same provisions above will govern any OIG
investigations of alleged misconduct within other Village departments, subject
to the applicable state laws, the Village’s Personnel Policy Manual, any
Department General Orders and Procedures and the applicable collective
bargaining agreements.
      (3)   To refer complaints and information regarding possible misconduct
to the President and Board of Trustees, the Village Manager and other outside
law enforcement agencies, including, but not limited to the United State’s
Attorney’s Office, as warranted and as appropriate. The OIG’s referral of
complaints and information regarding possible misconduct to the President and
Board of Trustees and the Village Manager, as warranted and appropriate, shall
be done in order to ensure that appropriate discipline may be imposed in
accordance with applicable state law (e.g., Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners Act, 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1 et seq.), the Village’s Personnel Policy
Manual, any department General Orders and Procedures and the Village collective
bargaining agreements.
      (4)   To obtain information from, and conduct interviews under oath with
Village employees, agents, contractors and persons doing or seeking to do
business with the Village for the purpose of investigating potential
misconduct.
      (5)   To make recommendations for corrective action to the President and
Board of Trustees and the Village Manager with respect to combating misconduct.
      (6)   To provide periodic reports to the President and Board of Trustees
and the Village Manager as to the status of matters within the scope of OIG’s
authority, to the extent such reporting would not impair the integrity of
ongoing investigations.
      (7)   To maintain an OIG hotline number and email address in order to
facilitate citizen and employee reports of misconduct.
      (8)   In the event of any grievance arbitration or hearing before the
Village Board of Fire and Police Commission arising from disciplinary charges
or actions taken by the Village against a Village employee based upon the
results of an OIG investigation, OIG will fully cooperate with the Village in
the prosecution of the disciplinary action or defense of the grievance
arbitration.
   (E)   Duty to cooperate.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of all Village employees, elected and
appointed officials, agents, independent contractors to the Village, licensees,
and those doing or seeking to do business with the Village, to cooperate with
OIG in the conduct of any investigation undertaken pursuant to OIG’s authority.
      (2)   Subject to federal and state constitutional protections, state law
employment rights, the Village’s Personnel Policy Manual and any applicable
Village collective bargaining agreements, failure of any Village employee or
appointed official to cooperate with OIG in regard to matters covered by this
section shall be considered cause for disciplinary action, up to and including
termination of employment or removal from office.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of any party doing business with the Village
to likewise cooperate with the OIG in regard to matters covered by this
section. Refusal to so cooperate shall be considered cause for termination of a
contract, license or similar benefit, or as grounds for the Village refusing to
enter into a future contract, license or other benefit.
   (F)   Acknowledgment of duty to cooperate. All contracts for goods and
services, and all future licenses or other benefits issued by the Village after
the effective date of this section shall be subject to the requirement that the
individual or entity receiving the contract, license, or benefit, agree to
fully comply with requirements of this section relating to cooperation with the
Inspector General’s Office.
(Ord. CO-2013-41, passed 7-16-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2016-08, passed 4-19-2016)
§ 30.15 USE OF VILLAGE SEAL, LOGO AND LETTERHEAD.
   (A)   The Village of Maywood official corporate seal, logo and letterhead
are considered symbols of the authority and jurisdiction of the Village and, as
such, are valuable assets of the Village and its citizens. The Village of
Maywood corporate seal, logo and letterhead are the sole property of the
Village, and as such, shall be used solely for official Village purposes, or as
otherwise expressly authorized by the Village Manager or his or her designee
pursuant to the Village of Maywood Policy on the Use of the Village Seal, Logo
and Letterhead adopted and approved by the Village Board of Trustees, as
amended from time to time, and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth
herein.
   (B)   Use of the Village seal, logo or letterhead in a manner not sanctioned
by the Village of Maywood Policy on the Use of the Village Seal, Logo and
Letterhead is prohibited.
   (C)   Violations of this section are punishable by a fine of up to $750,
with each day that a violation continues being a separate offense.
(Ord. CO-2016-17, passed 8-16-2016)
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 30.25 GOVERNMENT OF VILLAGE.
   The Village shall be governed by a Board of Trustees which shall consist of
a President and 6 Trustees and shall operate under the managerial form of
municipal government as set forth under Illinois Municipal Code, Article V (65
ILCS 5/5-1-1 et seq.).
(1997 Code, § 2.01)
Editor’s note:
   Electors of the Village adopted managerial form of municipal government in
special referendum election held December 17, 1977.
§ 30.26 ELECTIONS AND TERMS OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   (A)   The term of office of Trustees shall be 4 years and until their
successors are elected and qualified.
   (B)   The term of office of the Village President shall be 4 years. They
shall be elected by the electors of the Village at the regular Village election
held in April, 1981 and each fourth year thereafter.
   (C)   Vacancies in the offices of Trustee or Village President shall be
filled as prescribed by the Illinois Municipal Code.
   (D)   The Village President and Trustees are elected at large and not from
districts.
   (E)   Newly elected officials shall be sworn in at the second regular
meeting in May following the election.
(1997 Code, § 2.02) (Am. Ord. CO-07-07, passed 2-20-2007)
§ 30.27 COMPENSATION OF TRUSTEES.
   Each Trustee of the Village shall, during their term of office, receive as
compensation for their services as compensation $7,800 per year payable in
biweekly increments of $300. Any Trustee first assuming the duties of office
following their election to office at the municipal elections held in April,
2025, or first assuming the duties of office following their election or
appointment after any subsequent
municipal election, shall receive as compensation $14,000 per year payable in
biweekly increments of $538.46.
(1997 Code, § 2.04) (Ord. 79-2, passed 3-8- 1979; Am. Ord. CO-94-13, passed 12-
27-1994; Am. Ord. 29, passed 9-19-2006; Am. Ord. CO-2024-43, passed 10-1-2024)
§ 30.28 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   Regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be held in the Council
Chambers located at 125 South Fifth Avenue, Maywood, on the first and third
Tuesdays of each month at 7:00 p.m. or immediately following the adjournment of
any Board of Local Improvement meeting, or other committee meetings, commission
meetings or special board meetings held on such evening, whichever occurs
first. The Board of Trustees may by motion change either the location or time
of a specifically designated meeting.
(1997 Code, § 2.05) (Ord. 86-1, passed 2-13- 1986; Am. Ord. CO-03-06, passed 2-
3-2003; Am. Ord. CO-03-08, passed 2-3-2003; Am. Ord. CO-03-17, passed 7-21-
2003; Am. Ord. CO-05-14, passed 5-2-2005)
§ 30.29 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Upon the written request of the President, or of 3 Trustees, duly signed by
them, the Village Clerk shall issue a written or printed call for a special
meeting, at least 24 hours previous, to all members of the Board when called by
the President, and to the members and President of the Board when called by 3
Trustees. The call shall state the time and place of holding such special
meeting, and the purpose for which it is called, and stating the names of the
members requesting such call. Such notice shall be served by any police officer
of the Village, by delivering to and leaving with each of them personally at
their place of residence, abode or business address, a correct copy of same;
provided, that such special meeting may be called at any previous regular
meeting, by a majority vote of the Board, without further notice.
(1997 Code, § 2.06)
§ 30.30 QUORUM.
   A majority of the Board of Trustees shall constitute a quorum to do business
but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the
attendance of absentees.
(1997 Code, § 2.07) (Ord. 58-23, passed 7-25-1958)
§ 30.31 NOTICE OF MEETINGS.
   Notice of meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be given in accordance
with the provisions of the 5 ILCS 120/1 et seq., governing Meetings of Public
Agencies.
(1997 Code, § 2.08)
§ 30.32 RULES.
   The following rules are adopted relating to the Board of Trustees.
   (A)   Rule 1. Order of business. A quorum shall proceed to transact the
business before it in the following order, unless the same be temporarily
suspended by unanimous consent:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Roll call of members;
      (3)   Invocation;
      (4)   Pledge of allegiance to the flag;
      (5)   Approval of minutes;
      (6)   Oaths, reports, proclamations, announcements and appointments;
      (7)   Finance management/Finance Committee Report(s): Approval of
expenditures;
      (8)   Mayor's report and theme;
      (9)   Public comments;
      (10)   Village Manager's report;
      (11)   Omnibus agenda items;
      (12)   Village Attorney report;
      (13)   New business;
      (14)   Old business;
      (15)   Board of Trustees comments/ information;
      (16)   For information only;
      (17)   Closed meeting session;
      (18)   Adjournment.
   (B)   Rule 2. Yeas and nays. In all cases of the passage of an ordinance,
the creation of a liability against the Village, the expenditure or
appropriation of its moneys, or at the request of any member, the yeas and nays
shall be taken, and the result shall be recorded in the record book of the
Board, and the concurrence of a majority of the members elected of the Board
shall be necessary to the passage of any such ordinance, resolution or
appropriation.
   (C)   Rule 3. Resolutions, motions, and the like. All resolutions, motions
or amendments shall be made in writing by the member wishing to introduce the
same and shall be handed to the Clerk to read, but in all cases where the
resolution, motion or amendment shall be a matter of record on the minutes of
the Board, the name of the member offering or making the same shall also be
entered thereon.
   (D)   Rule 4. Special committees. The Village President shall appoint all
special committees, unless otherwise specially directed by the Board, in which
case they shall be appointed by vote of the Board.
   (E)   Rule 5. Approval of bills. All bills, before being paid, shall be
approved by the Village Board.
   (F)   Rule 6. All members to vote. When a question is stated from the chair
every member who shall be present shall vote thereon, unless excused by the
President and Board of Trustees, or unless he is personally or directly
interested in the question before the Board.
   (G)   Rule 7. Expelling a member. Any member acting or appearing in a
disgraceful manner, or using violent and insulting language to or about any
member of the Board of Trustees, or who does not obey the orders of the chair,
shall, on motion, be censured by a majority vote of the members present, or
expelled by a two-thirds vote of all members elected.
   (H)   Rule 8. Agenda preparation. Each Board meeting agenda and agenda
packet shall be prepared under the direction of the Village President and
Village Manager, and the Village Manager shall include such matters (i.e.,
agenda items): (a) as the Village Manager shall determine, including written
communications, notices, petitions, complaints and other matters relating to
the village or of interest to the village; (b) as previously agreed to by a
favorable majority vote of Village Board members present at a prior Village
Board meeting for inclusion on a particular meeting agenda, including matters
postponed or tabled to such meeting; and (c) as submitted by any Village Board
member in writing to the Village Manager in compliance with this rule.
      (1)   Submission of agenda items. Each Village Board member may submit
agenda items in writing to the Village Manager for placement under new business
at a future Village Board meeting, provided the Village Board member receives,
during the Board of Trustees comments/information portion of the meeting, a
favorable majority vote of the Village Board members present at the meeting.
The Village President may submit items for placement under the Mayor's report
and theme at a future Village Board meeting. All agenda items, with supporting
documents (if any), shall be submitted in writing to the Village Manager no
later than the close of business on the Wednesday next preceding a regular
meeting.
      (2)   Removal prior to agenda publication. A member of the corporate
authorities may request that the Village Manager remove one or more of their
submitted agenda items prior to the finalization of the agenda and agenda
packets. No member of the corporate authorities may direct the Village Manager
to remove any agenda item submitted by another member of the corporate
authorities in accordance with this rule.
      (3)   Removal after agenda publication. Any matter included on an agenda
may be removed from the agenda by an affirmative vote of at least four members
of the corporate authorities during the meeting. Such motion shall be in order
during the portion of the meeting referred to as "oaths, reports,
proclamations, announcements and appointments" or at the point of the meeting
when the agenda item is considered by the corporate authorities.
      (4)   Agendas for special meetings. The process for calling a special
meeting is governed by §
30.29 (Special Meetings) of this code. The agenda and agenda packet for a
special meeting shall be prepared under the direction of the Village Manager,
and the Village Manager shall include such matters (i.e., agenda items) as
requested by the Village President or the three Trustees who have called for
the special meeting.
      (5)   Agendas for emergency meetings. The process for calling an
emergency meeting is governed by the Illinois Open Meetings Act. The agenda and
agenda packet for an emergency special meeting shall be prepared under the
direction of the Village Manager, and the Village Manager shall include such
matters (i.e., agenda items) that relate to the emergency situation.
   (I)   Rule 9. President to decide. The President shall decide all questions
of order, and in all cases not specially provided for by law or ordinance, the
Board shall be guided by parliamentary law as laid down in Robert’s Rules of
Order, including without limitation:
      (1)   Speaking once. Board members can speak once on an agenda item, then
must allow all other Board members an opportunity to speak on that agenda item
before they may speak a second time on the same agenda item.
      (2)   Speaking twice. Each Board member can only speak twice on an agenda
item and then the President will call for a vote, unless the twice per topic
rule is waived by a vote of the Board.
      (3)   Speaking time limit. Each Board member may only speak for 3 minutes
each time they speak on an agenda item.
(1997 Code, § 2.09) (Ord. CO-03-06, passed 2-3-2003; Am. Ord. CO-03-08, passed
2-3-2003; Am. Ord. CO-03-17, passed 7-21-2003; Am. Ord. CO-05-20, passed 6-21-
2005; Am. Ord. CO-06-16, passed 6-20-2006; Am. Ord. CO- 2010-03, passed 2-16-
2010; Am. Ord. CO-2013-40, passed 7-2-2013; Am. Ord. CO- 2018-07, passed 3-20-
2018; Am. Ord. CO-2020- 16, passed 5-19-2020; Am. Ord. CO-2025-18, passed 7-1-
2025)
§ 30.33 RECORD AND MEMORANDUM OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Required. The Village Clerk shall record, in a book used exclusively
for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees. Immediately
following each ordinance, the Village Clerk shall make a memorandum of the date
of the passage and the publication, where required, of the ordinance.
   (B)   Prima facie evidence. The record and memorandum required by this
section, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the
contents, passage and of the publication or posting of ordinances.
(1997 Code, § 2.10)
§ 30.34 PROOF OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   The contents of all Village ordinances, the date of passages and the
date of publication or posting, where required, may be proved by the
certificate of the Village Clerk, under the seal of the Village.
   (B)   Whenever Village ordinances, including this Code, are printed in book
or pamphlet form, and purport to be published by authority of the Board of
Trustees, such book or pamphlet shall be prima facie evidence of the contents,
passage and legal publication of such ordinances, as of the dates mentioned in
such book or pamphlet, in all courts and administrative tribunals.
(1997 Code, § 2.11)
§ 30.35 ENACTING STYLE OF ORDINANCES.
   The enacting style of all ordinances shall be: “Be it ordained by the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Maywood, Illinois.”
(1997 Code, § 2.12)
§ 30.36 PARTICIPATION IN MEETINGS VIA TELEPHONE CONFERENCE CALL OR OTHER
ELECTRONIC MEANS.
   (A)   Findings. Public Act 94-1058, effective January 1, 2007, amends the
Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.) to allow municipalities to adopt rules
and procedures that permit appointed and elected members of boards, commissions
and committees to attend, participate and vote at open and closed public
meetings through the use of telephone conference calls or other electronic
means. The corporate authorities of the Village find that it is in the public
interest to adopt a set of rules and procedures that allow appointed and
elected members of Village boards, commissions and committees to attend,
participate in and vote at open and closed public meetings through the use of
telephone conference calls or other electronic means (e.g., video or audio
conference).
   (B)   Definitions. The definitions of the terms MEETING, PUBLIC BODY, OTHER
MEANS, QUORUM or any other defined term used in this section, which is also
found in the Open Meetings Act, shall have the same definitions as contained in
the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.), as amended.
   (C)   Rules and procedures.
      (1)   Village boards, committees and commissions must comply with all of
the applicable requirements of the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.), as
amended.
      (2)   Village boards, committees and commissions are prohibited from
establishing a quorum to conduct business at an open or closed meeting through
the attendance of board members by the use of telephone conference calls or
other electronic means. A quorum of members of a Village board, commission or
committee must be physically present at the location of an open or closed
meeting.
      (3)   Village officials who wish to attend a meeting electronically must
give notice before the commencement of the meeting to the recording secretary
or the Village Clerk (or Deputy Clerk), unless advance notice is impractical.
      (4)   Meeting minutes must reflect whether a member is present physically
or electronically, regardless of whether any members are attending through the
use of a telephone conference call or other electronic means.
      (5)   Provided that the audio, telephone or video conference connection
allows the voice of an absent member to be clearly heard by the attendees of
the meeting (including the public) and the absent member can clearly hear the
voices of the attendees who participate in the meeting, a member of a Village
board, committee and commission may attend, participate and vote at an open or
closed meeting through the use of a telephone conference call or other
electronic means if the member is prevented from physically attending because
of:
         (a)   Personal illness or disability;
         (b)   Employment purposes or the business of the public body; or
         (c)   A family or other emergency.
      (6)   Where 1 or more members of a Village board, committee and
commission is attending the meeting by use of a telephone conference call or
other electronic means, the presiding officer shall, immediately after
convening of the meeting, announce to the public which member is attending the
meeting by use of a telephone conference call or other electronic means,
identify the method of attendance and the reason why the absent member is
participating by such means.
      (7)   If the presiding officer attends the meeting through the use of a
telephone conference call or other electronic means, they shall not be required
to vacate the chair and may act in their capacity as the presiding officer for
the purposes of the meeting despite not being physically present.
      (8)   The voice of the absent member participating by telephone
conference call or other electronic means, after being identified by the other
Village board, committee and commission members as belonging to the absent
member, shall be simultaneously broadcast to the public present at the meeting
so that their voice can be heard, and the member shall also be able to hear any
discussions of the other members and the public comment regarding any issue
discussed at the meeting before a vote is taken.
(Ord. CO-06-44, passed 11-8-2006)
§ 30.37 RULES GOVERNING PUBLIC COMMENT AT PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   (A)   In accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act,
5 ILCS 120/2.06(g), any person attending a public meeting of any Village board,
committee, subcommittee or commission shall be permitted to address the public
officials during the public comment period, which shall be reserved for each
meeting, subject to the following rules.
   (B)   Public comment participation rules.
      (1)   A period of time not to exceed 30 minutes will be devoted to public
comment at each meeting, unless the public officials, by a majority vote at the
meeting, agree to allow the public comment period to exceed 30 minutes for that
particular meeting.
      (2)   Public comment for each individual who desires to address the
public body shall be limited to 3 minutes per person per meeting. The public
officials may, by a majority vote at the meeting, agree to allow the per person
public comment session to exceed 3 minutes for a particular topic or a
particular meeting.
      (3)   Each person who desires to address the public body shall contact
the Village Clerk or secretary of the public body prior to the start of the
meeting and provide their name, address and topic on which they wish to speak.
      (4)   Each person shall state their name and address to the public body
at the start of their public comment session.
      (5)   Each person may provide pre-prepared copies of their public
comments to the public body prior to, during or after their public comment
session.
      (6)   A group of 3 or more individuals speaking on the same topic are
asked to designate a single spokesperson to present the group’s public
comments.
      (7)   Public comment at all public meetings of Village boards,
committees, subcommittees and commissions shall be entertained on any subject
matter.
      (8)   Members of the public body will not respond to the public comments
at the public meeting, unless directed by the Village President or Chair of the
public body. The Village President or Chair, or their designee, will respond to
the public comments, as they deem appropriate, and may direct the person to the
appropriate Village official or staff member for assistance.
      (9)   Abusive, foul or other inappropriate language or conduct and/or
personal attacks are not permitted.
      (10)   The Village President or Chair has the authority to terminate the
public comment session of any person who fails to adhere to these Rules.
(Ord. CO-2010-26, passed 12-21-2010)
§ 30.38 APPROVAL OF MINUTES.
   The President and Board of Trustees, including when they meet as the Legal,
License and Ordinance Committee, shall approve minutes of their open meetings
within 30 days after that meeting, or at the second subsequent regular meeting
thereafter, whichever is later.
(Ord. CO-2010-26, passed 12-21-2010)
CHAPTER 31: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Village Departments
   
31.01   Department of Finance
   
31.02   Building and Code Enforcement Department
   
31.03   Department of Public Works
   
31.04   Discontinuation of the Department of Playgrounds and Recreation
   
31.05   Community Development Department
   
31.06   Police Department
   
31.07   Fire Department
Appointed Village Boards and Commissions
   
31.20   Board of Local Improvements
   
31.21   Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
   
31.22   Joint Emergency Telephone System Board
   
31.23   Maywood Housing Authority
   
31.24   Maywood Firefighter Pension Fund Board
   
31.25   Maywood Police Officer Pension Fund Board
   
31.26   Board of Health
   
31.27   Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
   
31.28   Historic Preservation Commission
Village Commissions
   
31.35   [Reserved]
   
31.36   [Reserved]
   
31.37   Commission on Community Relations
 
   
31.99   Boards, committees and commissions; resignation by non-attendance
   
31.100   Approval of minutes by boards, committees, subcommittees and
commissions
   
31.101   Rules governing public comment at public meetings
Cross reference:
   Emergency Services and Disaster Agency, see §§
37.05 through
37.07
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 33
   Historic Preservation Commission, see
Ch. 158
   Police Department, see
Ch. 32
VILLAGE DEPARTMENTS
§ 31.01 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.
   There is established an executive department of the Village which shall be
known as the Department of Finance and which shall embrace the office of
Director of Finance who shall be ex officio Village Collector and the office of
Village Treasurer.
(1997 Code, § 3.10)
§ 31.02 BUILDING AND CODE ENFORCEMENT DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Creation and purpose. There is created a Building and Code Enforcement
Department, an executive department of the Village. The Building and Code
Enforcement Department shall be under the jurisdiction and control of the
Village Manager. The Building and Code Enforcement Department shall provide for
the administration and coordination of all building inspections, code
enforcement and related activities within the Village.
   (B)   Composition. The Building and Code Enforcement Department shall be
composed of such officials, deputies, assistants and employees, including
supervisors, inspectors, clerks, project assistants and other employees as may
be necessary to carry out the functions of the Department and as may be
financed by the President and Board of Trustees in the annual budget of the
Village.
   (C)   Director of Building and Code Enforcement. The head and direct
supervisor of the Building and Code Enforcement Department shall be known as
the Building Director. The Building Director shall be appointed by the Village
Manager and shall be an official of the Village. The Building Director shall
report directly to the Village Manager. The duties and responsibilities of the
Building Director shall include oversight of the building inspection and code
enforcement activities of the Village, as set forth in further detail below.
All of the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the Building and Code
Enforcement Department as set forth below may be performed by the Building
Director, in his or her discretion, or may be performed at his or her
direction. A bond shall be posted and paid for by the Village on behalf of the
Building Director in an amount to be determined by the Village Manager at the
time of his or her appointment.
   (D)   Powers, duties and responsibilities. The powers, duties and
responsibilities of the Building Director, and his or her subordinates, shall
be under the supervision and at the direction of the Village Manager, and shall
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the Building and
Code Enforcement Department relative to enforcement of the Building Code and
other Codes adopted by the Village, as well as other departmental duties
relative to Code Enforcement as set forth throughout the Village Code;
      (2)   Conducting plan review and the issuance of permits as appropriate
pursuant to the Village Code and any other codes or regulations adopted by the
Village;
      (3)   Conducting inspections required by the Village Code and any other
codes or regulations adopted by the Village, and oversight of all inspectors,
including electrical and plumbing inspectors;
      (4)   The power to order all work stopped on construction or alterations
and/or repairs to buildings within the corporate limits of the Village whenever
such work is being done in violation of the Village Code, building, zoning, and
property maintenance codes or any other Village code or regulation;
      (5)   The power, for the purposes of making inspections at any reasonable
time, to make or cause to be made entry into any building or premises where
work or altering, repairing and/or constructing any building or structure is
commenced;
      (6)   Issuing notices of violations and citations for violations of the
Village Code or any building or other Codes or regulations adopted thereunder;
      (7)   Approving certificates of occupancy and zoning for any structure or
use of land in the Village;
   (8)   With the assistance of the administrative staff of the Building and
Code Enforcement Department, keeping all records of transactions and matters
involving the Building and Code Enforcement Division, including all records
required by federal and state funding agencies, all financial records, records
and files related to applications for permits and inspections, records related
to compliance issues concerning properties within the Village, and other such
records as may be necessary for the efficient operation of the Department; and
   (9)   The performance of any other duties at the direction of the Village
Manager.
   (E)   At-will employee. Notwithstanding wording contained in other parts of
the Village Code, the Building Director is an at-will employee and shall serve
at the pleasure of the Village Manager.
(Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. 2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 31.03 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   (A)   There is established as an executive department of the Village
government the Department of Public Works, which shall be under the supervision
of the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall be
appointed by the Village Manager.
   (B)   The Department shall have the supervision, management, control,
maintenance, enlargement and operation of the waterworks and sewerage system
and of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other public places in the Village
and any other matters and things connected with the operation, maintenance and
extension of the Department.
(1997 Code, § 3.17)
§ 31.04 DISCONTINUATION OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATION.
   As of June 11, 2007, the operation and staffing of the Department of
Playgrounds and Recreation as one of the regular departments of the Village was
discontinued due to the passage of a referendum on November 7, 2006 that
approved the expansion of the corporate boundaries of the Maywood Park District
through annexation to match the corporate boundaries of the Village. The effect
of the referendum is that the Maywood Park District would offer the recreation
activities and operate and maintain recreation facilities for the benefit of
the residents of the Village. For purposes of repaying an inter-fund loan made
by the Village's General Fund to fund past annual budgets of the Department of
Playgrounds and Recreation, the Village will continue to levy approximately
$200,000 per year as part of its annual property tax levy until the inter-fund
loan is paid in full.
(1997 Code, § 3.18) (Ord. 75-5, passed 7-10-1975; Am. Ord. CO-2010-02, passed
2-16-2010)
§ 31.05 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Creation and purpose. There is created a Community Development
Department, an executive department of the Village. The Community Development
Department shall be under the jurisdiction and control of the Village Manager.
The Community Development Department shall provide for the administration and
coordination of all economic and land development, planning and zoning issues
and related activities within the Village.
   (B)   Composition. The Community Development Department shall be composed of
such officials, deputies, assistants and employees, including supervisors,
inspectors, clerks, project assistants and other employees as may be necessary
to carry out the functions of the Department and as may be financed by the
President and Board of Trustees in the annual budget of the Village.
   (C)   Director of Sustainability and Innovation. The head and direct
supervisor of the Community Development Department shall be known as the
Director of Sustainability and Innovation. The Director of Sustainability and
Innovation shall be appointed by the Village Manager and shall be an official
of the Village. The Director of Sustainability and Innovation shall report
directly to the Village Manager. The duties and responsibilities of the
Director of Sustainability and Innovation shall include oversight of the
economic and land development, planning and zoning activities of the Village,
as set forth in more detail below. All of the powers, duties, and
responsibilities of the Director of Sustainability and Innovation as set forth
below may be performed by the Director of Sustainability and Innovation, in
their discretion, or may be performed at their direction. A bond shall be
posted and paid for by the Village on behalf of the Director of Sustainability
and Innovation in an amount to be determined by the Village Manager at the time
of their appointment.
   (D)   Powers, duties and responsibilities. The powers, duties and
responsibilities of the Director of Sustainability and Innovation, and their
subordinates, shall be under the supervision and at the direction of the
Village Manager, and shall include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Oversight of all planning and zoning matters, including, but not
limited to:
         (a)   General oversight of all planning activities within the Village,
including the development and periodic updating of a comprehensive plan for the
Village.
         (b)   Enforcing the zoning regulations adopted by the Village.
         (c)   Providing public information on the provisions of the Village
zoning regulations.
         (d)   Processing and forwarding to the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals all applications for appeals, variations, special uses, map or text
amendments, or other matters on which the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals is required to review pursuant to law, this Code, or the Village’s
zoning regulations.
         (e)   Reviewing and preparing recommendations on all matters going
before the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and otherwise assisting the
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals in the administration of its duties and
responsibilities.
         (f)   Maintaining possession of appropriate records and files
pertaining to the zoning regulations of the Village, including, but not limited
to, zoning maps, amendments, special uses, variations, and appeals.
         (g)   Acting as Zoning Administrator and carrying out the powers and
duties of the Zoning Administrator as set forth in the Village’s zoning
regulations.
      (2)   Oversight of all economic development activities within the
Village, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Monitoring all new residential, commercial and industrial
development within the Village.
         (b)   Planning, managing and developing programs related to
residential, commercial and industrial redevelopment within the Village.
         (c)   (c)   Activities related to protecting and strengthening the
character of the residential, commercial and industrial areas located within
the Village.
         (d)   Oversight of properties owned by the Village and coordinating
the acquisition and/or transference of same.
         (e)   Striving to have properties placed back onto the tax rolls and/
or to otherwise become economically productive.
      (3)   Oversight of all community development functions and grant
activities related to community development within the Village, including, but
not limited to:
         (a)   Investigation of matters pertaining to community development and
federal and state grant aid programs.
         (b)   Preparation of applications and supporting documentation
regarding requests to federal and state agencies for funds for local housing
and community development needs, and at the authorization of the President and
Board, to file such applications as may be required.
         (c)   Carrying out activities related to housing and housing
rehabilitation.
         (d)   Supervising the inspection of substandard housing, the
preparation of cost estimates, and the preparation of rehabilitation job
specifications.
         (e)   Reviewing and recommending to the President and Board of
Trustees or other appropriate Village body approval of loans and grants related
to community development and rehabilitation.
         (f)   Submitting to the appropriate funding agencies such reports as
may be required quarterly, semi-annually, annually, biannually, and the like.
Such reports include any reports required by the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development. A copy of all periodical reports shall also be
submitted to the President and Board of Trustees.
      (4)   Other miscellaneous duties, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Keeping all records of transactions of the Community Development
Department, including all records required by federal and state funding
agencies, all financial records, records and files related to applications for
rehabilitation loans and grants, and other such records as may be necessary for
the efficient operation of the Department.
         (b)   Oversight and management of all environmental Brownfield areas
within the Village.
         (c)   Managing the registration of landlords pursuant to §
150.100 of the Village Code.
         (d)   The performance of any other duties at the direction of the
Director of Sustainability and Innovation.
   (E)   At-will employee. Notwithstanding wording contained in other parts of
the Village Code, the Director of Sustainability and Innovation is an at-will
employee and shall serve at the pleasure of the Village Manager.
(1997 Code, § 3.23) (Res. R-77-15, passed - -; Am. Ord. C0-07-25, passed 6-5-
2007; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2013-24, passed 4-16-
2013; Am. Ord. CO-2014-04, passed 1-21-2014; Am. Ord. 2018- 04, passed 2-6-
2018; Am. Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-
2021; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10- 2025)
§ 31.06 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   See
Chapter 32 (Police Department) of this Code.
(Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 31.07 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   See
Chapter 33 (Fire Department) of this Code.
(Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021)
APPOINTED VILLAGE BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
§ 31.20 BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Establishment; composition; term of office. There is established a
Board of Local Improvements for the Village, which shall consist of 7 members.
The term of office of all members of the Board of Local Improvements shall
expire 30 days after the expiration of the term of office of the Village
President; provided that members of the Board of Local Improvements shall
continue to hold office until their respective successors are appointed and
qualified.
   (B)   Appointment and qualifications of members. The members of the Board of
Local Improvements shall consist of the Village President and the Board of
Trustees.
   (C)   Duties and powers. The Board of Local Improvements shall have the
powers and perform the duties conferred upon it by the Illinois Complied
Statutes. The Board of Local Improvements shall have such other powers and
duties as are conferred upon it by the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   President. The Board of Local Improvements shall elect 1 of its
members to serve as President, except that if the Village President is a member
of the Board of Local Improvements, then they shall also serve as President of
the Board of Local Improvements.
   (E)   Records to be kept. The Board of Local Improvements shall keep
adequate records of all work undertaken by it, showing the work undertaken, the
work accomplished, the expenditures made, and the amount of money received.
   (F)   Secretary. The Village Manager shall be Secretary of the Board of
Local Improvements. They shall keep all records pertaining to the activities of
the Board of Local Improvements and shall perform such other duties as may be
required of them by the Board of Local Improvements or by statute or ordinance.
   (G)   Meetings. Meetings of the Board of Local Improvements may be called by
either the President or the Secretary.
   (H)   Compensation of members. The members of the Board of Local
Improvements shall receive no compensation for their services as members of
such Board.
(1997 Code, § 3.19) (Am. Ord. C0-99-13, passed 6-24-1999)
§ 31.21 BOARD OF FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSIONERS.
   (A)   Creation; composition and terms of members. There is created a Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners consisting of 3 members whose terms of office
shall be 3 years, except as provided for in the next sentence, and until their
respective successors shall be appointed and qualified as provided by statute.
For the new appointees to the Board after August 6, 2024, the first appointee
shall serve a term that expires on December 31, 2025, the next appointee shall
serve a term that expires June 1, 2026, and the final appointee shall serve a
term that expires December 31, 2026.
   (B)   Qualifications, oath, bond, certification and removal of members.
      (1)   Qualifications, oath, bond. The members of the Board shall possess
the qualifications required of other officers of the Village, shall take oath
or affirmation of office, and give bond in the same manner as other appointive
officers of the Village.
      (2)   Certification. Each new member of the Board shall participate in
the education and certification program conducted by the Illinois Fire and
Police Commissioners Association (or any successor association) and will
complete the program within 18 months of their appointment to the Board.
      (3)   Removal. A member shall only be subject to removal for cause, upon
written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within 30 calendar days
in his or their own defense, before a regular meeting of the Board of Trustees.
A majority vote of the Board of Trustees shall be required to remove any such
member from office. Cause for removal shall include, but is not limited to,
failure to complete the education and certification program conducted by the
Illinois Fire and Police Commissioners Association as required in division (B)
(2) above, malfeasance and the failure to apply and enforce rules that
effectively carry out the purpose of Article 10, Section 2.1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.) in that they fail to effect the
removal of officers and members of the Police and Fire Departments of the
Village where cause for such removal exists due to violations by such officers
or members of applicable state statutes, general orders, department rules, the
community policing policy of the Village, or other relevant Village policies.
   (C)   Appointments by Board. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners
shall appoint all officers and members of the Fire and Police Departments of
the Village, except the Chief of Police, the Deputy Chief of Police, Police
Commander(s), and the Chief of the Fire Department. All appointments to each
department other than that of the lowest rank shall be made from the rank below
that to which the appointment shall be made, except with respect to the
appointment of the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police, Police Commanders),
and Chief of the Fire Department, who shall be appointed by the Village
Manager. The appointment of the Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of Police, Police
Commander(s), and Chief of the Fire Department need not be from among the
members of the Police and Fire Departments.
   (D)   Temporary appointments.
      (1)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, the
Village Manager, or the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners at the Village
Manager's request, may, in order to prevent a stoppage of public business, to
meet extraordinary exigencies, or to prevent material impairment of either the
Fire or Police Departments of the Village, make temporary appointments of
officers and members of the Fire and Police Departments of the Village, to
remain in force until regular appointments may be made by the Commission, but
the term of appointments shall not exceed 150 calendar days per person in any
one calendar year.
      (2)   Hiring process.
         (a)   The Manager or the Commission (at the Manager's request) shall
post a notice of acceptance of applications for temporary appointment to the
Police Department and the Fire Department at least once in a local newspaper of
general circulation within the Village and on the Village website not less than
10 calendar days prior to the deadline for application submittals. In the
discretion of the Manager, the application process can be conducted on a
continuous basis with no deadline for application submittals. The Manager, or
the Commission at the Manager's request, may test applicants in the labor
market on a continuous basis. Testing, evaluation, and the placement of
applicants on an eligibility list shall be according to the scoring methods
determined by the Manager. The purpose of continuous testing is to provide a
labor pool of the most qualified candidates in the local labor market so that
the Village may provide the highest possible quality of service to the public.
Candidates evaluated through the continuous testing process shall be compared
with candidates previously tested based upon job-related qualifications for the
position tested as set forth in the hiring standards and criteria below. When
continuous testing applies, all candidates shall be subject to substantially
similar testing procedures and the method of scoring shall be the same.
Candidates who are added to the current eligibility list under the continuous
testing process will remain eligible for appointment from either the current
eligibility list or the subsequent eligibility list for a period of 2 calendar
years from the date his or her name is added to the eligibility list or the
date he or she successfully completed the hiring process, whichever is earlier.
         (b)   To be eligible for consideration, each candidate must submit a
completed application and successfully complete or satisfy the hiring standards
and criteria set forth in this section. Only persons who have received a
certificate attesting to their successful completion of the minimum standards
basic law enforcement training course, as provided in the Illinois Police
Training Act, 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq., as amended, and who have been certified by
the Illinois Law Enforcement Training and Standards Board as a full-time police
officer shall be eligible for temporary appointment to the Police Department.
Only persons who are certified by the State of Illinois both as a firefighter
II and as an emergency medical technician/paramedic shall be eligible for
temporary appointment to the Fire Department.
         (c)   In addition to the required training and certifications listed
above, to be eligible for temporary appointment, candidates shall satisfy the
following hiring standards and criteria:
            1.   For temporary appointment to the Police Department:
               A.    Successful completion of a full background investigation.
               B.    Successful completion of polygraph and psychological
examinations.
               C.    Successful completion of Field Training Program with the
Police Department and oral interview with the Police Chief.
               D.    Expressed an interest in becoming a Police Department
full-time officer.
            2.   For temporary appointment to the Fire Department:
               A.    Successful completion of a full background investigation.
               B.    Successful completion of polygraph and psychological
examinations.
               C.    Successful completion of Field Training Program with the
Fire Department and oral interview with Fire Chief.
               D.    Expressed an interest in becoming a Fire Department full-
time officer.
         (d)   Upon successful completion of the application process, the
Manager, or the Commission at the Manager's request, shall prepare and post an
eligibility list in Village Hall and on the Village website that lists the
successful candidates in alphabetical order. The eligibility list shall remain
in effect for 2 calendar years from the date of its initial posting; unless,
the Manager uses the continuous hiring process. With the continuous hiring
process, new successful candidates will be added to the eligibility list from
time to time. In no case, however, shall a successful candidate's name remain
on the eligibility list in excess of 2 calendar years from the date he or she
is added to the eligibility list or the date he or she successfully completed
the hiring process, whichever is earlier. The Manager, or the Commission at the
Manager's request, shall have the discretion to strike any person from the
eligibility list who is determined to no longer meet the hiring standards and
criteria or who declines to accept an offer of hire; and hire any person listed
on the eligibility list.
   (E)   Powers generally. The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners shall
make such rules and make such appointments and removals and shall have such
other and further powers as are contained in the Illinois Municipal Code, 65
ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.
   (F)   Compensation of members. Each member of the Board shall receive the
sum of $150 for each meeting actually attended, up to a maximum of $300 per
month, except the Secretary of the Board, who shall receive the sum of $200 for
each meeting actually attended, up to a maximum amount of $400 per month.
Effective September 1, 2024, each appointed member of the Board shall receive
the sum of $250 for each meeting actually attended, up to a maximum of $500 per
month for attendance at multiple meetings in a given month. The Secretary of
the Board shall receive the sum of $250 for each meeting actually attended, up
to a maximum amount of $500 per month for attendance at multiple meetings in a
given month. The compensation of members of the Board is subject to review and
revision from time to time by the President and Board of Trustees.
   (G)   Lateral hire process for entry level police officers. The Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners are authorized to adopt amended Rules and
Regulations to enact and implement a “lateral hire process for entry level
police officers” for the purpose of expanding the pool of eligible candidates
for original appointment to include trained individuals whose skills and level
of experience meet specific and definable needs of the Police Department. As an
alternate method of original appointment, the Board may consider individuals
for lateral appointment to the entry level police officer position. In
addition, the Board is authorized to amend the Rules and Regulations to provide
that the maximum age limitation and preference points do not apply to the
Village’s lateral hiring process for entry level police officers.
(1997 Code, § 3.20) (Ord. 88-4, passed 7-14- 1988; Am. Ord. C0-98-14, passed 9-
10-1998; Am. Ord. C0-02-4, passed 1-22-2002; Am. Ord. C0-02-20, passed 8-5-
2002; Am. Ord. C0-02-33, passed 10-21-2002; Am. Ord. C0-03-18, passed 9-8-2003;
Am. Ord. C0-08-07, passed 2-19- 2008; Am. Ord. C0-08-32, passed 7-15-2008; Am.
Ord. CO-2016-18, passed 8-16-2016; Am. Ord. CO-2016-22, passed 10-5-2016; Am.
Ord. CO-2021-23, passed 9-21-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2024-29, passed 8-6-2024)
§ 31.22 JOINT EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SYSTEM BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment; membership; authority and duties.
      (1)   Establishment. Pursuant to Resolution No. 2017-67 (adopted on
December 19, 2017), the Village approved an intergovernmental agreement
entitled "Intergovernmental Agreement Establishing The IKE Joint Emergency
Telephone System Board And Providing For The Consolidation Of And Operation Of
Certain Public Safety Answering Points And The 'Eisenhower Emergency
Communication Center' ("IKE 911 Center") (Participating Members: Village Of
Broadview And The Village Of Maywood)" (the "Intergovernmental Agreement") that
provided for the establishment of an intergovernmental cooperative venture
known as the "Eisenhower Emergency Communication Center" (also referred to as
the "IKE 911 Center") for the operation and maintenance of a centralized,
combined emergency services dispatch and communication system that includes 9-
1-1 services and wireless E-9-1-1 services (the "System"). The
intergovernmental agreement also provided for the creation of the IKE Joint
Emergency Telephone System Board.
      (2)   Membership; authority and duties. The members of IKE Joint
Emergency Telephone System Board shall be comprised of the appointed public
safety employees from the participating members (e.g., Fire Chiefs and Police
Chiefs) plus an appointed public member and an appointed PSAP representative.
The authority and duties of the IKE Joint Emergency Telephone System Board
shall be governed by the applicable provisions of the intergovernmental
agreement and the Emergency Telephone System Act (50 ILCS 750/1 et seq.) and
any other applicable laws.
   (B)   Dissolution of local ETSB; re-instatement.
      (1)   Dissolution of local ETSB. Pursuant to Ordinance No. 2017-47
(adopted December 23, 2017), the Village's ETSB was dissolved effective upon
the date of the regulatory approval of the IKE 911 Center and the IKE JETSB by
the 9-1-1 Administrator of the Illinois Department of State Police.
      (2)   Re-instatement of local ETSB. In the event the Village withdraws
from participation in the IKE 911 Center, to the extent permitted by applicable
laws and regulations, the Village will either take the necessary corporate
actions to re-instate its local ESTB or join another joint emergency telephone
system board.
   (C)   Use of ETSB funds; surcharge funds.
      (1)   Use of ETSB funds. Under the Intergovernmental Agreement, the
Village, in its own discretion, may use or expend any of its ETSB funds,
including any surcharge funds, to pay for budgeted items or obligations that
exist in its current 2017/2018 ETSB budget in accordance with the applicable
laws, including the Emergency Telephone System Act (50 ILCS 750/1 et seq.), the
Wireless Emergency Telephone Safety Act (50 ILCS 751/1 et seq.) and the Prepaid
Wireless 9-1-1 Surcharge Act (50 ILCS 753/1 et seq.).
      (2)   Surcharge funds. Upon dissolution of the Village's ETSB and subject
to the terms of the intergovernmental agreement and the Village's continued
participation in the IKE JETSB, all monies received or collected by the Village
that are intended to be used to pay for the operation and maintenance of the
IKE 911 Center and its system from any surcharge or revenue source authorized
by any federal or State law, including Section 15.3 of the Emergency Telephone
System Act (50 ILCS 750/15.3), the Wireless Emergency Telephone Safety Act (50
ILCS 751/1 et seq.) and the Prepaid Wireless 9-1-1 Surcharge Act (50 ILCS 753/
1 et seq.), shall be transferred to the IKE JETSB for deposit and expenditure
by the IKE JETSB in accordance with the Intergovernmental Agreement and
applicable federal or State law.
(1997 Code, Ch. 5A) (Ord. CO-97-02, passed 9-11-1997; Am. Ord. CO-2010-04,
passed 2-16- 2010; Am. Ord. 2017-47, passed 12-19-2017; Am. Ord. CO-2021-19,
passed 8-17-2021)
Editor’s note:
   50 ILCS 751 was repealed by P.A. 99-6
§ 31.23 MAYWOOD HOUSING AUTHORITY.
   Establishment and dissolution. In 1976, pursuant to the authority granted
pursuant to the Housing Authorities Act (310 ILCS 10/1 et seq.), the corporate
authorities of the Village of Maywood adopted an ordinance that established the
Maywood Housing Authority. On June 9, 2020, the Maywood Housing Authority Board
of Commissioners passed Resolution No. 2020-4 (A Resolution of Dissolution of
the Maywood Housing Authority), which dissolved the Maywood Housing Authority
and transferred the administration of the program to the Housing Authority of
Joliet for the reasons set forth in the resolution with an effective date of
June 30,2020. A copy of Resolution No. 2020-4 (A Resolution of Dissolution of
the Maywood Housing Authority) is on file with the Village Clerk’s Office.
(Ord. CO-05-53, passed 12-20-2005; Am. Ord. CO-2010-04, passed 2-16-2010; Am.
Ord. CO-2015-04, passed 3-3-2015; Am. Res. 2020-004, passed 6-9-2020; Am. Ord.
CO-2022-01, passed 1-18-2022; Am. Ord. CO-2022-02, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 31.24 MAYWOOD FIREFIGHTER PENSION FUND BOARD.
   The Maywood Firefighter Pension Fund Board shall consist of 5 members,
comprised of 2 members appointed by the President of the Board of Trustees, 2
members who are active participants of the Pension Fund and who are elected
from the active participants of the Pension Fund, and 1 member of the Board,
who is a retiree of the Pension Fund and who shall be elected to the Board by
the other retired firefighters of the Fund. The term of elected members shall
be 3 years and until a successor has been duly elected and qualified. Upon the
death, resignation or inability to act of any elected Board member, his or her
successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special election, to be
called by the Pension Board and conducted in the same manner as the regular
election. The members of the Board appointed by the Village President shall
hold office until their successors are appointed and have qualified. The Board
shall be governed by and shall administer the Fire Pension Fund in accordance
with the provisions of 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq. See §
33.13 (Fireman’s Pension Fund) of this Code.
(Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 31.25 MAYWOOD POLICE OFFICER PENSION FUND BOARD.
   The Police Pension Fund Board shall consist of 5 members comprised of 2
members appointed by the Village President, 2 members of the Board shall be
elected from the active participants of the Pension Fund by such active
participants, if any, and 1 member shall be elected by and from the
beneficiaries, if any. The members of the Board, whether appointed by the
Village President or elected to the Board, shall hold office for a term of 2
years each or until their successors are appointed and have qualified. Upon the
death, resignation or inability to act of any elected Board member, his or her
successor shall be elected for the unexpired term at a special election, to be
called by the Board and conducted in the same manner as the regular biennial
election. The Board shall be governed by and shall administer the Police
Pension Fund in accordance with the provisions of 40 ILCS 5/3-101 set seq. See
§
32.15 (Police Pension Fund) of this Code.
(Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 31.26 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   See §
92.01 of this Code.
(Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 31.27 PLAN COMMISSION/ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   See §
151.01 of this Code.
(Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 31.28 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
   See
Chapter 158 of this Code.
(Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021)
VILLAGE COMMISSIONS
§ 31.35 [RESERVED].
 
§ 31.36 [RESERVED].
 
§ 31.37 COMMISSION ON COMMUNITY RELATIONS. 
   (A)   Establishment. There is established a Maywood Commission on Community
Relations (hereafter referred to as "Commission") consisting of 3 members to be
appointed by the Village President with the approval of the Board of Trustees.
Members of the Commission shall be chosen from among residents of the Village
representing various segments of the community. In the making of appointments
hereunder, the Village President may receive recommendations by civic groups. A
majority of the current membership shall constitute a quorum but such quorum
shall in no event consist of less than 2 members of the Commission. The term of
each member of the Commission shall be 3 years and until his or her successor
is appointed and qualified; provided, however, that of the members first
appointed, or appointed after a period of commission dormancy in excess of 3
years, 1 shall be appointed for a term of 1 year, 1 shall be appointed for a
term of 2 years, and 1 shall be appointed for a term of 3 years. The Commission
shall elect from its members a Chairman and such other positions as it deems
necessary. The Village President shall appoint 1 Trustee to serve as the
Village Board liaison to the Commission and who shall attend Commission
meetings and report to the Board of Trustees on matters being considered by the
Commission. Village employees may serve on the Commission, but in doing so,
they serve in a strictly volunteer capacity, they are not Village employees
during the time of their service, and they are not entitled to receive salary,
overtime, compensatory time or other compensation or accrue employment benefits
for the time they serve on the Commission.
   (B)   Meetings. The Commission shall conduct a regular public meeting once
every month or on call of the Chairman or of any 2 members.
   (C)   Duties.
      (1)   The Commission shall cooperate with the Village President, Board of
Trustees, Village departments, agencies and officials in securing the
furnishing of equal services to all residents, and where the need is greater,
in meeting that need with added services; training Village employees to use
methods of dealing with intergroup relations which develop respect for equal
rights and which result in equal treatment without regard to the actual or
perceived status, practice, or expression of that person's race, color,
religion, age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity, marital status, military discharge status, source of income,
housing status, or parental status; or the actual or perceived association with
such a person; assuring fair and equal treatment under the law to all citizens;
protecting the rights of all persons to enjoy public accommodations and
facilities and to receive equal treatment from all holders of licenses,
contracts or privileges from the Village; and maintaining equality of
opportunity for employment and advancement in the Village government. The
services of all Village departments and agencies shall be made available by
their respective heads to the Commission at its request, and information in the
hands of any department or agency shall be furnished to the Commission when
requested. Upon receipt of recommendations in writing from the Commission, each
department or agency shall submit a reply in writing indicating the disposition
of, and action taken, with regard to such recommendations.
      (2)   The Commission shall advise and consult with the Board of Trustees
on all matters involving prejudice or discrimination based on the actual or
perceived status, practice, or expression of that person's race, color,
religion, age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity, marital status, military discharge status, source of income,
housing status, or parental status; or the actual or perceived association with
such a person and recommend such legislative action as it may deem appropriate
to effectuate the policy of this section. The Commission shall render quarterly
reports to the President and Board of Trustees or more frequent reports upon
request by the President and Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Staff.
      (1)   The Commission shall, with the approval of the Village President
and the Board of Trustees, hire professional and clerical staff to carry out
its purposes.
      (2)   The staff shall have the responsibility for carrying out the
administrative and day to day operations of the Commission and implementing the
policies and programs of the Commission.
   (E)   Cooperation with other agencies.
      (1)   The Commission shall invite and enlist the cooperation of racial,
religious, ethnic and other groups, community organizations, labor and business
organizations, fraternal and benevolent societies, veterans organizations,
professional and technical organizations, and other groups in the Village in
carrying on it's work. The Commission may aid in the formation of local
community groups in such neighborhoods as it may deem necessary or desirable to
carry out specific programs designed to lessen tensions or improve
understanding in the community.
      (2)   The Commission shall cooperate with state and federal agencies
whenever it deems such action appropriate in effectuating the policy of this
section.
   (F)   Further duties. The Commission shall receive and investigate
complaints and initiate its own investigations of tensions, practices of
discrimination and acts of prejudice against any person or group because of the
actual or perceived status, practice, or expression of that person's race,
color, religion, age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity, marital status, military discharge status, source
of income, housing status, or parental status; or the actual or perceived
association with such a person and may conduct public hearings with regard
thereto; carry on research, obtain factual data and conduct public hearings to
ascertain the status and treatment of racial, religious and ethnic groups in
the Village, and the best means of progressively improving human relations in
the entire Village; and issue such publications and such results of
investigations and public hearings and make such recommendations to the Board
of Trustees as in its judgment will effectuate the policy of this section. The
Commission shall perform such further duties as are set forth in
Chapter 90 and as may be delegated to it by the Board of Trustees.
   (G)   See
Chapter 90 (Fair Housing) of this Code.
(1997 Code, § 3.25) (Ord. 66-18, passed 6-23- 1966; Am. Ord. 73-3, passed 3-8-
1973; Am. Ord. 73-11, passed 6-14-1973; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009; Am.
Ord. CO-2010-04, passed 2-16-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 31.99 BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS; RESIGNATION BY NON-ATTENDANCE.
   Any appointed member of a board, committee or commission who is absent from
the regular meetings of such board, committee or commission of the Village for
3 consecutive regular meetings of such board, committee or commission and who
has not furnished written explanations for his or her absence which are
satisfactory to a majority of the Village President and Board of Trustees
shall, following the third consecutive absence, be subject to being classified
as a resigned member following a hearing before the Village President and Board
of Trustees. At least 7 days written notice of a hearing before the Village
President and Board of Trustees shall be given to the appointee whose failure
to attend is at issue. At the hearing, the appointee may appear personally and
present such pertinent evidence as he or she wishes or as the Village President
or other individual presiding over the hearing shall request. If, after a
hearing, a majority of the Village President and Board of Trustees votes to
classify a member as resigned, that member shall be removed from his or her
appointed position and there shall be deemed to be a vacancy of such position.
The Village President may then appoint a replacement pursuant to whatever
provision of this code or state law governs the appointment of persons to the
board, committee or commission, subject to Board of Trustees approval, if
required by state law. This section is applicable to the boards, committees and
commissions created by ordinance and set forth in this chapter or elsewhere in
this code, or any other board, committee or commission created by the Village
President and Board of Trustees by ordinance pursuant to state law, but
excluding the Board of Trustees, Legal, License and Ordinance Committee or any
other board, committee or commission made up exclusively of members of the
Board of Trustees. To the extent the hearing process set forth herein varies
from any hearing process for a particular statutory board, committee or
commission set forth in state law, the process for removing appointees to such
statutory board, committee or commission set forth in state law shall control.
(Ord. CO-2010-04, passed 2-16-2010)
§ 31.100 APPROVAL OF MINUTES BY BOARDS, COMMITTEES, SUBCOMMITTEES AND
COMMISSIONS.
   The members of each board, committee, subcommittee and commission of the
Village shall approve minutes of its open meetings within 30 days after that
meeting, or at the second subsequent regular meeting thereafter, whichever is
later.
(Ord. CO-2010-26, passed 12-21-2010)
§ 31.101 RULES GOVERNING PUBLIC COMMENT AT PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   In accordance with the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5
ILCS 120/2.06(g), any person attending a public meeting of any Village board,
committee, subcommittee or commission shall be permitted to address the public
officials during the public comment period, which shall be reserved for each
meeting, subject to the Rules set forth at §
30.37 (Rules Governing Public Comment at Public Meetings) of this Code.
(Ord. CO-2010-26, passed 12-21-2010)
CHAPTER 32: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
32.01   Department established
   
32.02   Offices created
   
32.03   Regulations
   
32.04   Bonds
   
32.05   Auxiliary police officers; part-time police officer; community resource
officers
   
32.06   Execution of orders of Building Director
   
32.07   Reports
   
32.08   Record of persons arrested
   
32.09   Police serving process
   
32.10   Interference with police officers
   
32.11   Aid to Fire Department
   
32.12   Authority to arrest
   
32.13   Arresting officers as witnesses
   
32.14   Assistance to Police
   
32.15   Police pension fund
   
32.16   Village jail
   
32.17   Medical and hospital care
   
32.18   Payment or allowance to families or dependents of police officers
killed or fatally injured in performance of their duties
   
32.19   False security system alarm rates
   
32.20   Administrative booking fee
   
32.21   Authority to dispose of lost, stolen or abandoned personal property
Cross-reference:
   Police and fire lateral hiring program, see §
35.02
§ 32.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is created and established a Police Department consisting of 1 Chief
of Police, 3 Lieutenants, 6 Sergeants and 54 Patrol Officers (who shall be
regarded as officers of the Village) and such other personnel, such as Deputy
Chief of Police and 1 or more Police Commander(s) and other employees of the
Police Department, as may be from time to time provided for by the corporate
authorities.
(1997 Code, § 4.01) (Ord. 89-2, passed - -; Am. Ord. 89-6, passed 5-22-1986;
Am. Ord. passed 5-13-1993; Am. Ord. passed 8-30-1994; Am. Ord. C0-03-18, passed
9-8-2003)
§ 32.02 OFFICES CREATED.
   There are created the respective offices of Chief of Police, Deputy Chief of
Police, Commander, Lieutenant, Sergeant and Patrol Officer.
(1997 Code, § 4.02) (Ord. 86-6, passed 5-22-1986; Am. Ord. passed 8-30-1994)
§ 32.03 REGULATIONS.
   The Police Chief shall make such rules and regulations for the conduct and
guidance of the Police Department personnel as they shall deem advisable and
such rules and regulations, when approved by the Village Manager, shall be
binding on the members.
(1997 Code, § 4.04)
§ 32.04 BONDS.
   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices each officer
shall execute a bond to the Village in amounts to be prescribed by the Board of
Police and Fire Commissioners at the time of their appointment.
(1997 Code, § 4.05)
§ 32.05 AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS; PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS; COMMUNITY
RESOURCE OFFICERS. 
   (A)   Authorization for appointment. The Village Manager, upon the
recommendation and request of the Chief of Police, may appoint auxiliary police
officers, part-time police officers, and community resource officers (CROs) in
such numbers as are deemed necessary from time to time, provided that the
Village has sufficient funds available for such appointments. The
qualifications of each officer or CRO shall, upon appointment be forwarded to
the Board of Trustees by the Village Manager.
   (B)   Role and responsibilities.
      (1)   Auxiliary police officers. Auxiliary police officers shall not be
members of the regular Police Department. Auxiliary police officers shall:
         (a)   Aid or direct traffic within the Village;
         (b)   Assist in natural or manmade disasters or civil disorders as
directed by the Chief of Police; and
         (c)   Perform regular police duties when it is impractical for members
of the regular Police Department to do so.
      (2)   Part-time police officers. Part-time police officers shall:
         (a)   Serve as members of the regular Police Department, except for
pension purposes; and
         (b)   Fulfill the responsibilities and specific duties as delineated
in the general orders of the Police Department.
      (3)   Community resource officers (CROs). Community resource officers are
non-sworn personnel who shall:
         (a)   Assist with compliance matters within Village business
corridors, and within the Village's active Tax Increment Financing (TIF)
Districts relating to administration of TIF redevelopment plans; i.e., annual
audit and reporting costs (both Village staff time and resources and
consultants), and economic development activity (land purchases from the
Village, business license applications for new businesses, Village plan reviews
and inspections and related code enforcement actions regarding of redevelopment
of land or renovation of buildings, including all Village staff time and
professional consultant fees and costs, marketing/business attraction and
retention activities,
etc.);
         (b)   Monitor business establishments holding liquor licenses to
ensure compliance with Village ordinances;
         (c)   Conduct checks of other establishments to confirm adherence to
local ordinances and issue citations for violations;
         (d)   Promote community engagement and facilitate collaboration
between the Police Department and Code Enforcement Division;
         (e)   Generate daily reports summarizing activities, compliance
checks, and citations issued, to be shared with the Police Department and Code
Enforcement Division; and
         (f)   Focus on tasks that fall outside of criminal enforcement, with a
primary focus on maintaining compliance and supporting public safety goals.
   (C)   Identification and training.
      (1)   Auxiliary police officers and CROs shall wear distinct
identification symbols that differ from those of regular Police Department
personnel.
      (2)   CROs shall complete training specific to their roles, including but
not limited to:
         (a)   Ordinance compliance;
         (b)   Community engagement strategies; and
         (c)   Basic safety and procedural operations.
      (3)   Auxiliary officers, part- time police officers, and CROs shall be
subject to training requirements as mandated by Illinois state law and local
procedures.
   (D)   Reporting and supervision.
      (1)   Auxiliary police officers, part-time police officers, and CROs
shall be under the direction and control of the Chief of Police or their
designee.
      (2)   CROs shall submit daily activity reports to the Chief of Police or
their designee.
   (E)   Firearm use.
      (1)   Auxiliary police officers shall not carry firearms except with the
permission of the Chief of Police and only while in uniform and performing
duties.
      (2)   CROs are non-sworn personnel and shall not carry firearms.
   (F)   Appointment and dismissal.
      (1)   All auxiliary police officers, part time police officers, and CROs
shall be appointed by the Village Manager based on the recommendation of the
Chief of Police.
      (2)   Auxiliary police officers and CROs are not civil service employees
and may be dismissed at any time by the Village Manager.
   (G)   Standards for appointment. Candidates for appointment as auxiliary
police officers, part-time police officers, or CROs must meet the following
standards:
      (1)   Be of good moral character, sound health, and physically and
mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      (2)   Be at least 21 years of age.
      (3)   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      (4)   Possess a valid Illinois driver's license.
      (5)   Have no felony convictions.
      (6)   U.S. military veterans must have been honorably discharged (if
applicable).
      (7)   Meet applicable state and Village certification and training
requirements.
   (H)   Funding of the CRP position. The CRO position(s) will be funded
through the annual budget of the Village and the funding sources to pay
compensation for each the CRO position shall consist of available, eligible and
lawful public funds including but not limited to Village General Corporate
funds, available and eligible grant funds, and available and eligible tax
increment funds from active Tax Increment Financing (TIF) Districts (payment of
compensation for the CRO position(s) using tax increment funds shall be
allocated by TIF District and the amount of time the CRO spends working in each
particular TIF District on TIF-eligible reimbursable tasks).
(1997 Code, § 4.06) (Ord. C0-02-12, passed 6-3-2002; Am. Ord. CO-2012-19,
passed 6-5-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2025-05, passed 2-4- 2025)
§ 32.06 EXECUTION OF ORDERS OF BUILDING DIRECTOR.
   The Chief of Police shall execute all orders directed to him by the Building
Director so far as they relate to the preservation of the health of the
Village.
(1997 Code, § 4.07) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 32.07 REPORTS.
   The Chief of Police shall prior to the first meeting of the Board of
Trustees in January of each year make an annual report in writing to the
Village Manager of the state of the Police Department with a detailed report of
the transactions of the Department for the preceding year, with such statistics
and suggestions in regard to the requirements of the Department as he may deem
advisable; and shall also make reports of any matter or thing concerning such
Department, whenever requested by the President or Board of Trustees.
(1997 Code, § 4.08)
§ 32.08 RECORD OF PERSONS ARRESTED.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep a record of the names of
all persons arrested or committed to the Village jail or county jail in a book
to be provided for such purpose. Such record shall show the date of arrest or
committal, the number of days imprisoned, the amount of the fine, when and to
whom paid, the date of discharge or other disposition of such persons.
(1997 Code, § 4.09)
§ 32.09 POLICE SERVING PROCESS.
   Any regular member of the Police Department, or auxiliary police officers,
shall have power and authority, and it shall be his duty, in the Village, to
serve and execute warrants and other processes for the apprehension and
commitment of persons charged with the violation of any Village ordinance or
any crime, misdemeanor or offense against the peace of the state or the
Village, or held for examination or trial, or taken on execution for the
commission of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any law or ordinance of
the Village.
(1997 Code, § 4.10) (Ord. 56-1, passed 3-1-1956)
§ 32.10 INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE OFFICERS.
   No person in the Village shall resist any member of the Police Department or
any other person duly authorized to perform police duty, in the discharge of
his duties, or shall in any way interfere with, prevent or hinder him in the
discharge of his duty as such member, or shall offer or endeavor to do so. No
person shall assist any person in the custody of any member of the Police
Department to escape or attempt to escape from such custody, or attempt to
rescue any person from custody.
(1997 Code, § 4.11)
§ 32.11 AID TO FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to aid the Fire Department by
giving alarms in case of fire and clearing the streets or grounds in the
immediate vicinity of the fire, so that the members of the Fire Department
shall not be hindered or obstructed in the performance of their duties.
(1997 Code, § 4.12)
§ 32.12 AUTHORITY TO ARREST.
   Members of the Police Department are severally authorized to arrest with or
without process, or on view, any person who shall break the peace or is found
violating any ordinance of the Village or any criminal law of the state, and to
take such person before a proper magistrate, or if necessary, detain such
person in custody over night or Sunday in the Village jail, or any other safe
place, until he can be brought before a proper magistrate or court.
(1997 Code, § 4.13)
§ 32.13 ARRESTING OFFICERS AS WITNESSES.
   All officers making arrests shall attend as witnesses before the court where
the trial may be had and shall procure all necessary evidence in their power
and furnish a list of witnesses to the court and the Corporation Counsel, and
no Village officer shall be entitled to any witness fees to be taxed against
the Village in any action for the violation of an ordinance where the Village
is plaintiff.
(1997 Code, § 4.14)
§ 32.14 ASSISTANCE TO POLICE.
   It shall be the duty of every citizen in the Village between the ages of 18
and 55, when called upon by any member of the Police Department, in case of
exigency, to promptly aid and assist such officer in the execution of his
police duties. Any person who shall refuse to give aid and assistance shall be
punished as provided by this Code.
(1997 Code, § 4.15)
§ 32.15 POLICE PENSION FUND.
   The Police Pension Fund shall operate under the provisions of 40 ILCS 5/3-
101 et seq.
(1997 Code, § 4.16)
§ 32.16 VILLAGE JAIL.
   The place in the Village established and used as the jail, or any other
place which may hereafter be established by the Board of Trustees for that
purpose, is declared to be the jail. The Chief of Police shall be keeper of the
jail and shall have custody of all persons confined therein and of all property
pertaining thereto.
(1997 Code, § 4.17)
§ 32.17 MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL CARE.
   (A)   Whenever the President and Board of Trustees shall appropriate a sum
or sums of money for the payment of medical care and hospital treatment in case
of an accident resulting in an injury to or death of a police officer (as
defined in this section), employed by the Village while in the performance of
his duties, in accordance with the provisions of an act of the General Assembly
entitled “An Act authorizing cities and Villages to provide for the payment of
allowances of money to the families or dependents of policemen and firemen
killed or fatally injured while in the performance of their duties and
authorizing such cities and Villages to provide medical care and hospital
treatment in case of accident to policemen and firemen,” approved June 27,
1921, as amended, the same shall be paid, disbursed and recouped in accordance
with the following provisions.
   (B)   The Committee on Finance of the Village Board of Trustees is
authorized, directed and empowered to provide for payment for proper medical
care and hospital treatment for injuries sustained by any police officer (as
defined in this section), while in the performance of his duties, and to that
end may recommend to the Village Board of Trustees the authorization for
payment of any such necessary expenses.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police in the case of a police
officer (as defined in this section), upon the occurrence of any injury in the
performance of duty, to have immediate medical care and hospital treatment
given to such officer, to make or cause to be made a complete and careful
investigation of all facts surrounding the occurrence; to obtain the statements
of all material witnesses; and to present a report thereof without delay to the
Committee on Finance for consideration and action thereon, which consideration
shall include the determination by said committee as to whether or not such
injury was occasioned by the negligence of any person or by any agent or
servant of such other person. Such report shall show the actual date and hour
of the injury, the place of occurrence, the names and addresses of witnesses,
and the apparent nature and extent of the injury. Such report shall also show
all items of expense, with bills attached, together with a certificate by a
doctor appointed by the Village as to the reasonableness of charges made for
the services rendered, and the recommendation of the Chief of Police as to
payment of such items of expense by the Village.
   (D)   In the event that the Committee on Finance is of the opinion, from all
facts and circumstances presented to it in the report or otherwise ascertained
by it, that such injury was occasioned by the negligence of some other person,
or by the negligence of any agent or servant of such other person, the
Committee on Finance shall so notify the Corporation Counsel; and it shall be
the duty of the Corporation Counsel forthwith to demand from such other person
reimbursement for the amount expended by the Village for the necessary medical
care and hospital treatment of such police officer, and in default of payment
of such amount so expended, the Corporation Counsel shall institute proceedings
to recoup for the Village the amount so expended, as provided in the aforesaid
act of the General Assembly.
   (E)   No payment shall be made under the provisions hereof unless
satisfactory proof shall have been presented to said Committee on Finance that
such injury was sustained by such police officer while in the performance of
his duty.
   (F)   POLICE OFFICER is defined, for purposes of this section only, as the
Chief of Police, Deputy Chief, Commanders’ Lieutenants, Sergeants, Patrol
Officers, Marshals, and Deputy Marshals, regardless of gender.
   (G)   The ordinance codified in this section supersedes any prior ordinances
passed by the Board of Trustees entitling police officers to Workers’
Compensation benefits, and where any provision herein is found to be in
conflict with any prior ordinance regarding the same, this section and its
provisions shall prevail.
   (H)   No common law or statutory right to recover damages against the
Village for injury or death sustained by any police officer while engaged in
the line of duty other than the payment of the medical care and hospital
treatment provided in this section shall be available to any police officer who
is covered by the provisions of this section, or to anyone wholly or partially
dependent upon such police officer or to the legal representative of the estate
of such police officer, or to anyone who would otherwise be entitled to recover
damages for much injury or death.
   (I)   This section supersedes any prior ordinances passed by the President
and Board of Trustees regarding the above described chapters and sections of
the Maywood Village Code, and where any provision herein is found to be in
conflict with any prior ordinance regarding the same, this section and its
provisions shall prevail.
(40 ILCS 5/22-301 et seq.) (1997 Code, § 4.18) (Ord. passed 5-13-1993)
§ 32.18 PAYMENT OR ALLOWANCE TO FAMILIES OR DEPENDENTS OF POLICE OFFICERS
KILLED OR FATALLY INJURED IN PERFORMANCE OF THEIR DUTIES.
   (A)   Whenever the President and Board of Trustees shall appropriate a sum
or sums of money for the payment to families or dependents, in case of a police
officer (as defined in this section) who is killed or fatally injured while in
the performance of his duties, in accordance with the provisions of an act of
the General Assembly entitled “An Act authorizing cities and Villages to
provide for the payment of allowances of money to the families or dependents of
policemen and firemen killed or fatally injured while in the performance of
their duties and authorizing such cities and Villages to provide medical care
and hospital treatment in case of accident to policemen and firemen,” approved
June 27, 1921, as amended, the same shall be paid, disbursed and recouped in
accordance with the following provisions.
   (B)   The Committee on Finance of the Village Board of Trustees is
authorized, directed and empowered to provide for payment or an allowance to
said family or dependents of police officers (as defined in this section) who
are killed or fatally injured, while in the performance of their duties, and to
that end may recommend to the Village Board of Trustees the authorization for
said payment.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police in the case of a police
officer (as defined in this section), upon the occurrence of any death or fatal
injury while said officer was in the performance of duty, to make or cause to
be made a complete and careful investigation of all facts surrounding the
occurrence, to obtain the statements of all material witnesses and to present a
report thereof without delay to the said Committee on Finance for consideration
and action thereon, which consideration shall include the determination by said
Committee as to whether or not such injury was occasioned by the negligence of
any other person or by any agent or servant of such other person. Such report
shall show the actual date and hour of the injury, the place of occurrence, the
names and addresses of witnesses, and the apparent nature and extent of the
injury. The Chief of Police shall make a recommendation to the Committee on
Finance as to whether the decedent's family or dependents meet the requirements
for the allowance espoused in this section.
   (D)   In the event that the Committee on Finance is of the opinion, from all
facts and circumstances presented to it in the report or otherwise ascertained
by it, that such injury was occasioned by the negligence of some other person,
or by the negligence of any agent or servant of such other person, the
Committee on Finance shall so notify the Corporation Counsel; and it shall be
the duty of the Corporation Counsel forthwith to demand from such other person
reimbursement for the amount expended by the Village; and in default of payment
of such amount so expended, the Corporation Counsel shall institute proceedings
to recoup for the Village the amount so expended, as provided in the aforesaid
act of the General Assembly.
   (E)   No payment shall be made under the provisions hereof unless
satisfactory proof shall have been presented to said Committee on Finance that
such death or fatal injury was sustained by such police officer while in the
performance of his duty.
   (F)   Such payment to the decedent's family or dependents shall not exceed
$15,000 and payable only in case the injury arises from violence or other
accidental cause and death is directly due to such cause and results within one
year after such injury.
   (G)   The payment or allowance to the beneficiaries of the decedent officer
shall be made according to the procedure delineated in 40 ILCS 5/22-302 and 22-
305.
   (H)   POLICE OFFICER is defined, for purposes of this section only, as the
Chief of Police, Deputy Chief, Commanders, Lieutenants, Sergeants, Patrol
Officers, Marshals, and Deputy Marshals, regardless of gender.
   (I)   The ordinance codified in this section supersedes any prior ordinances
passed by the Board of Trustees entitling police officers to Workers'
Compensation benefits, and where any provision herein is found to be in
conflict with any prior ordinance regarding the same, this section and its
provisions shall prevail.
   (J)   No common law or statutory right to recover damages against the
Village for injury or death sustained by any police officer while engaged in
his line of duty other than the payment of the allowances of money and of the
medical treatment provided in this section shall be available to any police
officer who is covered by the provisions of this section, or to anyone wholly
or partially dependent upon such police officer or to the legal representative
of the estate of such police officer, or to anyone who would otherwise be
entitled to recover damages for such injury or death.
(40 ILCS 5/22-301 et seq.) (1997 Code, § 4.19) (Ord. passed 5-13-1993)
§ 32.19 FALSE SECURITY SYSTEM ALARM RATES.
   (A)   In the event that any Village police officer responds to a security
system alarm at any premises in the Village and the responding police officer
or other Police Department personnel determines that the alarm was a false
alarm in that the alarm system was defective or malfunctioned, the alarm was
inadvertently and/or mistakenly activated by an owner, occupant or visitor to
the premises, or was otherwise activated for any other reason other than an
apparent attempt to enter, or entrance, onto the premises by an unauthorized
person, the Police Department shall keep a log of the subject premises address
and the date of each false alarm per month. If police units responding to an
alarm and checking the protected premises, do not discover any evidence of
unauthorized entry, or criminal activity, there shall be a rebuttable
presumption that the alarm is false. Police Department records shall be prima
facie evidence of the facts stated therein with regard to alarms and responses.
   (B)   If the alarm, when communicated to the Police Department before an
officer is dispatched to investigate, is clearly identified to the Department
as resulting from authorized entry, authorized system test or noncriminal
cause, or any other related incident where the system operated properly, it
shall not be considered a false alarm.
   (C)   By the fifteenth day of each month, the Police Department shall submit
to the Village Finance Department a copy of the false alarm log for the
previous month. On a quarterly basis, the Village Finance Department shall send
an invoice to the owner(s) of the subject premises at the owner’s last known
address demanding payment for false alarms in accordance with the following fee
schedule:
      (1)   First 3 false security alarms: no charge;
      (2)   Fourth through seventh false alarm: $75 per false alarm;
      (3)   Each subsequent false alarm: $150 per false alarm.
   (D)   The owner shall pay the full invoice amount to the Village Cashier
within 30 days of the invoice date.
   (E)   If the owner fails to cause the full invoice amount to be paid to the
Village Cashier within 30 days of the invoice date, the Village Finance
Director or the Finance Director’s designee may issue a violation notice
pursuant to Chapter 39 for the owner’s failure to remit payment pursuant to
division (D) of this section.
(40 ILCS 5/22-301 et seq.) (Ord. CO-00-35, passed 12-4-2000; Am. Ord. CO-2013-
33, passed 4-30-2013)
§ 32.20 ADMINISTRATIVE BOOKING FEE.
   An administrative fee of $30 shall be imposed upon an arrestee when posting
bail or bond for any criminal, Village ordinance or other bookable arrest,
including, but not limited to, warrants. The arrestee shall be advised, in
writing, prior to such release, of the following procedure:
   (A)   An administrative booking fee of $30 is imposed upon all persons, who
are processed (photographed or fingerprinted) for any criminal, Village
ordinance or other bookable arrest, to recoup the Police Department’s cost for
that service.
   (B)   The fee must be paid prior to release on bail or bond. In the event
that the individual does not possess sufficient funds to pay the fee, the
individual will be released after being provided a document stating that the
fee is due and owing, and subject to collection. An individual will not be
detained solely for his or her inability to pay the fee.
   (C)   Prior to release, the individual may request to speak with a
supervisor to contest whether or not there was probable cause for the arrest.
   (D)   Refunds.
      (1)   If a court or other adjudicative body finds that there was no
probable cause for the arrest or that the individual was not guilty on all
charges, or if all charges are withdrawn by the prosecuting authority (non-
suit, nolle prosequi, etc.), the individual shall be entitled to a refund of
the fee.
      (2)   A disposition of supervision shall be considered equivalent to a
conviction and not a dismissal of charges.
      (3)   Applications for a refund must be made in writing to the Office of
the Chief of Police within 14 days of the finding or withdrawal of all charges,
as described in division (D)(1) above. The Chief of Police shall designate an
employee to determine the validity of the application. Refund of the fee shall
be without interest.
(Ord. CO-07-11, passed 4-3-2007; Am. Ord. CO-2013-09, passed 3-13-2013)
§ 32.21 AUTHORITY TO DISPOSE OF LOST, STOLEN OR ABANDONED PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Law Enforcement Disposition of Property Act (765 ILCS 1030/0.01 et
seq.) (the “Act”) is adopted and incorporated by reference into this section,
and the provisions of the Act shall apply to the disposition of personal
property outlined in this section, except as amended in this section. Where
there is a conflict between the provisions of the Law Enforcement Disposition
of Property Act and the provisions of this section enacted pursuant to the
Village’s home rule authority, the provisions of this section shall control.
   (B)   The Village Police Department may dispose of all personal property of
possessed by it when possession was transferred to the Village Police
Department under circumstances supporting a reasonable belief that such
property was abandoned, lost or stolen or otherwise illegally possessed.
Property seized during a search and retained and ultimately returned, destroyed
or otherwise disposed of pursuant to order of court is not subject to this
section. Property that the Chief of Police reasonably believes was abandoned,
lost or stolen or otherwise illegally possessed, may be disposed pursuant to
the following:
      (1)   Such property shall be retained in custody by the Chief of Police
or his designee, who shall make reasonable inquiry and efforts to identify and
notify the owner or other person, entitled to possession thereof, and shall
return the property after such person provides reasonable and satisfactory
proof of his ownership or right to possession and reimburses the Police
Department for all reasonable expenses of such custody.
      (2)   Weapons that have been confiscated as a result of having been
abandoned or illegally possessed may be transferred, in accordance with written
direction from the Chief of Police, to the Department of State Police for use
by the crime laboratory system, for training purposes, or for any other
application as deemed appropriate by the Department, if no legitimate claim is
made for the confiscated weapon within 6 months of the date of confiscation or
within 6 months of final court disposition if such confiscated weapon was used
for evidentiary purposes.
      (3)   If the identity or location of the owner or other person entitled
to possession of the property has not been ascertained within 6 months after
the Police Department obtains such possession, the Chief of Police shall
effectuate the sale of the property for cash to the highest bidder at a public
auction, notice of which (including time, place and a brief description of such
property) shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general
circulation in Cook County at least 10 days prior to such auction. However, if
the Chief of Police determines that the interests of the public would best be
served thereby, he may donate property that is worth less than $100, if the
donation is approved by the Board of Trustees, to a charitable organization,
rather than effectuating the sale of the property by public auction.
      (4)   Property offered but not sold at such public auction may be offered
and sold at a subsequent public auction without further published notice.
      (5)   Proceeds of the sale of the property at public auction shall be
deposited in the treasury of the Village for the use and benefit of the
operation of the Police Department.
      (6)   The owner or other person entitled to possession of such property
may claim and recover possession of the property at any time before its sale at
public auction, upon providing reasonable and satisfactory proof of ownership
or right to possession and reimbursing the Police Department for all reasonable
expenses of custody thereof.
      (7)   Paper currency or coins that hold no historical or monetary value
other than the value indicated on the face of such currency, that the Police
Department has obtained and reasonably believes to be abandoned, lost or stolen
or otherwise illegally possessed, shall not be subject to the auction
provisions of division (B)(3) above. The Chief of Police shall make a
reasonable inquiry to identify and notify the owner or other person entitled to
possession of the paper currency or coins. If the identity or location of the
owner or other person entitled to possession of the currency or coins has not
been ascertained within 6 months after the Police Department obtains possession
of the currency or coins, the Chief of Police shall deposit the paper currency
or coins in the treasury of the Village, for the use and benefit of the
operation of the Police Department.
      (8)   The Chief of Police shall maintain a written record of all personal
property retained and disposed of by the Police Department under this section,
which shall include:
         (a)   A complete inventory of the personal property, including a
picture and brief description of each item or group of items;
         (b)   All efforts to identify and notify the owner or other person
entitled to possession of such personal property;
         (c)   All claims made by any person that they are the owner or are
otherwise entitled to the possession of such personal property;
         (d)   All auctions for the sale of such personal property, including
the date, time, location and outcome of said auctions; and
         (e)   The amount of proceeds deposited into the treasury of the
Village by the Police Department from the sale of such personal property.
      (9)   The Chief of Police shall provide a monthly report to the Village
President and Board of Trustees summarizing any updates to the records required
under division (B)(8) above.
      (10)   No person shall be responsible for consequential damages to
another occasioned by an act or omission in compliance with this section.
(Ord. CO-2015-13, passed 5-19-2015)
CHAPTER 33: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Department established
   
33.02   Offices created
   
33.03   Rules and regulations for personnel
   
33.04   Duties of Chief and assistants at fires
   
33.05   Powers of the Chief
   
33.06   Custody of property
   
33.07   Examination and report of property
   
33.08   Right to enter premises; stop orders
   
33.09   Dangerous buildings
   
33.10   Annual report
   
33.11   Destruction of buildings to prevent spread of fire
   
33.12   Building hazards
   
33.13   Firemen’s Pension Fund
   
33.14   Service by emergency vehicles
   
33.15   Bureau of Fire Investigation
   
33.16   Maywood Fire Department Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Fund Association
   
33.17   Medical and hospital care
   
33.18   Payment or allowance to families or dependents of fire officers killed
or fatally injured in performance of their duties
   
33.19   Training; election to participate in the programs of the Illinois Fire
Protection Training Act
   
33.20   Mitigation rates for Fire Department services
Regulations
   
33.30   Bystander duties
   
33.31   Tampering with property of Department
   
33.32   Obstructing fire hydrants and fire lanes
   
33.33   False fire alarm rates
Cross-reference:
   Police and fire lateral hiring program, see §
35.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
   There is created and established a Fire Department consisting of a Chief of
the Fire Department, 3 Captains, 3 Lieutenants, 36 firefighters, who shall all
be officers of the Village, and such additional members of such Fire Department
as may be, from time to time, provided for in the annual appropriation
ordinance.
(1997 Code, § 5.01) (Ord. 77-7, passed - -)
§ 33.02 OFFICES CREATED.
   (A)   There are created the offices of the Chief of the Fire Department, 3
Lieutenants and 39 firefighters and such additional offices of the Fire
Department as may be, from time to time, provided for in the annual
appropriation ordinance.
   (B)   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, each
officer shall execute a bond to the Village in the amounts hereinafter set
forth: the Chief of the Fire Department, $500; Lieutenant of the Fire
Department, $250; firefighter, $200.
(1997 Code, § 5.02) (Ord. 91-7, passed 5-23-1991)
§ 33.03 RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PERSONNEL.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall make such rules and regulations for
the conduct and guidance of the Fire Department personnel as he shall deem
advisable and such rules and regulations, when approved by the Village Manager,
shall be binding on the members.
(1997 Code, § 5.03)
§ 33.04 DUTIES OF CHIEF AND ASSISTANTS AT FIRES.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department, if within his
power, to attend all fires occurring in the Village, and in case of his absence
from any fire, it shall be the duty of the officer in command of the fire
company first on the ground at such fire to take charge of the Department, and
during the absence of the Chief he shall have and exercise all the powers of
the Chief.
(1997 Code, § 5.04)
§ 33.05 POWERS OF THE CHIEF.
   (A)   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have sole and absolute control
and command over all persons connected with the Fire Department of the Village.
He shall possess full power and authority over its organization, government and
discipline, and the direction and control of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, and
to that end he may prescribe and establish from time to time such rules and
such regulations as he may deem advisable, subject to the approval of the
Village Manager.
   (B)   He shall have power to suspend any firefighter from duty, but he shall
report such suspension to the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners at its
next regular meeting and the reasons for his action. On such report being made,
the Board shall take such action thereon as shall seem to them just and right
in the premises. Any firefighter so suspended shall not be entitled to pay
while so suspended, nor until he shall be returned to duty by the proper
authority.
(1997 Code, § 5.05)
§ 33.06 CUSTODY OF PROPERTY.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the custody, subject to the
direction of the Village Manager, of all property and equipment belonging to
the Fire Department.
(1997 Code, § 5.06)
§ 33.07 EXAMINATION AND REPORT OF PROPERTY.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall at least 4 times in every year
examine into the condition of the Department equipment and report the same to
the Board of Trustees at the next subsequent meeting, together with such
recommendations as he may deem advisable.
(1997 Code, § 5.07)
§ 33.08 RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES; STOP ORDERS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall have the right to enter upon the
premises wherein any fire has occurred, if necessary, in order to investigate
the origin of the fire. He shall have power to stop the construction of any
building when the same is being done in a reckless or careless manner or in
violation of any ordinance of the Village.
(1997 Code, § 5.08)
§ 33.09 DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall examine all buildings and walls
reported dangerous or damaged by fire or accident and shall, when requested by
the Village Manager, also examine all buildings under application for permit to
raise, enlarge, alter or rebuild, and he shall make a report of the condition
thereof to the Building Director.
(1997 Code, § 5.09) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 33.10 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall in January of each year make a full
and complete report of all transactions of the Fire Department for the
preceding year. Such report shall also show, as nearly as can be ascertained,
the number of fires, causes thereof, all accidents by fire and the number of
and a brief description of the buildings destroyed or injured, together with
the names of the owners and occupants, the amount of property destroyed by fire
and insurance thereon, and shall include such other statistics and
recommendations as they may deem advisable.
(1997 Code, § 5.10)
§ 33.11 DESTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS TO PREVENT SPREAD OF FIRE.
   The Chief of the Fire Department, or in their absence, the officer in
command, or in case of the absence of such officers at any fire, the Village
President, or any 2 members of the Board of Trustees, may direct the members of
the Fire Department to remove any building or structure for the purpose of
checking the progress of any fire.
(1997 Code, § 5.11)
§ 33.12 BUILDING HAZARDS.
   (A)   When any building in the Village shall, by reason of fire or other
casualty, or by reason of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair, or
any other cause, become a hazard or menace so as to endanger persons or
property, the Board of Trustees may declare the same to be a danger or menace
and abate the same. Where such building has become extra dangerous so that the
hazard therefrom to life or property is imminent, and the necessity for
immediate action arises, the Village President, the Building Director, the
Chief of the Fire Department or the Chief of Police may order the removal of a
part or all of such building without previous notice to the owner. But notice
to the owner shall be given as soon as possible.
   (B)   (1)   Where such extra danger may be guarded against by protective
measures without destroying or removing such building or part thereof, the
Village Manager shall cause an investigation to be made through the proper
department of the Village to determine the extent and character of the
condition and the steps necessary to correct the same. When such investigation
shall have been completed and submitted to the Board of Trustees, they may by
resolution determine in what manner such hazard or menace shall be removed or
abated. Notice shall be given the owner and a hearing granted him at the next
regular meeting of the Board of Trustees if he requests it prior to, or at such
meeting, whereupon the Board of Trustees shall adopt such resolution as in
their discretion they may deem proper or necessary to remove such hazard or
menace, and may require the owner within such reasonable time as may be
specified in the resolution to abate such condition. The owner shall have 10
days within which to appeal to the department of insurance of the state.
      (2)   Notice shall be given by delivering a copy of the resolution to the
owner. If the owner cannot be found, the Village Clerk shall send copies of
such resolution and notice by registered mail to his last known address and
shall post copies thereof upon the building. If the building is occupied, the
Village Clerk shall also deliver copies of such resolution and notice to the
occupant.
   (C)   (1)   Wilful failure, neglect or refusal of the owner to comply with
the requirements of the resolution provided for in this section, after the
final determination therein provided, shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor.
      (2)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be taken as limiting the
duties, powers and authority of any officer or department of the Village
respecting other ordinances providing for remedying defects in buildings.
(1997 Code, § 5.15) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 33.13 FIREMEN’S PENSION FUND.
   There is created a Firemen’s Pension Fund in accordance with the provisions
of 40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.
(1997 Code, § 5.16)
§ 33.14 SERVICE BY EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Fees.
      (1)   Fees for ambulance services and prehospital care provided by the
Fire Department shall be charged the following fees:
Services Resident Fees Nonresident Fees
Services                                        Resident Fees Nonresident Fees
Ambulance service (basic life support services) $900          $1,400
Ambulance service (advanced life support        $1,450        $1,950
services)
Mileage charge (if treatment rendered and
transported, mileage will be calculated on      $15 per mile  $15 per mile
portal to portal basis)
Airway/intubation                               $150          $150
Bandaging                                       $50           $50
Burn care                                       $100          $100
Communicable disease protection                 $75           $75
CPR                                             $100          $100
Decontamination                                 $500          $500
External pacing                                 $175          $175
Extrication                                     $150          $150
Head immobilization                             $100          $100
Hot/cold administration                         $50           $50
Irrigation                                      $50           $50
KED                                             $75           $75
Nitronox                                        $150          $150
Obstetrical delivery                            $1,500        $1,500
Oxygen                                          $100          $100
Pulse oximetry                                  $100          $100
Response                                        $275          $275
Restraints                                      $150          $150
Spinal immobilization                           $125          $125
Splinting                                       $75           $75
Stair chair                                     $75           $75
Suction                                         $75           $75
Traction splint                                 $75           $75
 
      (2)   Extraordinary expenses shall be in accordance with the provisions
of §
91.08 (Reimbursement of Extraordinary Expenses),
Chapter 91 (Fire Prevention), Title IX (General Regulations) of this Code.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT SERVICES (ALS). An advanced level of prehospital
and interhospital emergency care and nonemergency medical services that
includes basic life support care, cardiac monitoring, cardiac defibrillation,
electrocardiography, intravenous therapy, administration of medications, drugs
and solutions, use of adjunctive medical devices, trauma care, or the infusion
of appropriate medications.
      BASIC LIFE SUPPORT SERVICES. A basic level of prehospital and
interhospital emergency care and nonemergency medical services that includes
airway management, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), control of shock and
bleeding and splinting of fractures.
      EXTRICATION. When one or more members of the Fire Department are required
to use hydraulic, gas powered, electric powered, air powered or other
specialized rescue equipment to remove a person from a vehicle or other
structure.
      MILEAGE CHARGE. A charge per mile from the patient pick-up location to
the hospital facility where patient is transported.
      NONRESIDENT. Any individual who does not reside or maintain his or her
domicile within the corporate limits of the Village.
      RESIDENT. Any individual who resides or maintains his or her domicile
within the corporate limits of the Village.
   (C)   Persons who are provided with assistance by a Village engine company
in response to car fires and automobile accidents shall be charged a $250 per
engine base fee for such service, plus $35 per crew member per hour or any part
thereof.
   (D)   The individual who has received ambulance or emergency fire and rescue
service of an ambulance, engine, truck, or squad will be billed by the Village.
The bill that is sent to persons who are being charged for ambulance service
and prehospital care shall state that, if the person has insurance coverage for
the ambulance service and/or prehospital care for which they are being charged
or is covered by Medicaid or Medicare, then that person should submit a claim
for the cost of ambulance service and/or prehospital care received to the
appropriate insurance company, Medicaid, or Medicare. The Village reserves the
right to terminate the billing cycle.
   (E)   The Village Manager reserves the right to waive the fees and/or
related service charges, or any portion thereof, based on economic hardship
reasons.
(Ord. CO-04-10, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. CO-08-45, passed 11-18-2008; Am. Ord.
CO-2013-34, passed 4-30-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2022-04, passed 1-18-2022)
§ 33.15 BUREAU OF FIRE INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   There is created a Bureau of Fire Investigation within the Maywood
Fire Department which shall have the power and duty to investigate the cause
and circumstances of fires and explosions which occur within the corporate
limits of the Village.
   (B)   In investigating the causes and circumstances of fires and explosions,
the members of the Bureau of Fire Investigation shall have the authority to
question witnesses, examine premises and to take any other actions which are
legally permitted that may be necessary to determine the cause and
circumstances surrounding fires and explosions which occur within the corporate
limits of the Village.
   (C)   The members of the Bureau of Fire Investigation shall be a Director
who shall be the Fire Chief of the Village, and 3 agents, all of whom shall be
regularly sworn full-time firefighters of the Village.
   (D)   The Village Manager, after consulting with the Fire Chief, shall
appoint the persons who will serve as agents of the Bureau of Fire
Investigation.
   (E)   The Director of the Bureau of Fire Investigation and the agents of the
Bureau of Fire Investigation shall be conservators of the peace and shall have
the powers of conservators of the peace, including all arrest powers as set
forth in 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25.
(1997 Code, § 5.18) (Ord. 79-18, passed 12-13-1979)
§ 33.16 MAYWOOD FIRE DEPARTMENT FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE TAX FUND ASSOCIATION.
   (A)   Name. The name of this association shall be the Maywood Fire
Department Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Fund Association.
   (B)   Object. The object and sole function of this Association is to provide
all needful rules and regulations governing its officers and its operation and
to manage the monies received from fire insurance companies to be used for the
maintenance, use and benefit of the Fire Department in accordance with 65 ILCS
5/11-10-2.
   (C)   Membership. The Fire Chief, officers and all full time firefighters of
the Maywood Fire Department are members of this Association and shall have the
privilege of holding office, attending meetings and electing officers.
   (D)   Officers and their election.
      (1)   The officers of this Association shall consist of a President,
Secretary and Treasurer. These officers shall be elected at an annual meeting
to be held each year during the month of May, except that, upon passage of this
section, an initial meeting shall be held as soon as is practical to elect the
officers and adopt needed rules and regulations to form the Association.
      (2)   A vacancy occurring in an office shall be filled through election
at an Association meeting which shall be held within 2 weeks of the occurrence
of the vacancy. If the office of Treasurer becomes vacant, the President shall
assume those duties until a new Treasurer is elected.
   (E)   Duties of officers.
      (1)   The President shall preside at all meetings of the Association, may
call for special meetings and shall perform all other duties as set forth in
the rules of the Association.
      (2)   The Secretary shall keep the minutes for all meetings of the
Association and shall post a copy of the approved minutes of each meeting at
all fire stations. The Secretary shall perform such other duties as may be
delegated under Association rules and shall supply new members of the
Department with a copy of such rules.
      (3)   The Treasurer shall receive all monies of the Association; shall
keep an accurate record of receipts and expenditures; and shall pay out funds
in accordance with the approved expenditure as authorized by the Association in
accordance with its rules. The Treasurer shall present a statement of accounts
at every meeting of the Association and at other times when requested by the
President and shall make a full Annual Report at the Annual Meeting.
      (4)   The Treasurer’s books shall be examined annually by an Auditing
Committee of not less than 3 members (or an auditor) who, satisfied that the
Treasurer’s Annual Report is correct, shall sign a statement at the end of the
report certifying its correctness. The Auditing Committee shall be appointed by
the President at least 30 days before the Annual Meeting.
      (5)   All monies shall be deposited in accordance with state law on
investing public funds in an interest bearing account at a local FDIC insured
depository selected by the Treasurer and qualified for the deposit of public
funds under state law.
      (6)   All officers shall:
         (a)   Perform the duties prescribed in the rules of the Association in
addition to those outlined above and those assigned from time to time;
         (b)   Deliver to their successors all official records and other
materials within 7 days following the meeting at which the successors take
office or immediately upon resignation or otherwise leaving the Department.
   (F)   Meetings. Regular meetings of this Association shall be held at least
twice per year on dates provided for in its rules. Seven days notice shall be
given of the change of the date of a regular meeting. Special meetings may be
called by the President, 3 days notice having been given. The annual meeting
date shall be established in the Association rules and shall be held in May, at
which time the election of officers shall occur.
   (G)   Standing committee. Standing committees may be created by the
Executive Board which shall consist of the President, Treasurer and Secretary,
as the need arises.
   (H)   Parliamentary authority. Robert’s Rules of Order Revised shall govern
the meetings of this Association in all cases to which they are applicable and
in which they are not in conflict with this section.
   (I)   Bond of Treasurer. The Treasurer of the Association shall provide the
Village with sufficient bond which shall be approved by the Village President
and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Treasurer of his or her
duties under the ordinance creating this Association and the rules and
regulations provided for therein.
   (J)   Disposition of revenue. The monies collected from fire insurance
companies pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-10-1 shall be paid over from the Village
Treasurer to the Association Treasurer and deposited into the Fire Association
Foreign Fire Insurance Tax Fund as established above. Such monies may be used
only upon order of the Department for the maintenance, use and benefit of the
Department.
(1997 Code, § 5.19) (Ord. 89-1, passed 2-23-1989)
§ 33.17 MEDICAL AND HOSPITAL CARE.
   (A)   Whenever the President and Board of Trustees shall appropriate a sum
or sums of money for the payment of medical care and hospital treatment in case
of an accident resulting in an injury to or death of a fire officer (as defined
in this section), employed by the Village while in the performance of his
duties, in accordance with the provisions of an act of the General Assembly
entitled “An Act authorizing cities and Villages to provide for the payment of
allowances of money to the families or dependents of policemen and firemen
killed or fatally injured while in the performance of their duties and
authorizing such cities and Villages to provide medical care and hospital
treatment in case of accident to policemen and firemen,” approved June 27,
1921, as amended, the same shall be paid, disbursed and recouped in accordance
with the following provisions.
   (B)   The Committee on Finance of the Village Board of Trustees is
authorized, directed and empowered to provide for payment for proper medical
care and hospital treatment for injuries sustained by any fire officer (as
defined in this section), while in the performance of his duties, and to that
end may recommend to the Village Board of Trustees the authorization for
payment of any such necessary expenses.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief in the case of a fire officer
(as defined in this section), upon the occurrence of any injury in the
performance of duty, to have immediate medical care and hospital treatment
given to such officer; to make or cause to be made a complete and careful
investigation of all facts surrounding the occurrence; to obtain the statements
of all material witnesses; and to present a report thereof without delay to the
Committee on Finance for consideration and action thereon, which consideration
shall include the determination by said committee as to whether or not such
injury was occasioned by the negligence of any other person or by any agent or
servant of such other person. Such report shall show the actual date and hour
of the injury, the place of occurrence, the names and addresses of witnesses,
and the apparent nature and extent of the injury. Such report shall also show
all items of expense, with bills attached, together with a certificate by a
doctor appointed by the Village as to the reasonableness of charges made for
the services rendered, and the recommendation of the Fire Chief as to payment
of such items of expense by the Village.
   (D)   In the event that the Committee on Finance is of the opinion, from all
facts and circumstances presented to it in the said report or otherwise
ascertained by it, that such injury was occasioned by the negligence of some
other person, or by the negligence of any agent or servant of such other
person, the Committee on Finance shall so notify the Corporation Counsel
forthwith to demand from such other person reimbursement for the amount
expended by the Village for the necessary medical care and hospital treatment
of such officer, and in default of payment of such amount so expended, the
corporation
counsel shall institute proceedings to recoup for the Village the amount so
expended, as provided in the aforesaid act of the General Assembly.
   (E)   No payment shall be made under the provisions hereof unless
satisfactory proof shall have been presented to said Committee on Finance that
such injury was sustained by such fire officer while in the performance of his
duty.
   (F)   FIRE OFFICER is defined, for purposes of this section only, as the
Fire Chief, Captains, lieutenants, sergeants, and firefighter, regardless of
gender.
   (G)   The ordinance codified in this section supersedes any prior ordinances
passed by the President and Board of Trustees entitling fire fighters to
Workers' Compensation benefits, and where any provision herein is found to be
in conflict with any prior ordinance regarding the same, this section and its
provisions shall prevail.
   (H)   No common law or statutory right to recover damages against the
Village for injury or death sustained by any fire fighter while engaged in his
line of duty other than the payment of the medical care and hospital treatment
provided in this section shall be available to any fire fighter who is covered
by the provisions of this section, or to anyone wholly or partially dependent
upon such fire fighter or to the legal representative of the estate of such
fire fighter, or to anyone who would otherwise be entitled to recover damages
for such injury or death.
(1997 Code, § 5.20) (Ord. passed 5-13-1993)
§ 33.18 PAYMENT OR ALLOWANCE TO FAMILIES OR DEPENDENTS OF FIRE OFFICERS KILLED
OR FATALLY INJURED IN PERFORMANCE OF THEIR DUTIES.
   The Village, pursuant to the Illinois Pension Code (40 ILCS 5/22-301 through
22-308) hereby provides that:
   (A)   Whenever the President and Board of Trustees shall appropriate a sum
or sums of money for the payment to families or dependents, in case of a fire
officer (as defined in this section) who is killed or fatally injured while in
the performance of his duties, in accordance with the provisions of an act of
the General Assembly entitled "An Act authorizing cities and Villages to
provide for the payment of allowances of money to the families or dependents of
policemen and firemen killed or fatally injured while in the performance of
their duties and authorizing such cities and Villages to provide medical care
and hospital treatment in case of accident to policemen and firemen," approved
June 27, 1921, as amended, the same shall be paid, disbursed and recouped in
accordance with the following provisions.
   (B)   The Committee on Finance of the Board of Trustees is hereby
authorized, directed and empowered to provide for payment or an allowance to
said family or dependents of fire officers (as defined in this section) who are
killed or fatally injured, while in the performance of their duties, and to
that end may recommend to the Village Board of Trustees the authorization for
said payment.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief in the case of a fire officer
(as defined in this section), upon the occurrence of any death or fatal injury
while said officer was in the performance of duty, to make or cause to be made
a complete and careful investigation of all facts surrounding the occurrence;
to obtain the statements of all material witnesses; and to present a report
thereof without delay to the Committee on Finance for consideration and action
thereon, which consideration shall include the determination by said committee
as to whether or not such injury was occasioned by the negligence of any other
person by any agent or servant of such other person. Such report shall show the
actual date and hour of the injury, the place of occurrence, the names and
addresses of witnesses, and the apparent nature and extent of the injury. The
Fire Chief shall make a recommendation to the Committee on Finance as to
whether the decedent's family or dependents meet the requirements for the
allowance espoused in this section.
   (D)   In the event that the Committee on Finance is of the opinion, from all
facts and circumstances presented to it in the report or otherwise ascertained
by it, that such injury was occasioned by the negligence of some other person,
or by the negligence of any agent or servant of such other person, the
Committee on Finance shall so notify the corporation counsel; and it shall be
the duty of the Corporation Counsel forthwith to demand from such other person
reimbursement for the amount expended by the Village; and in default of payment
of such amount so expended, the Corporation Counsel shall institute proceedings
to recoup for the Village the amount so expended, as provided in the aforesaid
act of the General Assembly.
   (E)   No payment shall be made under the provisions hereof unless
satisfactory proof shall have been presented to said Committee on Finance that
such death or fatal injury was sustained by such fire officer while in the
performance of his duty.
   (F)   Such payment or allowance to the decedent’s family or dependents shall
not exceed $15,000 total, and is payable only in case the injury arises while
the officer is in performance of his duties and arises from violence or other
accidental cause and death is directly due to such cause and results within one
year after such injury.
   (G)   The payment or allowance to the beneficiaries of the decedent officer
shall be made according to the procedure delineated in 40 ILCS 5/22-302 and 22-
305.
   (H)   FIRE OFFICER is defined, for purposes of this section only, as the
Fire Chief, Captains, lieutenants, sergeants, and firemen, regardless of
gender.
   (I)   The ordinance codified in this section supersedes any prior ordinances
passed by the Board of Trustees entitling fire fighters to Workers'
Compensation benefits, and where any provision herein is found to be in
conflict with any prior ordinance regarding the same, this section and its
provisions shall prevail.
   (J)   No common law or statutory right to recover damages against the
Village for injury or death sustained by any fire fighter while engaged in his
line of duty other than the payment of the allowances of money and of the
medical treatment provided in this section shall be available to any fire
fighter who is covered by the provisions of this section, or to anyone wholly
or partially dependent upon such fire fighter or to the legal representative of
the estate of such fire fighter, or to anyone who would otherwise be entitled
to recover damages for such injury or death.
(1997 Code, § 5.21) (Ord. —, passed 5-13-1993)
§ 33.19 TRAINING; ELECTION TO PARTICIPATE IN THE PROGRAMS OF THE ILLINOIS FIRE
PROTECTION TRAINING ACT.
   (A)   Participation in Illinois Fire Protection Training Act. The Village
elects to participate in the programs provided for in the Illinois Fire
Protection Training Act (50 ILCS 740/1 et seq.).
   (B)   Before an individual may commence regular full-time employment as a
firefighter, he must have been certified by the Illinois State Fire Marshal as
a Firefighter II, as having successfully completed an approved training course
as provided in the Act.
   (C)   The Firefighter II certification must be completed by the trainee
within the probationary period. Failure of any trainee to complete such basic
training and certification within the required period will render that
individual and local governmental agency ineligible for reimbursement funding
for basic training for that individual in the fiscal year in which his
probationary period ends. The individual may later become certified without
reimbursement.
   (D)   The Board of Fire and Police Commissioners are hereby instructed and
directed to make the necessary amendments to the Personnel Rules, the Manual
Rules of the Maywood Fire Department, and Rules of the Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners in order to require that any person appointed to the Fire
Department of the Village of Maywood shall not become a regular member of the
Maywood Fire Department unless and until he shall complete, pursuant to the
Illinois Fire Protection and Training Act, the approved training course within
the probationary period.
(Ord. CO-08-38, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 33.20 MITIGATION RATES FOR FIRE DEPARTMENT SERVICES.
   (A)   The Maywood Fire Department shall charge mitigation rates for the
delivery of emergency and non-emergency services by the Fire Department for
personnel, supplies and equipment to the scene of emergency and non-emergency
incidents as set forth in this section. The mitigation rates shall be based on
usual, customary and reasonable costs of the emergency and non-emergency
services and are billed on an hourly basis.
   (B)   A claim shall be filed to the responsible party through their
insurance carrier. In some circumstances, the responsible party will be billed
directly.
   (C)   The Village Manager reserves the right to waive the fees and/or
related services charges, or any portion thereof, based on economic hardship
reasons.
   (D)   (1)   The mitigation rates are average “billing levels,” and are
typical for the incident responses listed, however, when a claim is submitted,
it will be itemized and based on the actual services provided.
      (2)   These average mitigation rates were determined by itemizing costs
for a typical run (from the time a fire apparatus leaves the station until it
returns to the station) and are based on the actual costs, using amortized
schedules for such apparatus (including useful life, equipment, repairs, and
maintenance) and labor rates (an average department’s “actual personnel
expense” and not just a firefighter’s basic wage). The actual personnel expense
includes costs such as wages, retirement, benefits, workers comp, insurance,
and the like.
   (E)   The mitigation rates are as follows:
      (1)   Motor vehicle incidents.
         (a)   Level 1 - $435. Provide hazardous materials assessment and scene
stabilization. This will be the most common “billing level.” This occurs almost
every time the Fire Department responds to an accident/incident.
         (b)   Level 2 - $495. Includes Level 1 services as well as clean up
and material used (sorbents) for hazardous fluid clean up and disposal. We will
bill at this level if the Fire Department has to clean up any gasoline or other
automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident/incident.
         (c)   Level 3 - $1,800. Includes Level 1 and 2 services as well as
extrication (heavy rescue tools, ropes, airbags, cribbing, and the like). We
will bill at this level if the Fire Department has to free/remove anyone from
the vehicle(s) using any equipment. We will not bill at this level if the
patient is simply unconscious and Fire Department is able to open the door to
access the patient. This level is to be billed only if equipment is deployed.
         (d)   Level 4 - $2,200. Includes Levels 1, 2, and 4 services as well
as Air Care (multi-engine company response, mutual aid, and helicopter). We
will bill at this level any time a helicopter is utilized to transport the
patient(s).
         (e)   Level 5 - Itemized Response: You have the option to bill each
incident as an independent event with custom mitigation rates, for each
incident using, itemized rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable (UCR).
These incidents will be billed, itemized per apparatus, per personnel, plus
products and equipment used.
      (2)   HAZMAT.
         (a)   Level 1 - $700. Basic Response: Claim will include engine
response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations,
setup and command.
         (b)   Level 2 - $2,500. Intermediate Response: Claim will include
engine response, first responder assignment, HAZMAT certified team and
appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, set-up and
command, Level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment. It
will also include set-up and removal of decon center.
         (c)   Level 3 - $5,900. Advanced Response: Claim will include engine
response, first responder assignment, HAZMAT certified team and appropriate
equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and
command, Level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment and
robot deployment. It also includes set-up and removal of decon center,
detection equipment, recovery and identification of material, and disposal and
environment clean up. Includes above, in addition to any disposal rates of
material and contaminated equipment and material used at scene. The base cost
includes 3 hours of on-scene time, each additional hour is billed at $300 per
hour per HAZMAT team.
      (3)   Pipeline incidents/power line incidents.
(Includes, but not limited to: gas, sewer, septic to sewer, and water
pipelines.)
         (a)   Level 1 - $400. Basic Response: Claim will include engine
response and first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations,
first responder set-up and command. It includes inspection without damage or
breakage.
         (b)   Level 2 - $1,000. Intermediate Response: Claim will include
engine response, first responder assignment, and appropriate equipment,
perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command. It
may also include HAZMAT team, Level A or B suit donning, breathing air and
detection equipment and any time spent to supervise and/or assist in pipeline
repair.
         (c)   Level 3 - Itemized Claim Charges. Advanced Response: Claim will
include engine response, first responder assignment, and appropriate equipment,
perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command. It
may include HAZMAT team, Level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection
equipment and it may include time spent to supervise and/or assist pipeline
repair of intermediate to major pipeline damage. It may include set-up and
removal of decon center, detection, recovery and identification of material,
disposal and environment clean up.
      (4)   Fire investigation.
         (a)   Fire Investigation Team - $275 per hour. Includes:
            1.   Scene safety.
            2.    Investigation.
            3.   Source identification.
            4.   K-9/arson dog unit.
            5.    Identification equipment.
            6.   Mobile detection unit.
            7.   Fire report.
         (b)   The claim begins when the Fire Investigator responds to the
incident and is billed for logged time only.
      (5)   Water incidents.
         (a)   Level 1 - $400 plus $50 per hour, per rescue person. Basic
Response: Claim will include engine response, first responder assignment,
perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command, scene
safety and investigation (including possible patient contact, hazard control).
This will be the most common “billing level.” This occurs almost every time the
Fire Department responds to a water incident.
         (b)   Level 2 - $800 plus $50 per hour, per rescue person.
Intermediate Response: Claim will include Level 1 services as well as clean up
and material used (sorbents), minor hazardous clean up and disposal. We will
bill at this level if the Fire Department has to clean up small amounts of
gasoline or other fluids that are spilled as a result of the incident.
         (c)   Level 3 - $2,000 plus $50 per hour per rescue person, plus $100
per hour per HAZMAT team member. Advanced Response: Claim will include Level 1
and Level 2 services as well as D.A.R.T. activation, donning breathing
apparatus and detection equipment. It will also include set up and removal of
decon center, detection equipment, recovery and identification of material,
disposal and environment clean up. It includes the above, in addition to any
disposal rates of material and contaminated equipment and material used at
scene.
         (d)   Level 4 - Itemized Response: You have the option to bill each
incident as an independent event with custom mitigation rates, for each
incident using, itemized rates deemed usual, customary, and reasonable (UCR).
These incidents will be billed, itemized, per trained rescue person, plus
rescue products used.
      (6)   Back country or special rescue.
         (a)   Minimum billed - $400 for the first response vehicle plus $50
per rescue person. Additional rates of $400 per hour per response vehicle and
$50 per hour per rescue person.
         (b)   Itemized Response: Each incident will be billed with custom
mitigation rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable (UCR). These incidents
will be billed, itemized per apparatus per hour, per trained rescue person per
hour, plus rescue products used.
      (7)   Chief response. $250 per hour. This includes the set-up of command,
and providing direction of the incident. This could include operations, safety,
and administration of the incident.
      (8)   Miscellaneous.
         (a)   Engine billed at $400 per hour.
         (b)   Truck billed at $500 per hour.
         (c)   Miscellaneous equipment billed at $300.
(Ord. CO-2013-35, passed 6-4-2013)
REGULATIONS
§ 33.30 BYSTANDER DUTIES.
   (A)   Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject and
obedient to the orders of the Chief of the Fire Department and other officers
of the Fire Department in extinguishing a fire and in the removal and
protection of property.
   (B)   The Chief or officers in command of any fire company may require the
aid of any driver of a vehicle, or any citizen, inhabitant or bystander, in
drawing or conveying any engine or fire apparatus to any fire, and in working
and using the same while at a fire.
(1997 Code, § 5.12)
§ 33.31 TAMPERING WITH PROPERTY OF DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Use of fire key. No person shall have in his possession, or make or
cause to be made, any key of any engine house or fire alarm box, or use any
such key without the consent of the proper authority.
   (B)   Signal boxes and property. No persons, except those connected with the
management of the same, shall open any signal box, unless it be to communicate
an alarm of fire, or break, cut, deface, derange, or in any manner meddle or
interfere with any signal box or fire alarm telegraph wires. No person shall
tamper with, damage or remove any property of the Fire Department without
proper authority.
(1997 Code, § 5.13)
§ 33.32 OBSTRUCTING FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE LANES.
   No person shall obstruct the use of any fire hydrant or any fire lane or
have or place any material in front thereof, or within 10 feet from either side
thereof. Any material obstructing a fire hydrant or fire lane may be
immediately moved by any member of the Fire Department at the expense of the
owner or claimant.
(1997 Code, § 5.14) (Ord. 80-18, passed 9-11-1980)
§ 33.33 FALSE FIRE ALARM RATES.
   (A)   In the event that any Village police officer or firefighter responds
to a fire alarm at any premises in the Village and the responding police
officer or firefighter or other Police or Fire Department personnel determines
that the alarm was a false alarm in that the alarm system was defective or
malfunctioned, the alarm was inadvertently and/or mistakenly activated by an
owner, occupant or visitor to the premises, or was otherwise activated for any
other reason other than a fire, smoke, or an apparent attempt to enter, or
entrance, onto the premises by an unauthorized person, the Police and Fire
Departments shall keep a log of the subject premises address and the date of
each false alarm per month. If police and/or fire units responding to an alarm
and checking the protected premises, do not discover any evidence of
unauthorized entry, criminal activity, smoke or fire, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that the alarm is false. Police and Fire Department
records shall be prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein with regard
to alarms and responses.
   (B)   If the alarm, when communicated to the Fire or Police Department
before an officer or fire unit is dispatched to investigate, is clearly
identified to the Departments as resulting from authorized entry, authorized
system test or other noncriminal cause, presence of smoke due to accidental
activation (e.g., burnt food) or any other related incident where the system
operated properly, it shall not be considered a false alarm.
   (C)   By the fifteenth day of each month, the Police and Fire Departments
shall submit to the Village Finance Department a copy of the false fire alarm
log for the previous month. On a quarterly basis, the Village Finance
Department shall send an invoice to the owner(s) of the subject premises at the
owner’s last known address demanding payment for false alarms in accordance
with the following fee schedule:
      (1)   First 3 false security alarms: no charge;
      (2)   Fourth through seventh false alarm: $100 per false alarm;
      (3)   Each subsequent false alarm: $200 per false alarm.
   (D)   The owner shall pay the full invoice amount to the Village Cashier
within 30 days of the invoice date.
   (E)   If the owner fails to cause the full invoice amount to be paid to the
Village Cashier within 30 days of the invoice date, the Village Finance
Director or the Finance Director’s designee may issue a violation notice
pursuant to Chapter 39 for the owner’s failure to remit payment pursuant to
division (D) of this section.
(Ord. CO-2013-33, passed 4-30-2013)
CHAPTER 34: FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES
Section
   
34.01   Declaration of policy
   
34.02   Unlawful employment practices
   
34.03   Nondiscrimination by Village; in Village contracts
   
34.04   Termination of Village contracts
   
34.05   Exemptions
   
34.06   Powers and duties of Commission
   
34.07   Procedures for processing complaints
   
34.08   Conference and conciliation
   
34.09   Procedure for hearing before Village Manager
   
34.10   Enforcement and civil penalties imposed by Village Manager
   
34.11   Procedures for processing complaints against the Village, Village
department, Village official and employees
   
34.12   Procedure for hearing before Commission
   
34.13   Injunctive relief
   
34.14   Attorney for Village Manager
   
34.99   Penalty
§ 34.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   Since it is the policy of the United States government to insure the maximum
participation of all available workers in production, regardless of race,
creed, color, national origin or ancestry, in the firm belief that the
democratic way of life within the nation can be defended successfully only with
the help and support of all groups within its borders, including the Village,
by eliminating possible discrimination in public and private employment, the
Board of Trustees of the Village, in furtherance of this democratic objective,
enacts this chapter to be known as the “Fair Employment Practices Ordinance.”
(1997 Code, § 6.01)
§ 34.02 UNLAWFUL EMPLOYMENT PRACTICES.
   It shall be an unlawful practice:
   (A)   For any department of the Village, or any Village official, or
employee, for or on behalf of the Village, to refuse to employ or to discharge
any person, otherwise qualified, on account of race, sex, color, creed,
national origin, ancestry, age unrelated to ability, or physical or mental
handicap unrelated to ability; to discriminate for the same reasons in regard
to tenure, terms or conditions of employment; to deny promotion or increase in
compensation solely for these reasons; to publish offers of employment based on
such discrimination; to adopt or enforce any rule or employment policy which
discriminates between employees on account of race, sex, color, creed, national
origin, ancestry, age unrelated to ability or physical or mental handicap
unrelated to ability;
   (B)   For any employer to refuse or fail to hire any person or otherwise to
discriminate against any person with respect to hiring, tenure, compensation,
promotion, discharge or any other terms, conditions or privileges directly or
indirectly related to employment because of race, sex, color, creed, religion,
national origin, ancestry, age unrelated to ability, or physical or mental
handicap unrelated to ability;
   (C)   For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to
establish, announce or follow a policy of denying or limiting, through a
restrictive quota system or otherwise, the employment or membership
opportunities of any person or group of persons because of race, sex, color,
creed, religion, national origin, ancestry, age unrelated to ability or
physical or mental handicap unrelated to ability;
   (D)   For any employer, labor organization, employment agency or any joint
labor-management committee controlling apprentice training programs to deny to
or withhold from any person the right to be admitted to or participate in a
guidance program, an apprenticeship training program, an on-the-job training
program or any other occupational training program because of race, color,
religion, sex, creed, national origin, ancestry, age unrelated to ability or
physical or mental handicap unrelated to ability;
   (E)   For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to require
of any applicant for employment or membership any information concerning race,
sex, color, creed, religion, national origin, ancestry, age unrelated to
ability or physical or mental handicap unrelated to ability;
   (F)   For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to publish
or circulate, or to cause to be published or circulated, any notice or
advertisement relating to employment or membership which indicates any
discrimination because of race, sex, color, creed, religion, national origin,
ancestry, age unrelated to ability, or physical or mental handicap unrelated to
ability;
   (G)   For any employment agency to fail or refuse to classify properly or
refer to employment or otherwise to discriminate against any person because of
race, color, sex, creed, religion, national origin, ancestry, age unrelated to
ability or physical or mental handicap unrelated to ability;
   (H)   For any employer substantially to confine or limit recruitment or
hiring of employees with intent to circumvent the spirit and purpose of this
chapter, to any employment agency, employment service, labor organization,
training school, training center or any other employee-referring source which
serves persons who are predominantly of the same race, color, sex, creed,
religion, national origin, ancestry, age unrelated to ability, or physical or
mental handicap unrelated to ability;
   (I)   For any labor organization to discriminate against any person in any
way which would deprive or limit his employment opportunities or otherwise
adversely affect his status as an applicant for employment or as an employee
with regard to tenure, compensation, promotion, discharge or any other terms,
conditions or privileges directly or indirectly related to employment because
of race, sex, color, religion, creed, national origin, ancestry, age unrelated
to ability, or physical or mental handicap unrelated to ability;
   (J)   For any employer, employment agency or labor organization to
discriminate against any person because he has opposed any practice forbidden
by this chapter, or because such individual has made a charge, testified or
assisted, in any manner, in any investigation, proceeding or hearing under this
chapter;
   (K)   For any person whether or not an employer, employment agency or labor
organization, to aid, incite, compel, coerce or participate in the perpetration
of any act declared to be an unlawful employment practice by this chapter, or
to obstruct any person from enforcing or complying with the provisions of this
chapter or any rule, regulation or order of the Commission, or to attempt
directly or indirectly to commit any act declared by this chapter to be an
unlawful employment practice;
   (L)   For any person to discriminate against any other person by reason of
race, sex, color, creed, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, physical or
mental handicap unrelated to ability, with respect to the hiring, application
for employment, tenure, terms or conditions of employment.
(1997 Code, § 3.02) (Ord. 80-8, passed 6-12-1980)
§ 34.03 NONDISCRIMINATION BY VILLAGE; IN VILLAGE CONTRACTS.
   (A)   Nondiscrimination by Village. The Village shall prohibit all the
discriminatory practices set forth in § 34.02 in all departments, divisions,
boards, and commissions or the perpetration of any discriminatory practice by
any Village officials, their agents or employees acting for or on behalf of the
Village. (1997 Code, § 6.03)
   (B)   Nondiscrimination in Village contracts.
      (1)   The Village and all of its contracting agencies and departments
shall include in all contracts negotiated or renegotiated by them a provision
obligating the contractor not to commit any of the discriminatory practices set
forth in § 34.02 and shall require such contractors to take affirmative steps
in the recruitment, hiring, promotion, and upgrading of minority employees. All
contracts in excess of $1,000 for purchasing materials, supplies, equipment,
services, or for the construction, reconstruction or repair of any Village
building facility or public improvement entered into by the Village or any of
its boards, divisions, commissions, or departments and authorized by resolution
or ordinance shall be an "equal opportunity employer" as defined by 42 U.S.C.A.
Ch. 21, § 2000(e) and Federal Executive Orders No. 11246 and No. 11478, which
are incorporated herein by reference.
      (2)   All such contracts shall provide:
         (a)   That the contractor and his subcontractor shall submit with
their bids a completed contractor employment practices form as provided by the
Commission on Community Relations. The form, as prepared by the Commission on
Community Relations, shall include the following:
            1.   A statement by the contractor and his subcontractors agreeing
to adhere to the provisions of this chapter;
            2.   A report showing affirmative action in employment, upgrading,
promotion, transfer, recruitment and advertising for employees, rates of pay or
other forms of compensation, and selection for training, including
apprenticeship of minorities and women;
         (b)   That the contractor and his subcontractor shall agree:
            1.   To post in a conspicuous place, both in the office and at the
job site, notices summarizing the provisions of this nondiscrimination
ordinance;
            2.   To state in all solicitations or advertisements for employees
placed by or on behalf of the contractor and subcontractor that all qualified
applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to race,
creed, color, sex, religion, national origin, ancestry, age unrelated to
ability or physical or mental handicap unrelated to ability;
            3.   To notify each of his subcontractors or labor unions of both
the contractors' and subcontractors' commitments under this chapter, that in
the event of the contractors' or subcontractors' noncompliance with the
nondiscrimination clauses of the contract, the contract may be cancelled,
terminated or suspended in whole or in part;
            4.   To allow the Village, through its authorized agency, the
Commission on Community Relations, to inspect relevant books and records
essential to evaluating and insuring compliance.
(1997 Code, § 6.04)
§ 34.04 TERMINATION OF VILLAGE CONTRACTS.
   Proof of violation of this chapter shall constitute a basis for termination
of any contract and shall render the contractor guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine in any sum not exceeding $500.
(1997 Code, § 6.05)
§ 34.05 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply to the following.
   (A)   Any employer who regularly employs less than 4 individuals. For
purposes of this section, individuals who are members of the employer’s family
shall not be counted as employees.
   (B)   Any bona fide religious institution with respect to any qualifications
for employment based on religion, when such qualifications are related to a
bona fide religious purpose.
   (C)   Any type of employment where religious creed, national origin, sex, or
ancestry would be considered an essential and bona fide qualification of
employment.
(1997 Code, § 6.06)
§ 34.06 POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Commission on Community Relations, as authorized agent for the
Village, shall be primarily responsible for insuring compliance with the terms
of this chapter.
   (B)   The Commission is authorized and shall:
      (1)   Adopt, promulgate, amend, and rescind rules and regulations to
effectuate the policies and provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Receive, initiate, investigate, and seek to adjust complaints filed
with the Commission under the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with
rules and regulations adopted by the Commission and approved by the Board of
Trustees;
      (3)   Evaluate compliance of Village contractors and suppliers with
respect to this chapter prior to the letting of bids and with periodic reviews
of compliance during any contract period, with full authority to examine
relevant books and records of Village contractors and prospective contractors;
      (4)   Insure compliance of Village contractors and suppliers with this
chapter and insure that they are "equal opportunity employers," as provided for
by federal law and federal executive order, and to insure their compliance with
the requirements and obligations of any applicable state or federal law,
including but not limited to Article 2 of the Human Rights Act (775 ILCS 5/2-
101 et seq.);
      (5)   Work in conjunction with the Village officers and employees in
insuring compliance with this chapter;
      (6)   Lend all reasonable assistance to Village contractors and suppliers
in complying with the nondiscrimination and affirmative action provisions of
this chapter;
      (7)   Issue such publications and results of investigations and research
as in its judgment will tend to promote good will and minimize or eliminate
discrimination because of race, sex, color, creed, religion, national origin,
ancestry, age unrelated to ability or physical or mental handicap unrelated to
ability.
(1997 Code, § 6.07)
§ 34.07 PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING COMPLAINTS.
   Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory practice prohibited
by § 34.02, other than a discriminatory practice by the Village, any department
of the Village, or any Village official or employee, may make, sign and file
with the office of the Village Manager a complaint in writing, which shall
state the name and discriminatory practice and which shall set forth the
particulars thereof and contain such other information as may be required under
rules established by the office of the Village Manager. Such complaints shall
be filed within 60 days after the alleged discriminatory practice is committed.
(1997 Code, § 6.08)
§ 34.08 CONFERENCE AND CONCILIATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complaint, the office of the Village Manager shall
conduct a preliminary investigation. If the Village Manager determines that
there is probable cause to believe that a discriminatory practice has been
committed, he shall attempt an adjustment by means of conference and
conciliation. If the Village Manager determines that there is no probable cause
to believe that a discriminatory practice has been committed, he shall make a
written finding to that effect and shall promptly send copies thereof to the
complainant and to the person complained against. (1997 Code, § 6.09)
   (B)   Upon receipt of a complaint pursuant to § 34.11, the Commission shall
conduct a preliminary investigation. If the Commission determines from such
investigation that there is probable cause to believe that a discriminatory
practice has been committed, the Commission shall attempt an adjustment by
means of conference and conciliation. If the Commission determines that there
is not probable cause to believe that a discriminatory practice has been
committed, then it shall enter an order dismissing the complaint and shall
promptly send copies thereof to the complainant and to the person or entity
complained against. (1997 Code, § 6.13)
§ 34.09 PROCEDURE FOR HEARING BEFORE VILLAGE MANAGER.
   (A)   In case of failure of conference and conciliation to attain compliance
with this chapter, the Village Manager shall proceed to hear the complaint. The
Village Manager shall serve upon the person charged with having engaged in the
discriminatory practice, referred to as the respondent, a statement of the
charges made in the complaint and a notice of the time and place of the
hearing. Such statement of charges and notice shall be sent by certified mail
(return receipt requested) to the respondent at his last known address at least
10 days prior to the date set for the hearing.
   (B)   The respondent shall have the right within 5 days after the service on
him of the statement of charges and notice of hearing to file an answer to the
statement of charges. He shall also have the right to be represented by
counsel, to appear at the hearing in person, to present evidence in his own
behalf and to examine and cross-examine witnesses.
   (C)   The Village Manager shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence
and shall have the power to administer oaths, to take sworn testimony and to
subpoena witnesses, documents and records. The Village Manager may adopt such
rules of procedure for the conduct of hearings as are deemed necessary.
   (D)   Within 5 days after the conclusion of any hearing, the Village Manager
shall render a decision. If the respondent is notified to attend a hearing
before the Village Manager and he fails to attend such hearing, the Village
Manager may proceed to hold such hearing and make a determination in such
person's absence.
(1997 Code, § 6.10)
§ 34.10 ENFORCEMENT AND CIVIL PENALTIES IMPOSED BY VILLAGE MANAGER.
   (A)   Findings and imposition of civil penalty by Village Manager. If, upon
presentation of all the evidence at a hearing pursuant to § 34.09, the Village
Manager finds that the person charged in the complaint has not engaged in or is
not engaging in any unfair or discriminatory practice, he shall state his
findings of fact and dismiss the complaint. If, upon the preponderance of all
the evidence, the Village Manager finds that the respondent has engaged in or
is engaging in an unfair discriminatory practice, he shall state his findings
of fact and impose such civil penalties and make such recommendations as he
deems appropriate, consistent with the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   If the Village Manager, pursuant to the provisions of division (A) of
this section, finds that the respondent has engaged in or is engaging in an
unfair discriminatory practice, he may impose a civil penalty not exceeding
$500. If a civil penalty is so imposed against a person, firm, corporation or
other entity pursuant to this chapter, the Village shall have the right to
terminate any and all contracts which the person, firm, corporation or entity
has with the Village.
(1997 Code, § 6.11)
§ 34.11 PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE VILLAGE, VILLAGE
DEPARTMENT, VILLAGE OFFICIAL AND EMPLOYEES.
   Any person claiming to be aggrieved by a discriminatory practice prohibited
by § 34.02, allegedly committed by the Village, any Village department, any
Village official or any Village employee, may make, sign and file with the
Commission on Community Relations a complaint in writing, which shall state the
name and address of the person or entity alleged to have committed the
discriminatory practice and which shall set forth the particulars thereof and
contain such other information as may be required by the Commission. Such
complaints shall be filed within 60 days after the alleged discriminatory
practice is committed.
(1997 Code, § 6.12)
§ 34.12 PROCEDURE FOR HEARING BEFORE COMMISSION.
   (A)   In case of failure of conference or conciliation to attain compliance
with this chapter, the Commission shall proceed to hear the complaint. With the
advice and consent of the Commission, the Chairman may appoint a hearing
examiner to hear the complaint. The hearing examiner shall be a person who is
qualified to conduct administrative or quasi judicial hearings and who holds no
other appointive or elective public office or position in the Village
government. In the alternative, the complaint may be heard by a hearing panel,
comprised of at least 3 Commissioners designated by the Chairman, not including
any Commissioner who may have been directly involved in the investigation of
the complaint. The Chairman shall designate one member of the hearing panel as
Hearing Commissioner, who shall be the presiding member.
   (B)   The Commission shall serve upon the person charged with having engaged
in the unfair or discriminatory practice, referred to as the respondent, a
statement of the charges made in the complaint and a notice of the time and
place of the hearing. Such statement of charges and notice shall be sent by
certified mail (return receipt requested) to the respondent at his last known
address at least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing. The respondent
shall have the right, within 5 days after the service on him of the statement
of charges and notice of hearing to file an answer to the statement of charges.
He shall also have the right to be represented by counsel, to appear at the
hearing in person, to present evidence in his own behalf and to examine and
cross-examine witnesses.
   (C)   The hearing panel or hearing examiner shall not be bound by the strict
rules of evidence and shall have the power to administer oaths, to take sworn
testimony, and to subpoena witnesses, documents and records. The Commission may
adopt such rules of procedure for the conduct of hearings as are deemed
necessary.
   (D)   Within 5 days after the conclusion of any hearing, a hearing panel or
hearing examiner shall render a decision. No final action for the imposition or
recommendation of a penalty shall be taken except at a meeting open to the
public. If a person against whom a complaint of an unfair or discriminatory
practice is made pursuant to § 34.11 is notified to attend a hearing before the
hearing panel or hearing examiner, and he fails to attend such hearing, the
hearing panel or hearing examiner may proceed to hold such hearing and make a
determination in such person's absence.
(1997 Code, § 6.14)
§ 34.13 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   In the event any respondent fails to comply with any order issued by the
Village Manager or issued by the Commission on Community Relations, pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter, the Village Manager or Commission may recommend
to the Village Board that the Village Attorney be directed to bring suit for an
injunction to enjoin violation of this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 6.16)
§ 34.14 ATTORNEY FOR VILLAGE MANAGER.
   When the Village Manager investigates a complaint or holds a hearing
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Village Attorney or a member of
his staff shall be the attorney for the Village Manager.
(1997 Code, § 6.17)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   If, upon presentation of all the evidence, the majority of the hearing panel
holding the hearing, or the hearing examiner finds that the person charged in
the complaint has not engaged in or is not engaging in any unfair or
discriminatory practice, it shall state its finding of fact and dismiss the
complaint. If, upon the preponderance of all the evidence, the majority of the
hearing panel holding the hearing, or the hearing examiner finds that the
respondent has engaged in or is engaging in an unfair discriminatory practice,
it shall state its findings of fact and impose such civil penalties, not to
exceed $1,000, and make such recommendations as it deems appropriate,
consistent with the terms of this chapter. The decision of the hearing panel or
hearing examiner shall be the decision of the Commission.
(1997 Code, § 6.15) (Am. Ord. C0-00-11, passed 11-20-2000)
CHAPTER 35: PERSONNEL MATTERS
Section
   
35.01   Statement of equal employment opportunity and adoption of Personnel
Policy Manual
   
35.02   Police and fire lateral hiring program
   
35.03   Reimbursement agreement for recovery of training and certification
costs required from applicants for entry level firefighter and police officer
positions
§ 35.01 STATEMENT OF EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY AND ADOPTION OF PERSONNEL
POLICY MANUAL.
   The Village is committed to the principles of equal employment opportunity.
The Village’s practices and employment decisions regarding recruitment, hiring,
assignment, promotions and compensation will not be based on any person’s race,
color, sex, age, national origin, ancestry, religion, disability, marital
status or military discharge status, and sexual orientation. Sexual harassment
or unlawful harassment based on other protected group status is also
prohibited. A Personnel Policy Manual shall be adopted by the President and
Board of Trustees of the Village, and shall be amended from time to time by the
Village Board. A copy of the Personnel Policy Manual shall be placed on file in
the Village Clerk’s Office for public inspection and photocopying in accordance
with the Freedom of Information Act.
(Am. Ord. —, passed - -1998; Am. Ord. C0-08-23, passed 6-3-2008; Am. Ord. 2017-
46, passed 12-19-2017; Am. Ord. 2018-02, passed 1-16-2018)
§ 35.02 POLICE AND FIRE LATERAL HIRING PROGRAM.
   The President and Board of Trustees of the Village authorize the Board of
Fire and Police Commissioners to enact rules and regulations which will permit,
at the Commission’s discretion, the recruitment, testing and selection of
original entry firefighters/paramedics and police officers meeting the
following criteria:
   (A)   To be placed upon a lateral entry eligibility list for original
appointment to the position of firefighter/parademic, candidates must be
certified as a firefighter II in accordance with such rules and regulations as
established by the State Fire Marshal’s office, must be licensed in accordance
with the laws of the state as an EMT-paramedic, and must, at the time of
application, have been employed, on a full-time basis, as a firefighter/
paramedic by a state municipality or fire protection district for a period not
less than 2 years immediately preceding the submission of his or her
application.
   (B)   To be placed upon a lateral entry eligibility list for original
appointment to the position of police officer, candidates must be certified as
having successfully completed the minimum standards basic law enforcement
course as required by the State Law Enforcement Training Standards Board and
must, at the time of application, have been employed, on a full- time basis, as
a police officer with a regularly constituted state municipal police department
for a period not less than 2 years immediately preceding the submission of his
or her application.
   (C)   Applicants must be able to demonstrate that they are leaving their
prior employment in good standing.
   (D)   Qualified lateral hire applicants will be added to the lateral entry
eligibility list for either the Fire or Police Department in chronological
order based upon the date an applicant’s application was received by the Board
of Fire and Police Commissioners.
   (E)   The decision to select a candidate from a lateral entry eligibility
list ahead of a non-certified candidate is solely within the discretion of the
Board of Fire and Police Commissioners.
   (F)   Applicants for lateral hire will not be required to submit to a
written examination as part of the Commission’s screening process. Qualified
applicants, prior to employment, must successfully complete an oral interview
to be given by the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners and, like any other
candidate for new hire to the Fire or Police Department, undergo a thorough
background investigation, an in-depth psychological examination and a thorough
physical examination in compliance with existing Commission rules.
(Ord. C0-04-25, passed 8-2-2004; Am. Ord. C0-08-38, passed 6-3-2008)
§ 35.03 REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENT FOR RECOVERY OF TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION
COSTS REQUIRED FROM APPLICANTS FOR ENTRY LEVEL FIREFIGHTER AND POLICE OFFICER
POSITIONS.
   All persons who apply for entry level firefighter and police officer
positions with the Village shall, as a condition of application for employment
with the Village, sign a reimbursement agreement that requires the repayment,
on a prorated basis, of the training and certification costs that the Village
pays on behalf of the applicant after he or she is hired by the Village, in the
event that the applicant’s employment with the Village ends within 36 months of
being hired by the Village due to any reason other than termination by the
Village or injury or illness that prevents continued employment. The
reimbursement agreement shall be in a form that has been approved by the
Village Manager and shall be attached to the Village employment application
form that is used for entry level firefighter and police officer positions. The
Village’s Personnel Policy Manual shall be amended to incorporate the
provisions of this §
35.03.
(Ord. CO-2012-07, passed 2-21-2012)
CHAPTER 36: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
36.01   Fiscal and municipal year
   
36.02   Officers to keep Village funds apart from personal funds
   
36.03   Director of Finance
   
36.04   Audits
   
36.05   Investment of Village funds; real estate loans
   
36.06   Use of public funds; expense approval policy, and travel policy and
reimbursements
   
36.07   Investment and fiscal policy for the Village
   
36.08   Contracts and purchases
   
36.09   Budget system; Budget Officer
   
36.10   TIF Districts
Maywood Liquor Tax
   
36.20   Title
   
36.21   Definitions
   
36.22   Liquor tax imposed
   
36.23   Tax on retail purchaser
   
36.24   Collection of tax
   
36.25   Report of sales
   
36.26   Inventory
   
36.27   Purchaser’s duty to pay tax
   
36.28   Remitting taxes; dealer’s commission
   
36.29   Exceptions to tax
   
36.30   Registration of dealers
   
36.31   Disposition of tax funds
   
36.32   Revenues to corporate fund
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
   
36.45   Definitions
   
36.46   Simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed
   
36.47   Collection of tax by retailers
   
36.48   Returns to Department
   
36.49   Resellers
Municipal Gas Utility Tax
   
36.50   Definitions
   
36.51   Tax imposed
   
36.52   Limitations
   
36.53   Effect of other compensation
   
36.54   Payment
   
36.55   Payment by mistake
   
36.56   Recovery of tax due
Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax and Municipal Service Occupation Tax
   
36.65   Tax imposed
   
36.66   Collection and enforcement of tax
Electricity Utility Tax
   
36.75   Definitions
   
36.76   Tax imposed
   
36.77   Collection of tax
   
36.78   Tax remittance and returns
   
36.79   Resales
   
36.80   Books and records
   
36.81   Credits and refunds
Municipal Gas Use Tax
   
36.90   Definitions
   
36.91   Tax imposed
   
36.92   Collection of tax
   
36.93   Books and records
Locally Imposed and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibilities
   
36.100   Title
   
36.101   Scope
   
36.102   Definitions
   
36.103   Notices
   
36.104   Late payment
   
36.105   Payment
   
36.106   Certain credits and refunds
   
36.107   Audit procedure
   
36.108   Appeal
   
36.109   Hearing
   
36.110   Interest and penalties
   
36.111   Abatement
   
36.112   Installment contracts
   
36.113   Statute of limitations
   
36.114   Voluntary disclosure
   
36.115   Publication of tax ordinances
   
36.116   Internal review procedure
   
36.117   Application
 
Municipal Cannabis Retailer’s Occupation Tax
   
36.130   Tax imposed
   
36.131   Payment of tax
   
36.132   Books and records
   
36.133   Penalty
Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax and Municipal Grocery Service
Occupation Tax
   
36.140   Tax imposed
   
36.141   Collection and enforcement of tax
 
   
36.99   Penalty
Cross reference:
   Village policies, see
Ch. 38
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Ch. 117
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 36.01 FISCAL AND MUNICIPAL YEAR.
   (A)   The fiscal year of the Village shall commence on the first day of May
and end on the thirtieth day of April.
   (B)   The municipal year of the Village for license purposes shall commence
on the first day of January of each year.
(1997 Code, § 3.11) (Ord. 59-9, passed 6-9-1959; Am. Ord. passed - -1997; Am.
Ord. C0-08-19, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 36.02 OFFICERS TO KEEP VILLAGE FUNDS APART FROM PERSONAL FUNDS.
   The Village funds that may come into the possession of any Village officer
shall be kept distinct and apart from the personal funds of such officer.
(1997 Code, § 3.12)
§ 36.03 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   (A)   Creation; appointment. There is created the office of Director of
Finance who shall be the head of the Department of Finance and shall have the
management and control of all matters and things pertaining thereto. The
Director of Finance shall be appointed by the Village Manager.
   (B)   Bond; compensation. The Director of Finance and ex officio Village
Collector shall execute to the Village a bond as required by statute in an
amount to be determined by the Board at the time of their appointment. They
shall receive such compensation for their services as the Board of Trustees
shall determine.
   (C)   Powers.
      (1)   The Director of Finance shall be the fiscal agent of the Village
and as such shall be charged with and shall exercise general supervision over
all officers of the Village charged in any manner with the receipt, collection
or disbursement of the Village revenues and all funds required to be in the
custody of the Village Treasurer.
      (2)   He shall have charge of all deeds, mortgages, leases, contracts,
judgment orders, notes, bonds and other evidences of indebtedness belonging to
the Village, except such as are directed by law or ordinance to be deposited
elsewhere. He shall have supervision of the making of all contracts, the
issuance and sale of bonds, warrants and obligations and the purchase, sale,
lease or disposition of all property of the Village.
   (D)   Filing of annual tax levy. The Director of Finance shall, as required
by law, file with the County Clerk a certified copy of the annual tax levy
ordinance in which the total amount of the tax levy for all corporate purposes
of the Village legally made is levied and assessed.
   (E)   Village Collector. The Director of Finance, as Village Collector,
shall prepare, collect and execute all special assessments and other warrants
which, by law or the ordinances of the Village, may be executed by him and
shall perform such other duties as may be imposed upon a Village Collector by
law or the ordinances of the Village.
   (F)   Disposition of moneys collected. The Director of Finance shall
promptly turn over to the Village Treasurer daily on each business day, all
moneys collected by him on account of the Village, and take his receipt
therefor.
   (G)   Accounts. The Director of Finance shall keep an accurate account of
all Village funds received by him and he shall also keep in suitable books for
that purpose an accurate and detailed account of each and every special
assessment levied for any improvement, and when it shall appear from such books
that all costs and expenses of any improvement which has been made by special
assessment have been paid and satisfied, and that there has been a sum of money
collected over and above the entire cost of such improvement, he shall report
to the Village Manager such fact and state in writing the amount of such
excess. The Director of Finance shall also keep an account of all rebates on
special assessments ordered by the Board of Trustees, issue warrants therefor
to the respective persons entitled thereto, and shall keep an account of the
same, and whenever the full amount of any such rebate has been paid out shall
report the fact to the Village Manager.
(1997 Code, § 3.13)
§ 36.04 AUDITS.
   There shall be provided an independent audit of all accounts of the Village,
which audit shall be conducted independently of the Manager, by some person
selected by the Board. A full report of such audit shall be filed in the public
records of the Village.
(1997 Code, § 3.14) (Ord. 77-17, passed 12-27-1977)
§ 36.05 INVESTMENT OF VILLAGE FUNDS; REAL ESTATE LOANS.
   (A)   It is declared the policy of the Village to assure that all Village
funds currently or in the future to be on deposit, invested or reinvested, be
affirmatively deposited, invested or reinvested in such financial institutions
as to assure their availability to qualified applicants for residential
mortgage loans and residential improvement loans within the Village.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees or duly authorized representative shall
designate only those financial institutions to receive Village investment funds
and deposits that do not participate in the practice known as "redlining"
activities based on racial, geographical or other discriminating policies that
fail to serve the best interests of the Village as a whole and its individual
citizens.
   (C)   (1)   All financial institutions receiving Village investment funds
and deposits shall sign the following pledge:
We pledge not to arbitrarily reject mortgage loans for residential properties
because of geographic area or location of such property. In addition, we pledge
to make loans available on low and moderate value residential property in the
Village of Maywood on an affirmative basis within the limits of our local
restrictions and sound credit and financial practices.
                                                               
   Name of Bank      Signature of President
      (2)   The pledge statement forms will be supplied by the Village.
   (D)   If any financial institution: (1) fails to sign the above pledge; and/
or (2) refuses to open their records to the Human Relations Commission when
requested to do so by the Board of Trustees; and/or (3) is found guilty of
"redlining" pursuant to the content of the Maywood Fair Housing Ordinance
(Chapter 90) such institution shall be found in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, and such violation shall result in the withdrawal of the total
amount of the Village investment funds and deposits from such institution, such
withdrawal to be accomplished only in a manner consistent with sound legal and
financial practice.
(1997 Code, § 3.26) (Ord. 74-17, passed 7-25-1974)
§ 36.06 USE OF PUBLIC FUNDS; EXPENSE APPROVAL POLICY, AND TRAVEL POLICY AND
REIMBURSEMENTS.
   (A)   Use of public funds. It is declared to be the policy of this Village
that the President, Board of Trustees, and all Village officials, employees or
agents, shall use public funds, property or credit only for public purposes.
The President and Board of Trustees, as part of the Village’s annual budget,
may establish and allocate an amount of money for use by the individual
Trustees and President in support of events, activities, and charities
organized by, sponsored by, or conducted by nonprofit organizations or
businesses that support or benefit the Village as a whole, so long as such
events, activities, and charities are not political or campaign-related in
nature or otherwise for a principally private purpose, and are authorized in
accordance with the Village’s expense approval policy. Such money may also be
used in accordance with the Village’s travel policy by the individual Trustees
and President for travel on an annual basis in attending up to 4 municipal
conferences, meetings, seminars or training sessions outside of the Maywood
Metropolitan Area (Cook, DuPage, Will, Lake, Kane and McHenry Counties) per
year, unless additional trips are approved in advance by the Village Board of
Trustees, and to pay business expenses that are directly related to the
performance of public office (for example, stationary, gas mileage, postage,
purchase of a cell phone, a facsimile machine, a computer and printer or
similar communication device or equipment, and the like) for the Trustees and
President. Any such device, machine or equipment purchased by the Village for
use by a Village official or employee remains public property and needs to be
returned to the Village (i) if and when the Village official leaves public
office, (ii) the employee’s employment ends, or (iii) the item becomes
obsolete. The disposal or sale of such item must be done pursuant to the
surplus personal property statute (65 ILCS 5/11-76-4) which requires a simple
majority vote of the corporate authorities. A Village official or employee is
prohibited by state law from purchasing the item from the Village at the time
the Village declares the equipment to be surplus and available for purchase.
   (B)   Travel policy and reimbursement.
      (1)   Employees and appointed and elected officials who incur expenses
while traveling on behalf of and for the benefit of the Village, may receive
reimbursement in accordance with current Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
regulations for expenses and in accordance with the “Village of Maywood travel
policy” as approved and modified from time to time by the Village Board.
      (2)   The Village of Maywood travel policy is available from the Office
of the Village Manager and the Finance Department, and on-lien at the Village’s
website, and provides, among other things, that in order to qualify for
reimbursement, all employees and appointed and elected officials must submit a
detailed expense statement, including original receipts and invoices, and that
certain travel shall only be reimbursed if pre-approved by the Village Board.
   (C)   Expense approval policy and reimbursements.
      (1)   Any expenses other than travel to be paid from the budget
allocation made pursuant to division (A) above may be made only in accordance
with the guidelines and procedures for pre-approval and reimbursement set forth
in the “Village of Maywood expense approval policy” as approved and modified
from time to time by the Village Board.
      (2)   The Village of Maywood expense approval policy is available from
the Office of the Village Manager and Finance Department, and on-line at the
Village’s website, and provides, among other things, that in order for an
expense to qualify for reimbursement, all elected officials must submit a
request for expenditure form, have the expense approved by the Village Board,
and then submit a payment request form, including supporting documentation.
(Ord. CO-03-02, passed 1-6-2003; Am. Ord. CO-04-03, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord.
CO-04- 14, passed 5-3-2004; Am. Ord. CO-05-54, passed 12-20-2005; Am. Ord. CO-
2013-48, passed 12-17-2013; Am. Ord. 2017-42, passed 11-21-2017)
§ 36.07 INVESTMENT AND FISCAL POLICY FOR THE VILLAGE.
   (A)   Purpose.  The investment and fiscal policy (the "policy") sets forth
the investment objectives, goals and guidelines for the Village of Maywood (the
"Village") in order to provide for the greatest degree of safety of principal
and liquidity of funds and to comply with Section 2.5 of the Public Funds
Investment Act, 30 ILCS 235/2.5 (the "Investment Act"), other state and federal
laws and local ordinances. This policy applies to all financial assets of the
Village and includes investment objectives, standard of care, diversification,
safekeeping, institutional qualification, collateralization, reporting
personnel qualifications and tax levy requirements.
   (B)   Objectives. The objectives, in order of priority, of the Village's
investment activities shall be:
      (1)   Safety. Investments of the Village shall be undertaken in a manner
that seeks to ensure the preservation of capital in the overall portfolio. This
includes mitigation of credit risk and interest risk and diversification so
that potential losses on individual securities do not exceed the income
generated from the remainder of the portfolio.
      (2)   Liquidity. The Village's investment portfolio shall remain
sufficiently liquid to enable the Village to meet all operating requirements
which might be reasonably anticipated. The portfolio will be structured so that
securities mature concurrent with cash needs to meet anticipated demands.
Furthermore, since all possible cash demands cannot be anticipated, the
portfolio shall consist largely of securities with active secondary or resale
markets. A portion of the portfolio also may be placed in money market mutual
funds or local government investment pools that offer same-day liquidity for
short-term funds.
      (3)   Return on investment. The Village's investment portfolio shall be
designed with the objective of achieving a rate of return during budgetary and
economic periods commensurate with the Village's risk constraints and liquidity
requirements. Return on investment is of secondary importance compared to the
safety and liquidity objectives described above. Securities shall not be sold
prior to maturity with the following exceptions:
         (a)   A declining credit security may be sold early to minimize loss
or principal.
         (b)   A security swap would improve the quality, yield or target
duration of the portfolio.
         (c)   Liquidity needs of the portfolio require that the security be
sold.
   (C)   Standards of care.
      (1)   Prudence. The standard of prudence to be used by the Village
Treasurer and Finance Director shall be the "prudent person" standard and shall
be applied in the context of managing an overall portfolio. Each such Village
official acting in accordance with written procedures and this policy and
exercising due diligence shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an
individual security's credit risk or market price changes provided deviations
from expectations are reported in a timely fashion and the liquidity and the
sale of securities are carried out in accordance with the terms of this policy.
Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then
prevailing, which persons of prudence, discretion and intelligence exercise in
the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment,
considering the probable safety of their capital as well as the probable income
to be derived.
      (2)   Ethics; conflicts of interest. Officers and employees involved in
the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could
conflict with proper execution of the Village's investment program or that
could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions. Employees
and investment officials shall disclose to the Village Treasurer and Finance
Director any material financial interests in financial institutions that
conduct business within this jurisdiction, and they shall further disclose any
large personal financial or investment positions that could be related to the
performance of the Village, particularly with regard to the time of purchases
and sales.
      (3)   Delegation of authority.  
         (a)   Both the Finance Director and the Village Treasurer (or their
designee) shall serve as the investment officers of the Village. The Finance
Director shall establish written procedures for the operation of the investment
program consistent with this policy. Procedures shall include reference to
safekeeping, wire transfer agreements, banking service contracts and
collateral/depository agreements. Such procedures shall include explicit
delegation of authority to persons responsible for investment transactions. No
person may engage in an investment transaction except as provided under the
terms of this policy and the procedures established by the Village Treasurer,
the Finance Director and approved by the Village Manager. The Village Treasurer
and the Finance Director shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken
and shall establish a system of controls to regulate the activities of
subordinate officials. In the even of a disagreement with respect to an
investment decision or transaction between the Village Treasurer and the
Finance Director, the Finance Director's decision shall control, unless
directed otherwise by the Village Board.
         (b)   The Village Treasurer and Finance Director may seek advice on
investments from other sources (for example, local bankers, brokers, and other
investment professionals) as provided in this policy. When selecting investment
advisors, the Village Treasurer and Finance Director shall carefully review the
credentials, procedures, and controls of the firms offering the services. All
investment decisions must be based upon the objectives as prioritized herein.
   (D)   Investment instruments. The following investments are authorized under
this policy in accordance with the Investment Act:
      (1)   Non-negotiable certificates of deposit and other collateralized
evidence of deposits with qualified public depositories;
      (2)   Obligations of the U.S. Government, its agencies and
instrumentalities. However, this authorization shall specifically exclude
Collateralized Mortgage Obligations (CMOs), Real Estate Mortgage Investment
Conduits (REMICs), and other Principal Only (Pos) and Interest Only (Ios)
obligations that are secured with mortgages issued by any federal agency,
instrumentality or private firm;
      (3)   Prime bankers' acceptances purchased on the secondary marked with
ratings of A1/P1;
      (4)   Repurchase agreements for securities listed above, provided the
transaction is structured so that the Village obtains control over the
underlying securities and a Master Repurchase Agreement has been signed with
the bank or dealer;
      (5)   State of Illinois Treasurer's Investment Pool;
      (6)   Bonds of the State of Illinois and any local government in the
State of Illinois, which bonds have at the time of investment, one of the three
highest credit ratings of a nationally recognized rating agency; and
      (7)   Any other investment authorized by the Investment Act.
   (E)   Diversification and maturities of investments. 
      (1)   Diversification. In order to reduce institutional risk on the
Village's capital and to provide competitive bidding benefits, investments
should be placed in various financial institutions. A diversification of
investment instruments is encouraged to give the Village more flexibility and
help minimize the impact of market fluctuations. Investment instruments not
subject to credit risks (such as Treasury bills and certificates of deposit)
need not be subjected to diversification requirements.
      (2)   Maturities. To the extent possible, the Village will attempt to
match its investments with anticipated cash flow requirements. Unless matched
to a specific cash flow, the Village will not directly invest in securities
maturing more than 3 years from the date of purchase. A careful analysis of the
Village's short-, mid-, and long-term cash needs should be made when planning
maturities. Reserve or capital improvement project funds may be invested in
securities not to exceed 5 years, or less if subject to federal arbitrage rules
with respect to the use of proceeds of tax-exempt bonds. The maturity of such
investments is made to coincide as nearly as possible with the expected use of
funds.
   (F)   Safekeeping; custody. 
      (1)   Authorized financial institutions. 
         (a)   Qualified and licensed financial institutions shall be selected
which qualify as depositories or custodians under Illinois law. In making these
selections, the Village shall consider the financial stability and strength of
the institution and the availability of financial data regarding the
institution. For additional requirements, see division (G) of this section.
         (b)   If a competitive rate is offered by a local banking institution,
the Village shall deposit their investment funds at the local institution. The
Finance Director will maintain a list of the financial institutions authorized
to provide investment services.
         (c)   Any financial institution seeking to become authorized for
investment transactions must submit their written confirmation of receipt of
this policy and certification of having read, understood and agreed to comply
with this policy. The Finance Director shall conduct an annual review of the
financial condition of the authorized financial institutions.
         (d)   Any financial institution selected shall provide normal banking
services including, but not limited to, checking accounts, wire transfers,
purchase and sale of investment securities and safekeeping services. Fees for
banking services shall be mutually agreed to by an authorized representative of
the depository bank and the Finance Director annually. Fees for services shall
be substantiated by a monthly account analysis (and shall be reimbursed by
means of compensating balances).
      (2)   Authorized investment advisors.
         (a)   The Village Treasurer or Finance Director, with the consent and
approval of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village (the "Village
Board") may appoint investment advisors. The investment advisor shall be a
fiduciary with respect to the security decisions and shall be one of the
following:
            1.   Investment advisor registered under the federal Investment
Advisors Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. §§ 80b-1, et seq.) and the Illinois Security
Law of 1953;
            2.   Bank or trust company authorized to conduct a trust business
in Illinois;
            3.   Life insurance company authorized to transact business in
Illinois;
            4.   Investment company as defined and registered under the
Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. §§ 80A-1, et seq.) and registered
under the Illinois Security Law of 1953.
         (b)   The investment advisor shall be a person who:
            1.   Has the power to manage, acquire, or dispose of any security;
            2.   Acknowledges in writing that he is a fiduciary with respect to
the Village's securities; and
            3.   Is either (i) registered as an investment advisor under the
Investment Advisors Act of 1940 (15 U.S.C. §§ 80b-1, et seq.); (ii) registered
as an investment advisor under the Illinois Security Law of 1953; (iii) a bank,
as defined in the Investment Advisors Act of 1940; or (iv) an insurance company
authorized to transact business in Illinois.
         (c)   All investment advice and services provided by an investment
advisor so appointed shall be rendered pursuant to written contract between the
investment advisor and Village and in accordance with this policy. The contract
shall include all of the following:
            1.   An acknowledgment in writing by the investment advisor that he
is a fiduciary with respect to the Village's securities;
            2.   This policy;
            3.   Full disclosure of direct and indirect fees, commission,
penalties, and any other compensation that may be received by the investment
advisor, including reimbursement for expenses; and
            4.   A requirement that the investment advisor submit periodic
written reports, on at least a quarterly basis, for regularly scheduled
meetings of the Village Board. All returns on investments shall be reported as
net returns after payment of all fees, commissions and any other compensation.
      (3)   Internal controls. The Finance Director is responsible for
establishing and maintaining an internal control structure designed to ensure
that the assets of the Village are protected from loss, theft or misuse. The
internal control structure shall be designed to provide reasonable assurance
that these objectives are met. The concept of reasonable assurance recognizes
that (i) the cost of a control should not exceed the benefits likely to be
derived, and (ii) the valuation of costs and benefits will require estimates
and judgments by management. To protect against potential fraud, embezzlement,
or losses caused by collapse of individual securities' dealers, all investment
securities purchase by the Village, including collateral on repurchase
agreements, shall be held by the Village or in safekeeping by the Village's
custodial bank or a third party bank trust department, acting as agent for the
Village under the terms of a custody or trustee agreement executed by the bank
or the Village. The primary agent shall issue a safekeeping receipt to the
Village listing the specific instrument, rate, maturity, or other pertinent
information. All securities' transactions conducted by the custodian on behalf
of the Village are to be on a delivery-versus payment (DVP) only basis.
Investment officials shall be bonded to protect the Village against loss due to
possible embezzlement and malfeasance.
   (G)   Criteria for qualified financial institutions. The Investment Act
establishes certain criteria be met for the placement of public funds in a
bank, savings and loan association or credit union. The requirements are:
      (1)   Investments may be made only in banks which are insured by the
Banking Insurance Fund of the F.D.I.C.
      (2)   No bank shall receive any public funds unless it has furnished the
Village Board with copies of the last 2 sworn statements of resources and
liabilities which the bank is required to furnish to the Commissioner of Banks
and Trust Companies or to the Comptroller of the Currency.
      (3)   Investments may be made only in those savings and loan associations
which are insured by the Savings Association Insurance Funds of the F.D.I.C.
      (4)   No savings and loan association shall receive public funds unless
it has furnished the corporate authorities of the Village with copies of the
last 2 sworn statements of resources and liabilities which the savings and loan
association is required to furnish to the Commissioner of Savings and Loan
Associations or the Federal Home Loan Bank.
      (5)   All financial institutions and broker/dealers who desire to become
qualified bidders for investment transactions must supply the Finance Director
with the following:
         (a)   Audited financial statements;
         (b)   Proof of National Association of Security Dealers certification;
         (c)   Trading resolution;
         (d)   Proof of state registration;
         (e)   Completed broker/dealer questionnaire;
         (f)   Certification of compliance with the policy; and
         (g)   Depository contracts.
   (H)   Collateralization.  
      (1)   Money on deposit at each savings institution which exceeds the
$100,000 limit insured by the F.D.I.C. shall be collateralized at a minimum of
110% by the institution at which these funds are held. Pledged collateral shall
be held in safekeeping by an escrow agency of the pledging institution. The
Village shall receive quarterly reports of the collateralization certificates
on deposit at a third-party custodial bank by the savings institution.
Collateralization will be provided through the following types of securities:
         (a)   U.S. Government Securities.
         (b)   Federal Agency Obligations.
         (c)   Federal Instrumentality Obligations.
         (d)   State of Illinois Obligations of the State of Illinois.
         (e)   General Obligation bonds of Illinois municipalities rated "A" or
better.
      (2)   Because the Village's funds will be fully collateralized by the
banking institution, no dollar limitation on the amount of the deposits and
investments is required.
   (I)   Investment and financial performance reporting.
      (1)   Investment Portfolio Reporting.
         (a)   Method. The Village Board shall receive a monthly report from
the Village Treasurer and the Finance Director on the state of the investment
portfolio. In addition, a comprehensive annual investment report should be
prepared. This report shall provide a review of the performance of the
Village's investment portfolio for the year and include a projection of future
performance based upon the prior year's results.
         (b)   Performance. The investment portfolio will be managed in
accordance with the parameters specified within this policy. The portfolio
should obtain a market average rate of return during a market/economic
environment of stable interest rates. The portfolio should be compared to the
market average rate on a regular basis.
      (2 )   Balanced budget. The Village shall operate within a balanced
budget (as defined herein) in each fiscal year. Not later than 45 days before
the end of each fiscal year, the Finance Director must submit to the President
and Board of Trustees the proposed balanced budget for the next fiscal year.
BALANCED BUDGET means, with respect to a fiscal year, a budget in each case
approved by the Board of Trustees in which (i) the amount of projected revenues
and the amount of projected expenses are equal, and (ii) any prior year
encumbrance (e.g., an expense incurred in the immediately preceding fiscal year
but not paid until the current fiscal year) is reflected in such budget as an
expense which is offset by a corresponding prior year fund balance relating to
such expense included in such budget.
      (3)   Financial reports. In addition to other financial reports required
to be prepared for the Village Board, the Finance Director shall provide or
cause to be provided to the Village Board these additional financial reports:
         (a)   Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, a copy of the
statement of financial position of the Village as of the end of the most
recently-completed fiscal year, and the related statements of activities and
changes in net assets, functional expenses and cash flows of the Village for
such fiscal year, setting forth in each case in comparative form the
corresponding figures as of the end of and for the preceding fiscal year, all
in reasonable detail and duly certified as correct by the Finance Director,
together with a certificate of the Finance Director stating that to their
knowledge no default or event of default on the Village's bonds has occurred,
and is continuing or, if a default or event of default has occurred and is
continuing, a statement setting forth the details of such default or event of
default and the action which the Village proposes to take with respect to such
default or event of default;
         (b)   Within 180 days after the end of each fiscal year, a copy of the
statement of financial position of the Village as of the end of such fiscal
year, and the related statements of activities and changes in net assets,
functional expenses and cash flows of the Village for such fiscal year, all in
reasonable detail and stating in comparative form the figures as of the end of
and for the previous fiscal year, audited or reviewed by the Village Auditor.
      (4)   Budget monitoring.
         (a)   Monthly. The Finance Director shall prepare monthly and
quarterly reports comparing the actual revenues and expenses with the budgeted
revenues and expenses (a budget-to-actual cash flow statement). By the twenty-
first day of each month, the Finance Director shall prepare a budget-to-actual
report for such month for (i) all funds of the Village, taken together, (ii)
the Village’s Water and Sewer Fund, and (iii) the Village’s Garbage Fund. Prior
to the second meeting of the Village Board during such month (or if the second
meeting of the Board precedes the twenty-first day, at the first meeting of the
Village Board during the next month), the Fiscal Accountability and Government
Transparency Committee shall meet to review the monthly budget-to-actual cash
flow statement with the Finance Director. At the second meeting of the Village
Board during such month (or if no meeting is held, at the first meeting held by
the Village Board during the next month) the Finance Director or Fiscal
Accountability and Government Transparency Committee shall report to the
Village Board with respect to such monthly budget-to-actual cash flow statement
and the proposed action, if any, to be taken by the Village with respect to the
remainder of the then current fiscal year as a result of such monthly budget-
to-actual cash flow statement.
         (b)   Quarterly. By the thirtieth day of the month following the end
of each fiscal quarter, the Finance Director shall submit to the Village Board
a report showing the actual versus budgeted revenues and expenses for such
fiscal quarter (a "quarterly budget-to-actual cash flow statement").
   (J)   Village management; Finance Department.
      (1)   Village Manager. The Village shall at all times retain a Village
Manager with the following qualifications: a Bachelor of Arts or Science degree
and either (i) a Masters in Public Administration or Masters in Business
Administration and not less than 5 years' experience in management in
government, or (ii) not less than 7 years' experience in management in
government.
      (2)   Finance Director. The Village shall at all times retain a Finance
Director with the following qualifications: either (i) a Bachelor of Arts or
Science degree in finance or accounting or a related field and not less than 7
years' experience in governmental accounting, or (ii) a certified public
accountant with not less than 5 years' experience and specialization in
governmental accounting.
      (3)   Finance Department. The Village shall at all times retain a Finance
Department headed by a Finance Director having a capable staff to perform the
following functions; budget, payroll, collections, payables, utility billing,
reconciliation and general bookkeeping; provided that nothing in this section
shall prohibit the Village from retaining a firm selected by the Village to
provide the functions of a Finance Department if the quality and quantity of
employees of such firm otherwise satisfy this division (J)(3).
      (4)   Vacancy in position. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Village
shall, upon the resignation or dismissal of the Village Manager or Finance
Director, retain a person meeting the applicable requirements set forth above
to fill such vacant position (including in the capacity of Acting Village
Manager or Acting Finance Director, as appropriate) within 90 days of the date
such position is vacated.
   (K)   Indemnification. The Village Treasurer and Finance Director, who are
responsible for the investment program, assume a unique responsibility for not
only realizing an acceptable rate of return on the monies invested, but also
safeguarding the monies against loss. The very nature of this responsibility
exposes the Village Treasurer and Finance Director to certain risks. The
Village Treasurer and Finance Director, acting in accordance with this policy,
shall be relieved of personal responsibility for an individual security's
credit risk or market price changes provided that deviations from expectation
are reported in a timely fashion and appropriate action is taken to control
adverse developments.
   (L)   Working Capital Reserve Fund.
      (1)   The Village shall establish a Working Capital Reserve Fund (the
“Fund”) for the purpose of enabling the Village to have in its treasury at all
times sufficient money to meet demands thereon for ordinary and necessary
expenditures for corporate purposes, and shall at all times maintain a balance
of $2,000,000, except for time periods in which the Village has received moneys
transferred from the Fund for the uses as stated herein and is waiting for the
receipt of semi-annual property tax collections or other moneys to repay such
funds as set forth below. Moneys in the Fund shall not be regarded as current
assets available for Village purposes. The Village Board may appropriate moneys
to the Fund up to the maximum amount allowable in the Fund, and the Fund may
receive such appropriations and any other contributions.
      (2)   Moneys in the Fund shall not be used by the Village Board in any
manner other than to provide moneys with which to meet ordinary and necessary
disbursements for salaries, operating expenses and other Village purposes, and
may be transferred, in whole or in part, to the general corporate fund or
another fund of the Village and disbursed therefrom in anticipation of the
collection of taxes lawfully levied for any or all purposes. Moneys so
transferred to any other fund shall be deemed to be transferred in anticipation
of the collection of that part of the taxes so levied or to be received, and
such taxes when collected shall be applied to the reimbursement of the Fund.
Upon receipt by the Village of any taxes, in anticipation of the collection
whereof, moneys of the Fund have been so transferred for disbursement, the Fund
shall immediately be reimbursed therefrom until the full amount so transferred
has been retransferred to the Fund.
      (3)   (a)   Repayment schedule for $997,787.70 draw from the Working
Capital Reserve Fund (approved by the Village Board by Ordinance No. CO-2011-16
on September 20, 2011, and Resolution No. R-2011-36 on December 20, 2011):
Payment of $200,905 on April 30, 2012, and monthly payments of $27,716.33 shall
be due on May 31, 2012, and each consecutive month through and including April
30, 2013, and monthly payments of $38,691.39 shall be due on May 31, 2013, and
each consecutive month through and including April 30, 2014, in order to repay
the Fund.
         (b)   Repayment schedule for $266,500 draw from the Working Capital
Reserve Fund (2014 first draw approved by the Village Board by Ordinance No.
CO- 2014-05 and Resolution No. R-2014-01 on January 21, 2014): In order to
repay the $266,500 draw, the Village shall make 12 consecutive monthly payments
equal to one-twelfth of $266,500 on the first day of each month, with the
initial monthly payment being made on or before June 1, 2014, and the final
payment being made on or before June 1, 2015, in order to repay the Fund.
         (c)   Repayment schedule for $120,400 draw from the Working Capital
Reserve Fund (2014 second draw approved by the Village Board by Ordinance No.
CO-2014-15 and Resolution No. R-2014-08 on April 2, 2014): In order to repay
the $120,400 draw, the Village shall make 12 consecutive monthly payments equal
to one-twelfth of $120,400 on the first day of each month, with the initial
monthly payment being made on or before June 1, 2014, and the final payment
being made on or before June 1, 2015, in order to repay the Fund.
         (d)   Repayment schedule for not to exceed $135,000 draw from the
Working Capital Reserve Fund (2014 third draw approved by the Village Board by
Ordinance No. CO-2014-43 and Resolution No. R-2014-20 on December 10, 2014): In
order to repay the not to exceed amount of $135,000 draw, the village shall
make 18 consecutive monthly payments equal to one-eighteenth of $135,000 on the
first day of each month, with the initial monthly payment being made on or
before June 1, 2015, and the final payment being made on or before November 1,
2016, in order to repay the Fund.
         (e)   Repayment schedule for not to exceed $30,200 draw from the
Working Capital Reserve Fund (2015 first draw approved by the Village Board by
Ordinance No. CO-2015-10 and Resolution No. R-201510 on April 21, 2015): In
order to repay the not to exceed amount of $30,200 draw, the village shall make
18 consecutive monthly payments equal to one-eighteenth of $30,200 on the first
day of each month, with the initial monthly payment being made on or before
June 1, 2015, and the final payment being made on or before November 1, 2016,
in order to repay the Fund.
         (f)   Repayment schedule for not to exceed $21,450.55 draw from the
Working Capital Reserve Fund (2015 second draw approved by the Village Board by
Ordinance No. CO-2015-19 and Resolution No. R-2015-20 on July 7, 2015): In
order to repay the not to exceed amount of $21,450.55 draw, the Village shall
make 18 consecutive monthly payments equal to one-eighteenth of $21,450.55 on
the first day of each month, with the initial monthly payment being made on or
before September 1, 2015, and the final payment being made on or before March
1, 2017, in order to repay the Fund.
         (g)   Repayment schedule for not to exceed $285,215.93 draw from the
Working Capital Reserve Fund (2017 first draw approved by the Village Board by
Ordinance No. CO-2017-30 and Resolution No. R-2017-43 on August 15, 2017): In
order to repay the not to exceed amount of $285,215.93 draw, the Village shall
make 18 consecutive monthly payments equal to one-eighteenth of $285.213.93 on
the first day of each month, with the initial monthly payment being made on or
before October 1, 2017, and the final payment being made on or before March 1,
2019, in order to repay the Fund.
         (h)   Repayment schedule for not to exceed $1,000,004.01 draw from the
Working Capital Reserve Fund (2018 first draw approved by the Village Board by
Ordinance No. CO-2018-09 and Resolution No. R-2018-05 on March 6, 2018): In
order to replay the 2018 first draw in an amount not to exceed $1,000,004.01,
the Village shall make 18consecutive monthly payments equal to one-eighteenth
of $1,000,041.01 on the first day of each month, with the initial monthly
payment being made on or before May 1, 2018 and the final payment being made on
or before November 1, 2019, in order to repay the Fund.
         (i)   Repayment schedule for an amount of not to exceed $415,692 draw
from the Working Capital Reserve Fund (2019 first draw approved by the Village
Board by Ordinance No. CO-2019-07 and Resolution No. R-2019-05 on March 5,
2019): In order to repay the 2019 First Draw in an amount not to exceed
$415.692.00, the Village shall make 12 consecutive monthly payments equal to
one-twelfth of $415,692 or $34,641 on the first day of each month, with the
initial monthly payment being made on or before May 1, 2019, and the final
payment being made on or before May 1, 2020, in order to repay the Fund.
      (4)   Moneys, including interest earned from investment of the Fund,
shall be transferred from the Fund to another fund of the Village only upon the
authority of the Village Board, which shall from time to time by separate
resolution direct the Village Treasurer to make transfers of such sums as may
be required for the purposes herein authorized. Moneys earned as interest from
the investment of the Fund, or any portion thereof, may be transferred from the
Fund to another fund of the Village without any requirement of repayment to the
Fund, upon the authority of the Village Board by separate resolution directing
the Village Treasurer to make such transfer, and stating the purpose therefor
as one authorized under Illinois law. The investment of moneys on deposit in
the Fund shall be governed by this policy.
   (M)   Policy considerations.
      (1)   Exemption. Any investment currently held that does not meet the
guidelines of this policy shall be exempted from the requirements of this
policy. At maturity or liquidation, such monies shall be reinvested only as
provided by this policy.
      (2)   Amendment. This policy shall be reviewed periodically. Any changes
must be approved by the Village Treasurer, the Finance Director and the Village
Board.
(Ord. , passed - -1999; Am. Ord. C0-05-08, passed 2-7-2005; Am. Ord. CO-2011-
16, passed 9-20-2011; Am. Ord. CO-2011-24, passed 9-20-2011; Am. Ord. CO-2012-
28, passed 8-21-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2014-05, passed 1-21-2014; Am. Ord. CO-2014-
15, passed 4-2-2014; Am. Ord. CO-2014-43, passed 12-10- 2014; Am. Ord. CO-2015-
10, passed 4-21-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2015-19, passed 7-7-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2017-
30, passed 8-15-2017; Am. Ord. CO-2018-09, passed 3-6-2018; Am. Ord. CO-2019-
07, passed 3-5-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2021-20, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 36.08 CONTRACTS AND PURCHASES.
   (A)   Competitive bidding procedures.
      (1)   Competitive bidding required. Any work or other public improvement
which is not to be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment and all
purchases of, and contracts for supplies, materials and services shall, except
as specifically provided herein, be based whenever possible on competitive
bids.
      (2)   Formal contracts.
         (a)   All work or other public improvement which is not to be paid for
in whole or in part by special assessment, except as otherwise provided herein,
when the estimated cost thereof shall exceed $20,000 shall be purchased by
formal, written contract from the lowest qualified and responsible bidder,
after due notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding is waived by a
majority vote of the corporate authorities.
         (b)   All single purchases of, and individual contracts for supplies,
materials and/or services, except as otherwise provided herein, when the
estimated cost thereof shall exceed $10,000, shall be purchased by formal
written contract from the lowest qualified and responsible bidder, after due
notice inviting bids, unless competitive bidding is waived by a majority vote
of the corporate authorities. When no single purchase of or individual contract
for, specific types of supplies, materials or services exceeds $10,000, but the
total dollar value of all purchases and/or contracts for said specific types of
supplies, materials or services during the Village’s fiscal year does exceed
said amount, said purchases and/or contracts shall be handled as set forth in
division (C) of this section, at the lowest obtainable price, from the most
qualified, responsible contractor/vendor. It is not the intent of this division
to encourage the circumvention of the bidding requirements and, to the extent
practicable, Village staff is encouraged to rely upon the competitive bidding
process. Rather, the competitive bidding exemption provided by this division is
intended to recognize and address those situations in which a competitive
bidding requirement is not necessarily practicable, and can be eliminated
without jeopardizing the Village’s ability to obtain a low and competitive
price from a qualified responsible contractor/vendor. Except for items or
services routinely used in the course of Village business on a frequent basis
purchased from one supplier.
      (3)   Notice inviting bids.
         (a)   Publication. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least
once in a newspaper with a general circulation within the Village. The
newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the
work to be performed or the articles to be purchased, shall state where
specifications may be secured, the time, place and manner for submitting a bid,
and the time and place for opening bids.
         (b)   Posting. The Village shall also advertise all pending work or
purchases by posting a notice on the public bulletin board in the Village Hall
and at Council Chambers.
         (c)   These posting requirements shall also include the information
required under division (D) of this section.
      (4)   Bid deposits. When deemed necessary by the President and Board of
Trustees, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids.
Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the return of their bid deposit upon
the award of the contract by the President and Board of Trustees. A successful
bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit required by the President and Board of
Trustees upon failure on their part to enter into a contract within 10 days
after the award.
      (5)   Performance bonds. The Village Manager shall have the authority to
require performance bonds before allowing the Village to enter into a contract
in such an amount as they shall find reasonable and necessary to protect the
best interests of the Village. Such performance bonds will be required for all
contracts involving public improvements or purchases where materials and labor
are involved. On purchases of material only, a warranty will be required for
the specific use of the material.
      (6)   Submittal and award of bids.
         (a)   Bids shall be submitted to the Village and shall be identified
as bids on the envelope. Bids should include Federal Employer Tax
Identification Number or Social Security Number (for individuals), and
information relevant to the considerations set forth in subdivision (e) below,
including information on whether the bidder is a Minority Business Enterprise,
Women’s Business Enterprise, or Persons with Disability Enterprise (MBE/WBE/
PBE) or will use MBE, WBE, or PBE subcontractors. For the purpose of
determining whether a bidder qualifies as a MBE, WBE, or PBE, the Village
adopts the definitions contained in Section 2 of the Business Enterprise for
Minorities, Females, and Persons with Disabilities Act (30 ILCS 575/2),
including the definitions contained therein of the terms minority person,
female, person with a disability, minority owned business, female owned
business, and business owned by a person with a disability. Proof of current
certification as a MBE/WBE/PBE through the State Business Enterprise Program
for Minorities, Females, and Persons with Disabilities, or similar
certification with Cook County, the City of Chicago, the Chicago Minority
Business Development Council, Women’s Business Development Center or the
Illinois Department of Transportation or other similar federal, state or county
agency should accompany all bids for which qualification as a MBE/WBE/PBE is
sought.
         (b)   Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in
the public notices, and conform to the requirements of division (D) of this
section.
         (c)   A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the Village
Manager, Finance Director, or their designee and the tabulation of the bids
with a recommendation from Village staff shall be furnished to the President
and Board of Trustees at its next regular meeting.
         (d)   The President and Board of Trustees shall have the sole
authority to reject all bids or parts of all bids. The Village shall not accept
the bid of a contractor who is in default on the payment of taxes, licenses or
other monies due the Village, the County of Cook or the State of Illinois.
         (e)   The President and Board of Trustees shall have the authority to
award contracts within the purview of this section. Unless rejected in whole or
in part, contracts shall be awarded to the lowest qualified and responsible
bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interest of the Village to
accept. In awarding a contract, in addition to price, the President and Board
of Trustees shall consider any 1 or more of the following items for purposes of
determining the lowest qualified and responsible bidders:
            1.   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract to provide the service required;
            2.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the
service promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
            3.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
            4.   The quality of performance of previous contracts or services;
            5.   Whether the bidder is a Minority Business Enterprise, Women's
Business Enterprise, or Person with Disability Business Enterprise (MBE/WBE/
PBE) or will use MBE, WBE, or PBE subcontractors. For the purpose of
determining whether a bidder qualifies as a MBE, WBE, or PBE, the Village
adopts the definitions contained in Section 2 of the Business Enterprise for
Minorities, Females, and Persons with Disabilities Act (30 ILCS 575/2),
including the definitions contained therein of the terms minority person,
female, person with a disability, minority owned business, female owned
business, and business owned by a person with a disability. Proof of current
certification as a MBE/WBE/PBE through the State Business Enterprise Program
for Minorities, Females, and Persons with Disabilities, or similar
certification with Cook County, the City of Chicago, the Chicago Minority
Business Development Council, Women's Business Development Center or the
Illinois Department of Transportation should accompany all bids for which
qualification as a MBE/WBE/PBE is sought;
            6.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws
and ordinances relating to the contract or service, including all applicable
provisions of the Illinois Human Rights Act, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964, as amended, the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act, Section 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation
Act, and all applicable rules and regulations;
            7.   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
            8.   The quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
            9.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and
service for the use of the subject of the contract;
            10.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid;
            11   Distance Village staff will have to travel to bidder’s place
of business;
            12.   Compliance with all applicable laws and Village Code and
ordinance prerequisites to doing business in Illinois and the Village,
including required Village licenses;
            13.   Evidence of sufficient insurance coverage, including
certificates of insurance indicating at least the following coverage at minimum
limits established by the Village: general liability, worker's compensation,
completed operations, automobile, hazardous occupation, product liability, and
professional liability;
            14.    Participation in apprenticeship and training programs
approved and registered with the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of
Apprenticeship and Training;
            15.   Adoption of a Sexual Harassment Policy pursuant to 775 ILCS
5/2-105;
            16.   Furnishing of required performance and payment bonds;
            17.   Submission of a contractor's drug-free workplace
certification;
            18.   Submission of an indemnity and hold harmless agreement; and
            19.   Submission of an anti-collusion affidavit of compliance.
         (f)   Each bid must contain a certification that it is an “Equal
Opportunity Employer” and that its officers, corporate authorities, employees
and agents are not barred from entering into a contract with the Village as a
result of a violation of either 720 ILCS 5/33E-3 or 5/33E-4 (bid rigging or bid
rotating) or 5/33E-6 (interference with contract submission and award by public
official); or as a result of a violation of 820 ILCS 130/1 et seq. (the
Illinois Prevailing Wage Act); or as a result of a delinquency in the payment
of any tax administered by the Illinois Department of Revenue or any fee
required by any unit of local government or the state, unless the party is
contesting, in accordance with the procedures established by the appropriate
revenue act, its liability for the tax or the amount of the tax or the fee, as
set forth in § 11-42.1-1 et seq. of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/11-
42.1-1 et seq.
         (g)   The Village will reject in its entirety any bid if the entity or
individual submitting the bid is excluded from receiving certain federal
contracts, subcontracts, and financial and non-financial assistance and
benefits. The Village will, prior to awarding a contract, utilize the “System
for Award Management” or other equivalent U.S. Government-owned and -operated
system to search all potential bids for the presence of exclusion records
commonly known as “suspensions” and “debarments”. The Village shall retain
documentation related to the search in its records. If it is determined that
the entity or individual is excluded from receiving the potential contract
based on this search, the bid will be rejected in its entirety.
   (B)   Solicitation of competitive proposals. The President and Board of
Trustees may waive the competitive bidding process by a 2/3 vote of the
corporate authorities and direct the Village Manager to solicit competitive
proposals for the award of any contract that comes within the purview of this
section. The justification for waiving the competitive bidding process in lieu
of the solicitation of competitive proposals may include any of the
considerations set forth in division (A)(6)(e) of this section as well as the
following:
      (1)   Availability of only a single source vendor or a limited number of
known vendors; and
      (2)   Financial savings realized by not utilizing the competitive bidding
process.
   (C)   Open market procedure.  
      (1)   All work and purchase of supplies, materials and services of less
than the estimated value of $10,000, respectively, shall be made in the open
market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure
prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts. However, all work
and purchases covered by this section shall conform to the requirements
detailed in this division and outlined below in Table 1, Open Market Procedure
Approval Limits.
      (2)   For the purchase of supplies, materials and services with an
estimated value of $500 or less, the approval of the Department Director is
required.
      (3)   For the purchase of supplies, materials and services with an
estimated value greater than $500.01, but less than the estimated value of
$3,000, the approval of the Department Director and Village Manager or his or
her designee is required and 1 or more quotes from qualified vendors must be
obtained and documented. In addition, a written description of the item sought,
the purpose of use, and a cover memo showing at least 1 obtained quote shall be
provided to the Department Director and Village Manager or his or her designee.
      (4)   For the purchase of supplies, materials and services with an
estimated value greater than $3,000.01, but less than the estimated value of
$5,000, the approval of the Department Director and Village Manager or his or
her designee is required, 2 or more quotes from qualified vendors must be
obtained and documented, and a written description of the item sought, the
purpose of use, and a cover memo showing 2 or more quotes shall be provided to
the Village Manager or his or her designee.
      (5)   For the purchase of supplies, materials and services with an
estimated value greater than $5,000.01, but less than the estimated value of
$10,000, the approval of the Village Manager or his or her designee and Board
of Trustees is required and the following documentation shall be provided to
the Village Manager:
         (a)   A written description of the item or service sought, the purpose
of use, and the cost and benefits to the Village;
         (b)   Three or more quotes from qualified vendors; and
         (c)   A cover memo showing the 3 quotes, the name of the vendor, and
the amount of the quote.
      (6)   For purposes of this section, a QUALIFIED VENDOR is a qualified,
responsible contractor/vendor pursuant to the criteria set forth in division
(A)(6)(e) of this section for qualified and responsible bidders and who is a
person or entity legally doing business in Illinois, provides the item or
service sought for sale or contract, and has the ability and capacity to
provide the item sought promptly or within the time specified.
      (7)   This section shall apply to purchases using any and all Village
funds, including, without limitation, purchases made from segregated
departmental funds, including, for example and without limitation, Police
Department 1505 funds.
   TABLE 1. OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE APPROVAL LIMITS
 
                                                                  $10,000.01 to
              $0 to      $500.01 to    $3,000.01 to $5,000.01 to  $20,000.00
Dollar Limits $500.00    $3,000.00     $5,000.00    $10,000.00    (Public
                                                                  Improvements
                                                                  Only)*
                                                    Department    Department
                         Department    Department   director,     director,
                         director and  director and Village       Village
Approval      Department Village       Village      Manager or    Manager or
Level         director   Manager or    Manager or   his or her    his or her
                         his or her    his or her   designee, and designee, and
                         designee      designee     Board of      Board of
                                                    Trustees      Trustees
                                                    approval      approval
                                                    Written       Written
                                                    description   description
                                                    of the item   of the item
                                       A written    sought, the   sought, the
                         A written     description  purpose of    purpose of
                         description   of the item  use, and the  use, and the
                         of the item   sought, the  costs and     costs and
                         sought, the   purpose of   benefits to   benefits to
Documentation            purpose of    use, and a   the Village,  the Village,
Required      None       use, and a    cover memo   3 quotes from 3 quotes from
                         cover memo    showing 2 or qualified     qualified
                         showing quote more quotes  vendors, and  vendors, and
                         (s) from      from         a cover memo  a cover memo
                         qualified     qualified    showing the 3 showing the 3
                         vendor(s)     vendor(s)    quotes, the   quotes, the
                                                    name of the   name of the
                                                    vendors, and  vendors, and
                                                    the amount of the amount of
                                                    the quotes    the quotes
                         Minimum 1 or  Minimum 2 or Minimum 3 or  Minimum 3 or
Competitive              more quotes   more quotes  more quotes   more quotes
Process       None       from          from         from          from
                         qualified     qualified    qualified     qualified
                         vendors       vendors      vendors       vendors
* Non public improvements over $10,000 must be competitively bid under division
(A) requirements.
 
   (D)   Prevailing wage. Each contract awarded and bid sought that involves
contractors whom the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act covers, and that uses Village
funds, (affected contract or affected bid), shall comply with the following
guidelines and notification procedures, regardless of the manner in which the
contract was awarded:
      (1)   All bid specifications issued for an affected bid shall list the
current specified prevailing wage rates for all laborers, workers, and
mechanics in the locality for each craft or type of worker or mechanic needed
to execute the contract (as tabulated annually by the Illinois Department of
Labor for Cook County pursuant to the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, 820 ILCS
130/1, et seq.).
      (2)   All affected contracts, affected bids, notices and bid
specifications issued or executed for an affected bid or affected contract by
the Village shall require that not less than the prevailing wage rate, as
tabulated annually by the Illinois Department of Labor for Cook County pursuant
to the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, (820 ILCS 130/1, et seq.), be paid to all
laborers, workers, and mechanics performing work under the contract. Should any
affected bid or affected contract not contain such provisions, it shall not be
considered binding upon the Village.
      (3)   All affected contracts, affected bids, notices and bid
specifications issued or executed for an affected bid or affected contract by
the Village shall include the following language:
"All specifications issued by [the General Contractor] to any proposed
subcontractor shall include references to the payment of all applicable
prevailing wages as tabulated annually by the Illinois Department of Labor for
Cook County pursuant to the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, 820 ILCS 130/1, et
seq. Should any bid or contract not contain such provisions, it shall not be
considered binding upon the Village."
      (4)   All affected contracts, affected bids, notices and bid
specifications issued or executed for an affected bid or affected contract by
the Village shall include the following language:
"All specifications issued by any subcontractor to any proposed lower tiered
subcontractor shall include references to the payment of all applicable
prevailing wages as tabulated annually by the Illinois Department of Labor for
Cook County pursuant to the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, 820 ILCS 130/1, et
seq. Should any bid or contract not contain such provisions, it shall not be
considered binding upon the Village."
      (5)   All affected contracts, affected bids, notices and bid
specifications issued or executed for an affected bid or affected contract by
the Village shall include the following language:
"All contractors and subcontractors hired by the Village of Maywood shall
comply with all requirements of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, 820 ILCS 130/
1, et seq., including the requirement that the current prevailing wage rates as
determined annually by the Illinois Department of Labor for Cook County be
posted at any and all job sites relating to this contract."
      (6)   All affected contracts, affected bids, notices and bid
specifications issued or executed for an affected bid or affected contract by
the Village shall contain reference to this section.
   (E)   Professional services. All contracts for professional services,
including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers, real estate appraisers,
auditors, architects and Village planners may be entered into by the Village
without observing the bidding procedures prescribed by this section for the
award of formal contracts, so long as the statutory requirements for entering
into such contracts are otherwise complied with.
   (F)   Emergency purchases. In case of an apparent emergency which requires
immediate work or purchase of supplies, materials or services, the President
and Board of Trustees or Village Manager (or their designee) shall be empowered
to secure by open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest
obtainable price, any work, supplies, materials or services regardless of the
amount of the expenditure. However, all work and purchases covered by this
section shall conform to the requirements detailed in division (D) of this
section.
   (G)   Cooperative purchasing. The Village shall have the authority to join
with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best
interest of the Village would be served thereby.
   (H)   Utilities, U.S. Mail and insurance. All contracts for utility services
(electricity, natural gas and telecommunications services), U.S. mail services,
and insurance may be entered into by the Village without observing the bidding
procedures prescribed by this section for the award of formal contracts.
   (I)   Procurement of products made from recycled materials. Where practical,
it shall be the policy of the Village that in purchasing materials, office
supplies and other products used by the Village, the Village shall attempt to
procure materials, office supplies and other products that are made in whole or
in part with recycled materials, to the extent that the cost of such materials,
office supplies and/or other products do/does not exceed the cost of similar
materials, office supplies and/or other products available in the market place,
and not made of recycled materials, by more than 10%.
(Ord. 19, passed 6-20-2006; Am. Ord. CO-2017-19, passed 5-16-2017; Am. Ord.
2017-34, passed 9-19-2017; Am. Ord. CO-2025-24, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 36.09 BUDGET SYSTEM; BUDGET OFFICER.
   (A)   Statutes adopted. The Village hereby adopts 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through
and including 8-2-9.10, providing for an annual municipal budget in lieu of the
passage of an annual appropriation ordinance.
   (B)   Budget Officer.
      (1)   Appointment. The Village President with the approval of the Board
of Trustees, shall appoint a Budget Officer who shall have the powers, duties
and responsibilities enumerated in 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 through and including 8-2-
9.10, as amended.
      (2)   Bond. Before entering upon the duties of their office, the Budget
Officer shall execute an oath of office and shall furnish a surety bond in such
amount and form as is approved by the Village Board, such bond to be
conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties. The premium of the
bond shall be paid by the Village.
      (3)   Duties. The Budget Officer shall compile a budget pursuant to the
above sections of the Illinois Compiled Statutes as they are now, or may
hereafter be amended, containing estimates of the revenues available before the
beginning of the fiscal year to which it applies, together with recommended
expenditures for the Village and all of its boards, commissions and
departments, with the budget being adopted by the President and Board of
Trustees prior to the first day of each fiscal year. The Budget Officer shall
be responsible for ensuring that the budget is timely filed with the proper
government agencies as required by state statute.
      (4)   Removal from office. The Budget Officer may be removed at any time
by a majority vote of the President and Board of Trustees. The action of the
President and Board of Trustees in removing the Budget Officer shall be final.
   (C)   Preliminary budget. Copies of the preliminary annual budget shall be
made available for public inspection in typewritten form in the Officer of the
Village Clerk for at least 10 days prior to the passage of the annual budget,
and not less than 1 week after the budget is available for inspection, and
prior to final action on the budget, at least 1 public hearing shall be held on
the budget by the President and Board of Trustees. Notice of this hearing shall
be given by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in the
Village at least 1 week prior to the time of the hearing.
   (D)   Budget revisions.
      (1)   Authority. The President and Board of Trustees may delegate
authority to the Village Manager, Budget Officer or Director of Finance to
delete, add to, or change items previously budgeted to the department, board or
commission, subject to such limitation or requirement for prior approval by the
Village Manager as the President and Board of Trustees, upon a 2/3 vote, may
establish. The Village Manager may revise or alter the annual budget by
changing line items in the same category without Board approval.
      (2)   Vote on revisions. The annual budget may be revised by a vote of 2/
3 of the President and Board of Trustees by deleting, adding to or changing
budgeted items.
      (3)   Restrictions on revisions. No revision of the budget items shall be
made which result in increasing the total budget unless funds are available to
effectuate the purpose of the revision.
      (4)   Emergency budget revisions; borrowing money.
         (a)   Notwithstanding the limitation of this section, the President
and Board of Trustees, by 2/3 vote, may make emergency revisions to the annual
budget for:
            1.   Improvements or restorations made necessary for any casualty
or accident; or
            2.   To meet any unforeseen emergency requiring immediate action to
prevent the spread of disease or avoid imminent danger to persons or property.
         (b)   For this purpose, the President and Board of Trustees, by a like
vote, may authorize the President and the Finance Committee to borrow the
amount of money necessary therefor for a space of time not extending beyond the
close of the next fiscal year. The sum so borrowed and the interest thereon
shall be added to and included in the amount authorized to be raised in the
next general tax levy.
         (c)   Should any judgment be obtained against the Village, the
President and the Finance Committee, under sanction of the Board of Trustees,
may borrow a sufficient amount to pay the same for a space of time expiring not
later than the close of the next fiscal year, which sum and interest shall, in
like manner, be added to and included in the amount authorized to be raised in
the general tax levy of the next year.
(Ord. C0-08-19, passed 5-6-2008)
§ 36.10 TIF DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Establishment of TIF Districts.
      (1)   St. Charles Road TIF District. The President and Board of Trustees
of the Village of Maywood established and have taken other action with regard
to the St. Charles Road Tax Increment Financing District (referred to as the
“St. Charles Road TIF District”) with the adoption of the following ordinances:
         (a)   Ordinance No. PRO-90-3 (Amending Ordinance No. PRO-90-1 and
Designating the Village of Maywood St. Charles Road Tax Increment Financing
District Redevelopment Project Area) (Approval Date: August 23,1990).
         (b)   Ordinance No. PRO-90-5 (Approving the Village of Maywood St.
Charles Road Tax Increment Financing District Redevelopment Project Area
Redevelopment Plan and Project) (Approval Date: August 23,1990).
         (c)   Ordinance No. PRO-90-6 (Designating the Village of Maywood St.
Charles Road Tax Increment Financing District Redevelopment Project Area)
(Approval Date: August 23, 1990).
         (d)   Maywood Ordinance No. PRO-7 (Adopting Tax Increment Financing
for the Village of Maywood St. Charles Road Tax Increment Financing District)
(Approval Date: August 23,1990).
         (e)   Ordinance No. CO-2013-10 (An Ordinance Confirming The Adoption
Of Tax Increment Allocation Financing For The Village Of Maywood St. Charles
Road Redevelopment Project Area) (Approval Date: April 23, 2013).
         (f)   Ordinance No. CO-2013-11 (Confirming The Designation Of The
Village Of Maywood St. Charles Road Redevelopment Project Area As A
Redevelopment Project Area Pursuant To The Tax Increment Allocation
Redevelopment Act) (Approval Date: April 23, 2013).
         (g)   Ordinance No. CO-2013-20 (Approving An Amendment To The Tax
Increment Redevelopment Plan And Project For The Village Of Maywood St. Charles
Road Redevelopment Project Area, And Amending Ordinance PRO-90-5, Adopted
August 23, 1990, Regarding The St. Charles Road Redevelopment Plan And Project
And Its Expiration Date) (Approval Date: April 23, 2013).
         (h)   Termination: Ordinance No. CO-2013-43 (Terminating The
Designation Of The St. Charles Road Tax Increment Financing Redevelopment
Project Area, As Created By Ordinance Number PRO-90-7, Adopted August 23, 1990,
As Amended By Ordinance Number CO-2013-11, Adopted March 13, 2013, As A Tax
Increment Financing Redevelopment Project Area And Dissolving The St. Charles
Road Tax Increment Financing District Special Tax Allocation Fund On December
31, 2014) (Approval Date: October 30, 2013).
      (2)   Madison Street/Fifth Avenue TIF District. The President and Board
of Trustees of the Village of Maywood established and have taken other action
with regard to the Madison Street/Fifth Avenue Tax Increment Financing District
(referred to as the “Madison Street/Fifth Avenue TIF District”) with the
adoption of the following ordinances:
         (a)   Ordinance No. CO-97-01 (Approving the Village of Maywood Madison
Street/Fifth Avenue Tax Increment Financing District Redevelopment Project Area
Redevelopment Plan and Project) (Approval Date: March 27,1997).
         (b)   Ordinance No. CO-97-02 (Designating the Village of Maywood
Madison Street/Fifth Avenue Tax Increment Financing District Redevelopment
Project Area) (Approval Date: March 27,1997).
         (c)   Ordinance No. CO-97-03 (Adoption Of Tax Increment Allocation
Financing For The Village Of Maywood Madison Street/Fifth Avenue Redevelopment
Project Area) (Approval Date: March 27,1997).
         (d)   Ordinance No. CO-2013-12 (Amending Ordinance CO-97-01, Adopted
March 27, 1997, Regarding The Expiration Date Of The Madison Street/5th Avenue
Redevelopment Plan And Project) (Approval Date: March 13, 2013).
         (e)   Ordinance No. CO-2020-37 (An Ordinance Approving A Minor
Amendment To The First Amendment To The Redevelopment Project And Plan For The
Village Of Maywood Madison Street/Fifth Avenue Tax Increment Financing
District) (Approval Date: December 15, 2020).
         (f)   Ordinance No. CO-2020-39 (An Ordinance Designating The Village
Of Maywood Madison Street/Fifth Avenue Tax Increment Financing District For An
Additional 12 Year Term In Accordance With The First Amendment To Redevelopment
Project And Plan For The TIF District) (Approval Date: December 29, 2020).
         (g)   Ordinance No. CO-2020-40 (An Ordinance Approving The First
Amendment To Redevelopment Project And Plan For The Village Of Maywood Madison
Street/Fifth Avenue Tax Increment Financing District Relative To A 12 Year Term
Extension Of The Duration Of The TIF District, An Amendment To The TIF District
Budget To Increase Estimated Redevelopment Project Costs, And An Amendment To
Update And Expand The List Of Eligible Redevelopment Project Costs Allowed
Under The Current Version Of The TIF Act) (Approval Date: December 29, 2020).
         (h)   Ordinance No. CO-2020-41 (An Ordinance Adopting Tax Increment
Financing For The Village Of Maywood Madison Street / Fifth Avenue Tax
Increment Financing District For An Additional 12 Year Term In Accordance With
The First Amendment To Redevelopment Project And Plan For The TIF District)
(Approval Date: December 29, 2020).
      (3)   Roosevelt Road TIF District. The President and Board of Trustees of
the Village of Maywood established and have taken other action with regard to
the Roosevelt Road Tax Increment Financing District (referred to as the
“Roosevelt Road TIF District”) with the adoption of the following ordinances:
         (a)   Ordinance No. CO-97-04 (Approving the Village of Maywood
Roosevelt Road Tax Increment Financing District Redevelopment Project Area
Redevelopment Plan and Project) (Approval Date: March 27,1997).
         (b)   Ordinance No. CO-97-05 (Designating the Village of Maywood
Roosevelt Road Tax Increment Financing District Redevelopment Project Area)
(Approval Date: March 27, 1997).
         (c)   Ordinance No. CO-97-06 (Adoption Of Tax Increment Allocation
Financing For The Village Of Maywood Roosevelt Road Redevelopment Project Area)
(Approval Date: March 27, 1997).
         (d)   Ordinance No. CO-2013-13 (Amending Ordinance CO-97-04, Adopted
March 27, 1997, Regarding The Expiration Date Of The Roosevelt Road
Redevelopment Plan And Project) (Approval Date: March 13, 2013).
         (e)   Ordinance No. CO-2020-42 (An Ordinance Designating The Village
Of Maywood Roosevelt Road Tax Increment Financing District For An Additional 12
Year Term In Accordance With The First Amendment To Redevelopment Project And
Plan For The TIF District (Approval Date: December 29, 2020).
         (f)   Ordinance No. CO-2020-43 (An Ordinance Approving The First
Amendment To Redevelopment Project And Plan For The Village Of Maywood
Roosevelt Road Tax Increment Financing District Relative To A 12 Year Term
Extension Of The Duration Of The TIF District, An Amendment To The TIF District
Budget To Increase Estimated Redevelopment Project Costs, And An Amendment To
Update And Expand The List Of Eligible Redevelopment Project Costs Allowed
Under The Current Version Of The TIF Act) (Approval Date: December 29, 2020).
         (g)   Ordinance No. CO-2020-44 (An Ordinance Adopting Tax Increment
Financing For The Village Of Maywood Roosevelt Road Tax Increment Financing
District for An Additional 12 Year Term In Accordance With The First Amendment
To Redevelopment Project And Plan For The TIF District) (Approval Date:
December 29, 2020).
   Copies of the above-referenced ordinances and the maps of the Redevelopment
Project Area and the Redevelopment Project Area Redevelopment Plans for the TIF
Districts are available from the Village Clerk’s Office.
   (B)   Designation of TIF Administrator. The President and Board of Trustees
of the Village designate the Village Manager as the TIF Administrator for each
active TIF District, who shall be responsible for performing all administrative
duties and compliance actions in regard to the TIF District, including
compliance with all annual filing and reporting requirements required by the
Illinois Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act (65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-3 et
seq.), preparation and filing of the annual TIF Report with the Office of the
State of Illinois Comptroller, scheduling and coordination of the annual joint
board of review meetings, and such other duties as are necessary to maintain
compliance with applicable laws. The Village Manager, or his or her designee,
is authorized and directed to create and maintain a “TIF Interested Parties
Registry” as required by Section 11-74.4-4.2 of the TIF Act (65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-
4.2). The TIF Interested Parties Registry shall pertain to all redevelopment
project areas created by the Village under the TIF Act.
   (C)   TIF Interested Parties Registry. The Village of Maywood has approved
the following relative to its obligations in regard to Interested Parties
Registry and registration rules:
      (1)   See §
38.01 (Interested Parties Registries) of the Maywood Village Code.
      (2)   See Ordinance No. CO-00-06 (An Ordinance of the Village of Maywood,
Illinois Authorizing the Establishment of Tax Increment Financing “Interested
Parties” Registries and Adopting Registration Rules for Such Registries) dated
September 18, 2000 and its Exhibit “A” (Village of Maywood, Illinois TIF
Interested Parties Registry and Registration Rules) and its Exhibit “B” (Notice
- Village of Maywood, Illinois Tax Increment Financing Redevelopment Project
Area Registration for Interested Parties Registry), all of which are on file
with the Village Clerk’s Office.
      (3)   The Village Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to amend
such registration rules, from time to time, without further approval by the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village after review by the Village
Attorney, as may be necessary or desirable to comply with the TIF Act and to
carry out its purposes. Public notice of the establishment and/or existence of
the TIF Interested Parties Registry for each Village TIF District, and the
availability of registration forms for the TIF Interested Parties Registry,
shall be published in accordance with the TIF Act.
(Ord. CO-2020-45, passed 12-29-2020)
MAYWOOD LIQUOR TAX
§ 36.20 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and cited as the “Maywood Liquor Tax
Ordinance,” and the tax herein imposed shall be known and cited as the “Maywood
Liquor Tax.”
(1997 Code, § 51.01) (Ord. C0-91-6, passed 5-23-1991)
§ 36.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   ALCOHOL. The product of distillation of any fermented liquid, whether
rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and includes
synthetic ethyl alcohol. It does not include denatured alcohol or wood alcohol.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Alcoholic spirits, wine, beer and any liquid or solid,
patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and capable of
being consumed as a beverage by a human being. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol
produced in accordance with Acts of the United States Congress and regulations
promulgated thereunder, nor to any liquid or solid containing 0.5% or less of
alcohol by volume. (235 ILCS 5/1-3.05)
   BEER. A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like. (235
ILCS 5/1-3.04)
   DEPARTMENT or FINANCE DEPARTMENT. The Finance Department of the Village.
   DIRECTOR or FINANCE DIRECTOR. The Finance Director of the Village.
   MANUFACTURER. Any brewer, fermenter, distiller, rectifier, blender,
processor, bottler or person who fills or refills an original package, whether
for himself or for another, and others engaged in brewing, fermenting,
distilling, rectifying or bottling alcoholic beverages. (235 ILCS 5/1-3.08)
   ORIGINAL PACKAGE. Any bottle, flask, jug, can, cask, barrel, keg, hogshead
or other receptacle or container whatsoever, used, corked or capped, sealed and
labeled by a manufacturer of alcoholic beverage, to contain or convey any
alcoholic beverage. (235 ILCS 5/1-3.06)
   RETAIL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE DEALER or RETAILER. Any person who engages in the
business of retail sale of alcoholic beverages in the Village.
   RETAIL SALE. Any sale to a person for use or consumption, and not for
resale. (235 ILCS 5/1-3.18)
   SALE or PURCHASE. Any transfer of ownership or title or both, any exchange
or barter, or any manner or by any means whatsoever, for a valuable
consideration.
   SPIRITS. Any beverage which contains alcohol obtained by distillation, mixed
with water or other substances in solution, and includes brandy, rum, whisky,
gin or other spirituous liquors, and such liquors when rectified, blended or
otherwise mixed with alcohol or other substances. (235 ILCS 5/1-3.02)
   WHOLESALE ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE DEALER or WHOLESALER. Any person who engages in
the business of selling or supplying alcoholic beverages to any person for
resale in the Village.
   WINE. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits, vegetables, or honey, containing sugar, including mead and
such beverages when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as above
defined. (235 ILCS 5/1-3.03)
(1997 Code, § 51.02) (Ord. C0-91-6, passed 5-23-1991)
§ 36.22 LIQUOR TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   In addition to any and all other taxes authorized by law, a tax is
hereby imposed on the retail sale of alcoholic beverages in the Village. Such
tax is to be paid by the purchaser and nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to impose a tax upon the occupation of retail or wholesale alcoholic
beverage dealer.
   (B)   This tax shall be levied according to the following schedule:
      (1)   Wine, a tax at the rate of $0.15 per gallon;
      (2)   Alcohol and spirits, a tax at the rate of $0.50 per gallon;
      (3)   Beer, a tax at the rate of $0.12 per gallon;
      (4)   The tax rate stated above shall be apportioned in sales involving a
fraction of a gallon and shall be rounded down to the nearest cent when one-
half cent or more is due.
(1997 Code, § 51.03)
§ 36.23 TAX ON RETAIL PURCHASER.
   The ultimate incidence and liability for payment of the tax herein levied is
to be borne by the retail purchaser of alcoholic beverages. It shall be a
violation of this chapter for a retail alcoholic beverage dealer to fail to
include the tax imposed herein in the sale price of the alcoholic beverage or
to otherwise absorb such tax.
(1997 Code, § 51.04)
§ 36.24 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the tax levied herein shall be
collected by each wholesale dealer of alcoholic beverages who sells such
beverages to a retail dealer of alcoholic beverages located in the Village.
   (B)   Any wholesale alcoholic beverage dealer who shall pay the tax levied
by this chapter shall collect the tax from each retail alcoholic beverage
dealer in the Village to whom the sale of said alcoholic beverages is made, and
any such retail alcoholic beverage dealer shall in turn then collect the tax
from the retail purchaser of the alcoholic beverages. The tax shall be paid to
the person required to collect it as trustee for and on the behalf of the
Village.
   (C)   If any retailer located in the Village shall receive or otherwise
obtain alcoholic beverages upon which the tax imposed herein has not been
collected by any wholesale alcoholic beverage dealer, then the retailer shall
collect such tax and remit it directly to the Village Finance Department within
30 days of the receipt of such alcoholic beverage.
   (D)   If a wholesale alcoholic beverage dealer sells alcoholic beverages to
a purchaser for use or consumption and not for resale, such wholesale alcoholic
beverage dealer shall collect the tax imposed herein from such purchaser and
remit it to the Village Finance Department in the same manner as sales to
retail alcoholic beverage dealers.
(1997 Code, § 51.05)
§ 36.25 REPORT OF SALES.
   Each wholesale alcoholic beverage dealer shall file each month with the
Finance Department a sworn report of sales of alcoholic beverages in such form
as prescribed and furnished by the Department. Such report of sales must be
mailed in sufficient time to be postmarked on or before the forty-fifth day
from the last day of the month for which the return is due. Each report of
sales of alcoholic beverages shall be accompanied by a remittance of the
appropriate amount of tax applicable to the sale reported, and such tax shall
be considered due and owing on the date the report is due. Payment of the tax
imposed herein shall be made to the Village Finance Department.
(1997 Code, § 51.06)
§ 36.26 INVENTORY.
   By July 1, 1991, every retail dealer of alcoholic beverages doing business
in the Village shall file with the Finance Department on forms prescribed by it
a sworn inventory of all alcoholic beverages in his possession or control on
the effective date of this chapter. With said inventory the retail dealer of
alcoholic beverages shall remit the taxes due from the retail sale of all
alcoholic beverages which were in such retailer's possession on such effective
date, and for which the tax herein levied has not been collected on behalf of
the Village by a wholesale alcoholic beverage dealer.
(1997 Code, § 51.07)
§ 36.27 PURCHASER’S DUTY TO PAY TAX.
   The failure of the wholesale or retail alcoholic beverage dealer to collect
the tax herein imposed shall not relieve the purchaser of his duty to pay it.
If the wholesale and retail alcoholic beverage dealer fails to collect the tax,
the purchaser shall be required to pay it directly to the Finance Department in
the same mariner and form as a retail alcoholic beverage dealer.
(1997 Code, § 51.08)
§ 36.28 REMITTING TAXES; DEALER’S COMMISSION.
   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any wholesale or retail
alcoholic beverage dealer filing a return under this chapter shall, at the time
of filing such return, remit to the Finance Department the amount of tax
imposed by this chapter less a commission of 1% of the tax remitted which is
allowed to reimburse the alcoholic beverage dealer for the expenses incurred in
collecting the tax, keeping records, preparing and filing returns, remitting
the tax, and supplying data to the Finance Department upon request. The
commission shall not be allowed, however, on any taxes not remitted when due.
The Director may also appoint one or more persons within or without the Village
as collection agents for the tax herein levied. The Commission for said
collection agents shall be the same as that provided for wholesale or retail
alcoholic beverage dealers.
(1997 Code, § 51.09)
§ 36.29 EXCEPTIONS TO TAX.
   (A)   This tax shall not apply to purchases of alcoholic beverages wherein
the purchaser is a passenger on an interstate carrier, nor shall this tax apply
to the extent it would violate the United States Constitution or the
Constitution of the State of Illinois. The tax herein levied shall not apply to
wine intended for use and used by any church or religious organization for
sacramental purposes, provided that such wine shall be purchased legally under
the laws of Illinois and the United States; but no exception from this tax is
permitted with respect to wine sold to private persons for such purposes.
   (B)   It shall be presumed that all sales of alcoholic beverages from
wholesale or retail alcoholic beverage dealers are subject to tax under this
chapter until the contrary is established. The burden of proving that such is
not taxable hereunder shall be upon the person so claiming.
(1997 Code, § 51.10)
§ 36.30 REGISTRATION OF DEALERS.
   Every wholesale alcoholic beverage dealer shall register with the Department
within 30 days after the later of the effective date of this chapter or the
date of commencing such business.
(1997 Code, § 51.11)
§ 36.31 DISPOSITION OF TAX FUNDS.
   All proceeds resulting from the imposition of this tax, including interest
and penalties, shall be deposited in the Village's Corporate Fund.
(1997 Code, § 51.12)
§ 36.32 REVENUES TO CORPORATE FUND.
   All revenues received by the Village pursuant to the fees imposed hereunder
shall be revenues of the Corporate Fund.
(1997 Code, § 51.15)
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
§ 36.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   AMOUNT PAID. The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address in this
municipality regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
   DEPARTMENT. The Illinois Department of Revenue.
   GROSS CHARGE. The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in this Village and for all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith by a retailer, valued in money whether paid in
money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services and property of every
kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the
cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor or
service costs or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended, the
amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. GROSS CHARGES for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
this Village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
this Village, and charges for that portion of the interstate inter-office
channel provided within the state. However, GROSS CHARGE shall not include:
      (1)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to the tax imposed by this subchapter; the tax imposed by the
Telecommunications Excise Tax Act (35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.); the tax imposed by
Section 4251 of the Internal Revenue Code; 911 surcharges; or charges added to
customers' bills pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-221 or 9-222 of the
Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/9-221 and 9-222), as amended, or any similar
charges added to customers' bills by retailers who are not subject to rate
regulation by the Illinois Commerce Commission for the purpose of recovering
any of the tax liabilities or other amounts specified in those provisions of
the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/9-202, 9-221, 9-222, and 9-222.1);
      (2)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of
such municipality;
      (3)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information for subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time-sharing agreement;
      (4)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
      (5)   Charges to business enterprises certified as exempt under Section
9-222.1 of the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/9-222.1) to the extent of such
exemption and during the period of time specified by the Department of Commerce
and Community Affairs;
      (6)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment
provided in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly
owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries when the tax imposed
under this subchapter has already been paid to a retailer and only to the
extent that the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation
between the corporations and not the generation of profit for the corporation
rendering such service;
      (7)   Bad debts (means any portion of a debt that is related to a sale at
retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or excludable that
has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under applicable federal
income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to be bad is
subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that portion
during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
      (8)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin-operated telecommunication
devices; or
      (9)   Amounts paid by telecommunications retailers under the
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act (35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.).
   INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that either originate
or terminate outside this state.
   INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS. All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
   PERSON. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, trustee, guardian, or other representative appointed by
order of any court, the federal and state governments, including state
universities created by statute, or any city, town, county, or other political
subdivision of this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. The acquisition, consumption or use of
telecommunications through a sale at retail.
   RETAILER. Every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail as
defined in this section. The Department may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the tax hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the Department, furnishes adequate security to insure collection and payment
of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued, without charge, a permit to collect
such tax. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to collect
the tax upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in this state in
the same manner and subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining
a place of business within this state. The permit may be revoked by the
Department at its discretion.
   RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any retailer having
or maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary, an office,
distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse or
other place of business, or any agent or other representative operating within
this state under the authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective
of whether such place of business or agent or other representative is located
here permanently or temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is
licensed to do business in this state.
   SALE AT RETAIL. The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of
telecommunications and all services and equipment provided in connection
therewith for a consideration, to persons other than the federal and state
governments, and state universities created by statute and other than between a
parent corporation and its wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned
subsidiaries for their use or consumption and not for resale.
   SERVICE ADDRESS. The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. In the event this may not be a defined
location, as in the case of mobile phones, paging systems, and maritime
systems, service address means the customer's place of primary use as defined
in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Conformity Act (35 ILCS 638/1 et
seq.). For air-to-ground systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the
location of a taxpayer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as
defined by telephone number, authorization code, or location in Illinois where
bills are sent.
   TAXPAYER. A person who individually or through his or her agents, employees,
or permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications in a municipality and who incurs a tax liability as
authorized by the ordinance.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. In addition to the meaning ordinarily and popularly
ascribed to it, includes, without limitation, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
private line services, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter,
computer exchange services, cellular mobile telecommunications service,
specialized mobile radio, stationary 2-way radio, paging service, or any other
form of mobile and portable 1-way or 2-way communications, or any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. As used in this subchapter, “private line”
means a dedicated non-traffic sensitive service for a single customer, that
entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a communications channel
or group of channels, from one or more specified locations to 1 or more other
specified locations. The definition of TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include
value added services in which computer processing applications are used to act
on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes other
than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include purchases of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by such provider to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the taxable end-to-end communications.
Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of inter-
company facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision of, used as a component of, or integrated into, end-to-end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable as sales for resale. Prepaid
telephone calling arrangements shall not be considered TELECOMMUNICATIONS
subject to the tax imposed under this subchapter. For purposes of this section,
"prepaid telephone calling arrangements" means that term as defined in Section
2-27 of the Retailers' Occupations Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.).
(Ord. C0-02-28, passed 9-23-2002)
§ 36.46 SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon any and all the following acts or privileges:
   (A)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6%
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer.
   (B)   The act or privilege of originating in the municipality or receiving
in the municipality interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of 6%
of the gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a
retailer. To prevent actual multi-state taxation of the act or privilege that
is subject to taxation under this subsection, any taxpayer, upon proof that the
taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on such event, shall be allowed a
credit against any tax enacted pursuant to or authorized by this section to the
extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid in such other state
which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other state or local
tax in this state.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this subchapter is not imposed on such act or
privilege to the extent such act or privilege may not, under the Constitution
and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the
municipality.
(Ord. C0-02-28, passed 9-23-2002)
§ 36.47 COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS.
   (A)   The tax authorized by this subchapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in this state and shall
be remitted by such retailer to the Department. Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this subchapter and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the state. Retailers shall collect
the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax to the gross charge for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications when sold for use, in
the manner prescribed by the Department. The tax authorized by this subchapter
shall constitute a debt of the taxpayer to the retailer until paid, and, if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
such sale at retail. If the retailer fails to collect the tax from the
taxpayer, then the taxpayer shall be required to pay the tax directly to the
Department in the manner provided by the Department.
   (B)   Whenever possible, the tax authorized by this subchapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications.
(Ord. C0-02-28, passed 9-23-2002)
§ 36.48 RETURNS TO DEPARTMENT.
   On or before the last day of February,2003 and on or before the last day of
every month thereafter, the tax imposed under this subchapter on
telecommunication retailers shall be returned with appropriate forms and
information as required by the Department pursuant to the Illinois Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (Public Act 92-526, Section 5-50) (35 ILCS
636/5-50) and any accompanying rules and regulations created by the Department
to implement the Act.
(Ord. C0-02-28, passed 9-23-2002)
§ 36.49 RESELLERS.
   (A) If a person who originates or receives telecommunications claims to be a
reseller of such telecommunications, such person shall apply to the Department
for a resale number. Such applicant shall state facts which will show the
Department why such applicant is not liable for the tax authorized by this
subchapter on any of such purchases and shall furnish such additional
information as the Department may reasonably require.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the Department shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify such number to the applicant. The
Department may cancel any number which is obtained through misrepresentation,
or which is used to send or receive such telecommunication tax-free when such
actions in fact are not for resale, or which no longer applies because of the
person's having discontinued the making of resales.
   (C)   Except as provided hereinabove in this section, the act or privilege
of originating or receiving telecommunications in this state shall not be made
tax-free on the ground of being a sale for resale unless the person has an
active resale number from the Department and furnishes that number to the
retailer in connection with certifying to the retailer that any sale to such
person is non-taxable because of being a sale for resale.
(Ord. C0-02-28, passed 9-23-2002)
MUNICIPAL GAS UTILITY TAX
§ 36.50 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services
and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that
GROSS RECEIPTS shall not include any amounts specifically excluded from the
definition of GROSS RECEIPTS in Section 8-11-2(d) of the Illinois Municipal
Code.
   PERSONS. Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability
company, municipal corporation, the State or any of its political subdivisions,
any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or
other representative appointed by order of any court.
(Ord. CO-2012-39, passed 10-16-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-52, passed 12-18-2012)
§ 36.51 TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax at the rate hereinafter specified is hereby established and levied by
the Village on the following occupations or privileges: persons engaged in the
business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas for use or
consumption within the corporate limits of the Village and not for resale, at a
rate of 5% of the gross receipts therefrom.
(Ord. CO-2012-39, passed 10-16-2012)
§ 36.52 LIMITATIONS.
   None of the taxes authorized by this subchapter are imposed with respect to
any transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such
business may not, under the constitution and statutes of the United States, be
made the subject of taxation by the state or any political subdivision thereof,
nor shall any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas be subject to taxation under the provisions of this
subchapter for such transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under
the provisions of the Municipal Retailers Occupation Tax authorized by Section
8-11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(Ord. CO-2012-39, passed 10-16-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-52, passed 12-18-2012)
§ 36.53 EFFECT OF OTHER COMPENSATION.
   The taxes enumerated in this subchapter shall be in addition to the payment
of money, or value of products or services furnished to the municipality by the
taxpayer as compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public
places or installation and maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles,
wires, pipes or other equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer’s
business.
(Ord. CO-2012-39, passed 10-16-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-52, passed 12-18-2012)
§ 36.54 PAYMENT.
   (A)   On or before the last day of December of each year, each taxpayer
shall make a return to the Village Treasurer for the month of November of that
year, stating:
      (1)   His name;
      (2)   His principal place of business;
      (3)   His gross receipts during the month upon the basis of which the tax
is imposed;
      (4)   Amount of tax;
      (5)   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   On or before the last day of each month thereafter, each taxpayer
shall make a like return to the Village Treasurer for a corresponding one month
period. The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the Village Treasurer, the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross receipts.
(Ord. CO-2012-39, passed 10-16-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-52, passed 12-18-2012)
§ 36.55 PAYMENT BY MISTAKE.
   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due
under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as the result of a mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than 3 years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited.
(Ord. CO-2012-39, passed 10-16-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-52, passed 12-18-2012)
§ 36.56 RECOVERY OF TAX DUE.
   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
subchapter shall be commenced more than 3 years after the due date of such
amount.
(Ord. CO-2012-39, passed 10-16-2012)
MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.65 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the Village of
Maywood in the business of selling tangible personal property, other than those
items of tangible personal property which are exempt from said tax pursuant to
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, at retail in the Village of Maywood at the rate of 1% of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
subchapter is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged
in the Village of Maywood in the business of making sales of service, at the
rate of 1% of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred
by such persons as an incident to a sale of service, other than the sale/
transfer of those items of tangible personal property which are exempt from
said tax pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-5.
   (B)   The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with the
provisions of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1 and 5/8-11-5.
(Ord. CO-2010-16, passed 9-20-2010)
§ 36.66 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TAX.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-
1 and 5/8-11-5. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer
and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. CO-2010-16, passed 9-20-2010)
ELECTRICITY UTILITY TAX
§ 36.75 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Maywood;
   PERSON. Any natural, individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court;
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE. Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation, facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL. Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2,
directly in the generation, production, transmission, delivery or sale of
electricity.
   PURCHASER. Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the Village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail.
   TAX COLLECTOR.  The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
   TAXPAYER. The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
(Ord. CO-2010-27, passed 9-29-2010)
§ 36.76 TAX IMPOSED.
   Pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2 and any and all other applicable authority, a
tax is imposed upon the privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in
a purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the
Village at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each
purchaser:
   (A)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.61
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   (B)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.40
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   (C)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month; 0.36
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   (D)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.35
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   (E)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.34
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   (F)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month;
0.32 cents per kilowatt-hour;
   (G)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.315 cents per kilowatt-hour;
   (H)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0,31 cents per kilowatt-hour;
   (I)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.305 cents per kilowatt-hour;
   (J)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-
hours in a month: 0.30 cents per kilowatt-hour.
      (1)   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue
measures imposed by the Village, the State of Illinois or any other political
subdivision of the state.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the tax
shall not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the
tax would violate the Constitution or statutes of the United States or the
Constitution of the State of Illinois.
      (3)   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after May 1, 1999; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity by
nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such customers
for delivery services in accordance with 220 ILCS 5/16-104, or the first bill
issued to such customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs
sooner. The new electric rates established by Ordinance No. CO-2010-27 approved
by the corporate authorities on September 29, 2010) shall become effective on
January 1, 2011,
(Ord. CO-2010-27, passed 9-29-2010)
§ 36.77 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter regarding the delivery of
electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this subchapter shall be
collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of business in this
state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax shall constitute a
debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity to the
purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as the
original charge for delivering the electricity.
   (B)   Any tax required to be collected by this subchapter, and any tax in
fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the Village by the person
delivering the electricity, provided that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further that
if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be
obligated to remit such tax.
   (C)   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to 3% of the tax they collect to reimburse
them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and fifing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data to the
Village upon request. For purposes of this subchapter, any partial payment of a
billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed to
be for the delivery of electricity.
(Ord. CO-2010-27, passed 9-29-2010)
§ 36.78 TAX REMITTANCE AND RETURNS.
   (A)   Every tax collector shall, on a monthly basis, file a return in a form
prescribed by the Village Treasurer. The return and accompanying remittance
shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during
which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under this
subchapter.
   (B)   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under this subchapter, then the
purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the Village Treasurer and
pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the last day of the
month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
(Ord. CO-2010-27, passed 9-29-2010)
§ 36.79 RESALES.
   (A)   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the Village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person, unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Village
Treasurer and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity,
and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially
nontaxable as a sale for resale.
   (B)   If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to for a resale
number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is not liable for the
tax imposed by this subchapter on any purchases of electricity and shall
furnish such additional information as the Village Treasurer may reasonably
require.
   (C)   Upon approval of the application, the Village Treasurer shall assign a
resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   (D)   Village Treasurer may cancel the resale number of any person if the
person fails to pay any tax payable under this subchapter for electricity used
or consumed by the person, or if the number: (1) was obtained through
misrepresentation, or (2) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
   (E)   (1)   If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by
this subchapter directly to the Village Treasurer pursuant to this subchapter
on the amount of electricity that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall
collect the tax pursuant to this subchapter and remit the tax on the amount of
electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
      (2)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions of the section shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the Village
Treasurer the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller, and such
other information that may reasonably be required.
(Ord. CO-2010-27, passed 9-29-2010)
§ 36.80 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every tax collector and every taxpayer required to pay the tax imposed by
this subchapter shall keep accurate books and records of its business or
activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions
that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability under this
subchapter. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
(Ord. CO-2010-27, passed 9-29-2010)
§ 36.81 CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   Notwithstanding any other provision in order to permit sound fiscal planning
and budgeting by the Village, no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or
credit for, a tax imposed under this subchapter, unless the person files a
claim for refund or credit within one year after the date on which the tax was
paid or remitted.
(Ord. CO-2010-27, passed 9-29-2010)
MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX
§ 36.90 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, trust estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT. The Public Utilities Act, as amended, (220 ILCS 5/1-
101 et seq.).
   PUBLIC UTILITY. A public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/3-105).
   RETAIL PURCHASER. Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
   SALE AT RETAIL. Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term retailer means any
person engaged in the business of distribution, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Maywood.
(Ord. CO-2012-38, passed 10-16-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-52, passed 12-18-2012)
§ 36.91 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by this subchapter, a tax is imposed on
the privilege of using or consuming gas in the Village that is purchased in a
sale at retail at the rate of 5.0 cents ($0.050) per therm.
   (B)   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the retail purchaser, and nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to
impose a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling
or transporting gas.
   (C)   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the retail purchaser’s premises, to the public utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant to §
36.92 on or before the payment due date of the public utility’s bill first
reflecting the tax, or directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the
fifteenth day of the second month following the month in which the gas is
delivered to the retail purchaser if no public utility has been designated to
collect the tax pursuant to §
36.92 or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a public utility so
designated.
   (D)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the Constitutions of the United
States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the
Village.
   (E)   To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the Village by a
retail purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this subchapter if the
gross receipts from the sale at retail of such gas to the retail purchaser are
properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to the
Village’s municipal gas utility tax, as amended from time to time (Title 3,
Chapter 36, Subchapter entitled “Municipal Gas Utility Tax”, §
36.51 of this Code) and as authorized pursuant to Section 8-11-2 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2).
   (F)   A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the
tax imposed by this subchapter with respect to the use or consumption of the
gas, but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
   (G)   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail
purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after January 1, 2013.
   (H)   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this subchapter, whether as a result of mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be (i) credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this subchapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment or (ii) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to
become due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than 3 years prior
to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited or refunded.
   (I)   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this subchapter shall be commenced more than 3 years after the due date of such
amount.
(Ord. CO-2012-38, passed 10-16-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-52, passed 12-18-2012)
§ 36.92 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   The Village Manager is authorized to enter into a contract for collection of
the tax imposed by this subchapter with any public utility providing gas
service in the Village. The contract shall include and substantially conform
with the following provisions:
   (A)   The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an
independent contractor;
   (B)   The public utility will remit collected taxes to the Village Treasurer
no more often than once each month;
   (C)   The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a
service fee equal to 3% of the amounts collected and timely remitted to the
Village Treasurer;
   (D)    The public utility shall not be responsible to the Village for any
tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
   (E)   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
(Ord. CO-2012-38, passed 10-16-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-52, passed 12-18-2012)
§ 36.93 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original
source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions
that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability or exemption under
this subchapter. All such books and records shall, at all times during business
hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the Village.
(Ord. CO-2012-38, passed 10-16-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-52, passed 12-18-2012)
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED
TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES
§ 36.100 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the "Locally Imposed
and Administered Tax Rights and Responsibility Ordinance."
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.101 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall apply to the Village's procedures in
connection with all of the Village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.102 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT.  Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The Village's President and Board of Trustees.
   HEARING OFFICER. An administrative individual appointed by the Village
President with the advice and consent of the corporate authorities to conduct
hearings and to issue final determinations regarding the collection of all
locally imposed and administered taxes.
   LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX or TAX. Each tax imposed by the Village
that is collected and administered by the Village, not an agency or department
of the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under
the Property Tax Code or fees collected by the Village other than
infrastructure maintenance fees.
   LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The Village Manager, or the Village Manager's
designee, who is hereby charged with the administration and collection of the
locally imposed and administered taxes, including staff, employees or agents to
the extent they are authorized by the Local Tax Administrator to act in the
Local Tax Administrator's stead. The Local Tax Administrator shall have the
authority to implement the terms of this subchapter to give full effect to this
subchapter. The exercise of such authority by the Local Tax Administrator shall
not be inconsistent with this subchapter and the Act.
   NOTICE. Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the Village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
   TAX ORDINANCE. Each ordinance adopted by the Village that imposes any
locally imposed and administered tax.
   TAXPAYER. Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered
tax and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax
is placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
Village.
   VILLAGE.  The Village of Maywood, Illinois.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.103 NOTICES.
   Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the
notice is to be in writing and mailed 7 calendar days prior to the day fixed
for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the Local Tax
Administrator. The notice shall be sent to the Local Tax Administrator as
follows:
   (A)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address; or
   (B)   Personal service or delivery.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.104 LATE PAYMENT.
   Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
Village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is:
   (A)   Physically received by the Village on or before the due date; or
   (B)   Received in an envelope or other container displaying a valid,
readable U.S. Postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to
the Village, with adequate postage prepaid.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.105 PAYMENT.
   Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order:
   (A)   First to the tax due for the applicable period;
   (B)   Second to the interest due for the applicable period; and
   (C)   Third to the penalty for the applicable period.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.106 CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS.
   (A)   The Village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   (B)    The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be 1
year after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was made. The
Village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and administered
taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the amounts directly
to a Village Cashier.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      (1)   The taxpayer shall submit to the Local Tax Administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
cancelled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the Village.
      (2)   Within 10 calendar days of the receipt by the Local Tax
Administrator of any claim for a refund or credit, the Local Tax Administrator
shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      (3)   In the event the Local Tax Administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of           per annum, based on a year
of 365 days and the number of days elapsed, from the date of the overpayment to
the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant of a credit.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.107 AUDIT PROCEDURE.
   Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this subchapter.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The tax;
      (2)   The time period of the audit; and
      (3)   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the Local Tax Administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within 30 days
after the originally designated audit and during normal business hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not more than 30 calendar days from the
date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer and the Local Tax Administrator
agreed to some other convenient time. In the event the taxpayer is unable to
comply with the audit on the date in question, the taxpayer may request another
date within the 30 calendar days, approved in writing, that is convenient to
the taxpayer and the Local Tax Administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the Village.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the Village. If the taxpayer fails to
provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the Local
Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the
Local Tax Administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's
tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within 30 days of the
Village's determination of the amount of overpayment,
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
government entity, the Local Tax Administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.108 APPEAL.
   (A)   The Local Tax Administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the Local Tax Administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      (1)   The reason for the assessment;
      (2)   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      (3)   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      (4)   The obligations of the Village during the audit, refund and
collection process,
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the Local Tax
Administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
Local Tax Administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the Local Tax Administrator within
45 days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination and
assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
Local Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within 14 days of receipt of the written protest and petition for hearing,
unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
45-day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall become a final
bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
date of the tax, the Local Tax Administrator may reopen or extend the time for
filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or extended
for more than 90 days after the expiration of the 45-day period.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.109 HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under §
36.108, the Local Tax Administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any
appeal. The taxpayer may request that a hearing officer conduct the hearing
rather than the Local Tax Administrator.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed 14 days.
   (C)   At the hearing the Local Tax Administrator/hearing officer shall
preside and shall hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax
determination, audit or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to
judicial proceedings shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Local Tax Administrator/hearing
officer shall make a written determination on the basis of the evidence
presented at the hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with
a copy of the written decision.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.110 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing,
through audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the
time frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest. The Village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be 5%
per annum, based on a year of 365 days and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late filing and payment penalties. If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of 5% of the amount of tax required to be shown as due on a return
shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of 5% of the tax due shall be
imposed. If no return is filed within the time or manner provided by the
controlling tax ordinance and prior to the Village issuing a notice of tax
delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure to file penalty shall be
assessed equal to 25% of the total tax due for the applicable reporting period
for which the return was required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty
shall not apply if a failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling
ordinance.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.111 ABATEMENT.
   The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any
late filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the
Local Tax Administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or
failure to make a filing.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.112 INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS.
   The Village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The Local Tax
Administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
Local Tax Administrator that the payment is 30 days delinquent, the taxpayer
shall have 14 working days to cure any delinquency. If the taxpayer fails to
cure the delinquency within the 14 working day period or fails to demonstrate
good faith in restructuring the installment contract with the Local Tax
Administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without further
notice to the taxpayer.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.113 STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   The Village, through the Local Tax Administrator, shall review all tax
returns in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due
and owing. The taxpayer shall have 45 days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than 4 years
after then end of the calendar year for which the return for the applicable
period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for the
applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (B)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any 4-year period for
which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the Village,
the tax paid was less than 75% of the tax due, the statute of limitations shall
be 6 years maximum after the end of the calendar year in which return for the
applicable period was due or end of the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was filed.
   (C)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.114 VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE.
   For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
Local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
Local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of 1% per month, for all periods prior to the filing
of the application but not more than 4 years before the date of filing the
application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application may not
be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for any period before
the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than 90 days after the fling of the voluntary
disclosure application or the date agreed to by the Local Tax Administrator.
However, any additional amounts owed as a result of an underpayment of tax and
interest previously paid under this section must be paid within 90 days after a
final determination and the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount
owed or the date agreed to by the Local Tax Administrator, whichever is longer.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.115 PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES.
   Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
Internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the Village
Clerk's office.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.116 INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE.
   The Local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the Local Tax Administrator shall:
   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the Village's expense;
   (B)   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.117 APPLICATION.
   This subchapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement
all of the Village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this subchapter, this subchapter shall be
controlling.
(Ord. CO-01-04, passed 1-11-2001)
§ 36.130 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A) Beginning July 1, 2020, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged
in the business of selling cannabis at retail in the Village, other than
cannabis purchased under the Illinois Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq., at the rate of 3% of the gross receipts
from such sales made in the course of that business. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their tax liability hereunder by separately stating the tax as
an
additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single
amount, with any state tax that retailers are required to collect.
   (B)   The imposition of the tax imposed by this Section is in accordance
with the provisions of Section 8-11-23 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-23), as amended, and is in addition to any and all other taxes and
charges.
(Ord. CO-2019-37, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 36.131 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   The tax imposed by this section, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be remitted to, collected by and
enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue in accordance with the
provisions of Section 8-11-23 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
23), as amended. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
(Ord. CO-2019-37, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 36.132 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original
source documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions
that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability or exemption under
this section. All such books and records shall, at all times during business
hours, be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
(Ord. CO-2019-37, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 36.133 PENALTY.
   The failure to timely collect or remit all taxes due pursuant to this
section is a violation of this code, and may be subject to the penalties
hereunder.
(Ord. CO-2019-37, passed 12-17-2019)
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE
OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.140 TAX IMPOSED.
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling groceries at retail in the Village at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
subchapter is in effect. A tax is hereby also imposed upon all persons engaged
in the Village in the business of making sales of service, who as an incident
to making those sales of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale
of service, at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such sales made in the
course of such business while this subchapter is in effect.
   (B)   The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-24.
(Ord. CO-2025-25, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 36.141 COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF TAX.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8- 11-
24. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to administer and enforce
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. CO-2025-25, passed 8-19-2025)
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, neglecting, or refusing to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapter except when otherwise
specifically provided upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $200 for the first offense and not less than
$300 nor more than $750 for the second and each subsequent offense in any 180-
day period; provided, however, that all actions seeking the imposition of fines
only shall be filed as quasi-criminal actions subject to the provisions of the
Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, 735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq. A person who commits
repeated offenses in excess of 3 within any 180-day period may also be punished
as committing a misdemeanor by incarceration in the County Jail for a term not
to exceed 6 months under the procedures set forth in Illinois Municipal Code, §
12-1.1 (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1) and under the provisions of the Illinois Code of
Criminal Procedure, 725 ILCS 5/100-1 et seq. in separate proceedings. A
separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon
which said person shall continue any such violation, or permit any such
violation to exist, after notification thereof.
(1997 Code, § 51.13)
CHAPTER 37: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
37.01   Definitions
   
37.02   Declaration
   
37.03   Time period
   
37.04   Notice
   
37.05   Department of Homeland Security and Emergency Management
   
37.06   Emergency succession
   
37.07   Emergency powers and spending authority
§ 37.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly or indicates a separate meaning.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY.
      (1)   A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual
force or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power
to execute by 3 or more persons acting together without authority of law; or
      (2)   Any natural disaster or manmade calamity, including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the corporate
limits of the Village, resulting in the death or injury of persons or the
destruction of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be
taken to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   CURFEW. A prohibition against any person or persons walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public
property or vacant premises within the corporate limits of the Village, except
officials of any governmental unit and persons officially designated to duty
with reference to said civil emergency.
(1997 Code, § 3.28(a)) (Ord. 68-3, passed 4-25-1968)
§ 37.02 DECLARATION.
   (A)   Whenever a civil emergency exists, the President of the Board of
Trustees shall declare the existence by means of a written declaration setting
forth the facts which constitute the emergency.
   (B)   After proclamation of a civil emergency by the President of the Board
of Trustees, he may order a general curfew applicable to such geographical
areas of the Village or to the Village as a whole, as he deems advisable, and
applicable during such hours of the day or night as he deems necessary in the
interest of the public safety and welfare.
(1997 Code, § 3.28(b)) (Ord. 68-3, passed 4-25-1968)
§ 37.03 TIME PERIOD.
   The proclamation herein authorized shall be effective for a period of 48
hours unless sooner terminated by a proclamation of the President of the Board
of Trustees indicating that the civil emergency no longer exists. The President
shall have the power to reproclaim the existence of a civil emergency at the
end of each 48-hour period during the time the said civil emergency exists.
(1997 Code, § 3.28(c)) (Ord. 68-3, passed 4-25-1968)
§ 37.04 NOTICE.
   Upon issuing the proclamation herein authorized, the Chief of Police shall
notify the news media situated within the Village and shall cause 3 copies of
the proclamation declaring the existence of the emergency to be posted at the
following places within the Village: the Village Hall, the police station, and
the post office or other public place.
(1997 Code, § 3.28(d)) (Ord. 68-3, passed 4-25-1968)
§ 37.05 DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Establishment. Under this section, the Village establishes the
Department of Homeland Security and Emergency Management (DHSEM) to prevent,
minimize, repair, and alleviate injury or damage resulting from the explosion
of atomic or other means from without or by means of sabotage or other disloyal
actions within, or from fire, flood, earthquake, telecommunications failure, or
other natural or technological causes, in accordance with the Illinois
Emergency Management Act (the Act) (20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.), as may be amended
from time to time. The Village may exercise any and all powers, rights and
duties available to it under the Act for emergency management duties and under
non-specific standard operating procedures for Homeland Security: even if not
specifically enumerated in this chapter.
   (B)   Composition. The DHSEM shall consist of the Coordinator-Chief, with
the advice and consent of the President and Board of Trustees. The Coordinator-
Chief and members of the DHSEM serve on a voluntary basis. The Chief of Police
and Chief of the Fire Department shall be permanent members of the DHSEM.
   (C)   Coordinator-Chief. The Coordinator-Chief of the DHSEM shall be
appointed by the Village President and shall serve until removed by same per 20
ILCS 3305/10(i). The Coordinator-Chief shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration, training, and operations of the DHSEM, subject to
the direction and control of the Village President as provided by statute. The
Coordinator-Chief shall report to the Village Manager for purposes of handling
day-to-day administrative activities and matters. The Coordinator-Chief shall
assist in the coordination of all the Village’s department resources (Police,
Fire, Public Works, Animal Care Control, Public Health, and Water Management)
when an emergency or disaster occurs. Subject to the annual budgetary
constraints of the Village and the annual budget, the Coordinator-Chief shall
be compensated in the amount of $15,000 per fiscal year for the performance of
day-to-day administrative activities and matters relating to the DHSEM. No
compensation shall be paid to the Coordinator-Chief for performance of his/her
duties when responding to an emergency or disaster.
   (D)   Oath. Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the DHSEM
organization shall, before entering upon his duties, execute a written oath in
substantially the form set forth in Section 20 of the Act (20 ILCS 3305/20),
before the Coordinator-Chief or other person authorized to administer oaths in
the state (20 ILCS 3305/20). The oath shall be filed with the Coordinator-
Chief.
   (E)   Office space. The Village President and Board of Trustees are
authorized to designate space in a Village building, or elsewhere, as may be
provided for by the Village President and Board of Trustees, for the DHSEM as
its office.
   (F)   Functions and duties. The DHSEM shall perform all DHSEM functions
within the Village as prescribed in and by the Act (20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.),
the State Emergency Operations Plan, and programs, orders, rules, and
regulations as may be promulgated by the Illinois Emergency Management Agency
(IEMA) and by local ordinance, and, in addition, shall perform those duties
outside the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid
agreements with other political subdivisions as provided by the Act (20 ILCS
3305/1 et seq.). The Coordinator-Chief shall be responsible for preparing and
updating the Village’s Emergency Operations Plan, which plan shall be approved
by resolution of the President and Board of Trustees.
   (G)   Service as mobile support team. All or any members of the DHSEM
organization may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by
the Director of the IEMA as provided by law, to aid and to reinforce the IEMA
and emergency services and disaster agencies in areas stricken by disaster.
Personnel of a mobile support team, while on duty pursuant to such a call or
while engaged in regularly scheduled training exercises, shall, if they are an
employee of the Village, have the powers, duties, rights, privileges and
immunities, and receive the compensation incidental to their employment, and if
not an employee of the Village, shall be entitled to at least $1 per year
compensation from the state.
   (H)   Emergency action. A proclamation of a disaster by the Governor shall
activate the State Emergency Operations Plan and the Village’s Emergency
Operations Plan, and shall be authority for the deployment and use of any
forces that the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies,
equipment, and materials and facilities assembled, stockpiled, or arranged to
be made available under the Act (20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.) or other provision of
law relating to disasters.
   (I)   Local disaster declaration. Only the Village President, President Pro
Tem, or the President’s emergency interim successor may declare a local
disaster. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of 7 days
except by or with the consent of the Board of Trustees. Any order or
proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local disaster shall be
given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the Village
Clerk. The effect of a declaration of a local disaster is to activate the
emergency operations plan of the DHSEM and to authorize the furnishing of aid
and assistance thereunder.
   (J)   Mutual aid agreements. The Coordinator-Chief of the DHSEM may, in
collaboration with other public agencies within the immediate vicinity, develop
or cause to be developed mutual aid arrangements with other political
subdivisions in the state for reciprocal disaster response and recovery
assistance in case a disaster is too great to be dealt with unassisted. The
mutual aid shall not, however, be effective unless and until approved by each
of the political subdivisions. The arrangements shall be consistent with the
State Emergency Operations Plan and state emergency management program, and, in
the event of a disaster, it shall be the duty of each emergency management
agency to render assistance in accordance with the provisions of the mutual aid
agreements.
   (K)   Reimbursement by state. The State Treasurer may receive and allocate
to the appropriate fund, any reimbursement by the state to the Village for
expenses incident to training members of the DHSEM as prescribed by the State
Director of IEMA, compensation for services and expenses of members of a mobile
support team while serving outside the Village in response to a call by the
Governor or State Director, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement
made by the state incident to DHSEM activities as provided by law.
   (L)   Purchase and expenditures. The Village President and Board of Trustees
may, on recommendation of the Coordinator-Chief or on their own motion, enter
into contracts or incur obligations necessary to place the Village in a
position to effectively combat any disaster, as defined in Section 4 of the Act
(20 ILCS 3305/4), and to protect the public health and safety, protect
property, and provide emergency assistance to victims of disasters. In the
event of a disaster, the Village President and Board of Trustees may exercise
the above powers, in the light of the exigencies of the disaster and, excepting
mandatory constitutional requirements, without regard to the procedures and
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to the performance of public
work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of
temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase of supplies and
materials, and the appropriation, expenditure, and disposition of public funds
and property, as authorized by Section 10(j) of the Act (20 ILCS 3305/10(j)).
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to limit the Village
President’s authority to apply for, administer and expend grants, gifts or
payments in aid of disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
(Ord. C0-04-28, passed 9-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-29, passed 9-20-2004; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-31, passed 11-16-2021)
§ 37.06 EMERGENCY SUCCESSION.
   (A)   In the event of an attack upon the United States or a natural or
manmade disaster in the Village resulting in the unavailability of both the
Village President and the elected President Pro Tem, or the unavailability of
the Village President when no President Pro Tern has been elected, the duties
and all of the rights and powers of the office of Village President shall be
discharged by the designated emergency interim successors in the order
specified below. Emergency interim successors for the office of Village
President are hereby designated as follows:
      (1)   Most senior Trustee available.
      (2)   Village Manager.
      (3)   Chief of Police.
   (B)   Other than taking the oath of office required in order to exercise the
rights and powers and discharge the duties of the office of Village President,
an emergency interim successor hereunder shall not be required to comply with
any other provision of law relative to taking office. The emergency interim
successor shall exercise the rights and powers and discharge the duties of the
office of Village President until such time as either the President or
previously elected President Pro Tem are available to resume the duties of
office, or the Board of Trustees elects a President Pro Tem.
(Ord. C0-04-28, passed 9-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-29, passed 9-20-2004)
§ 37.07 EMERGENCY POWERS AND SPENDING AUTHORITY.
   In the event that a state of emergency exists within the Village, the
Village President, President Pro Tem, or emergency interim successor to the
office of Village President, may, by executive order and without the approval
of the Board of Trustees, exercise such powers of the corporate authorities,
including spending up to $50,000 in Village funds, as may be reasonably
necessary to respond to the emergency. For purposes of this section, a state of
emergency is defined as an attack or series of attacks by an enemy of the
United States causing, or which may cause, substantial damage or injury to
civilian property or persons in the Village in any manner by sabotage or by the
use of bombs, missiles, shellfire, or atomic, radiological, chemical,
bacteriological or biological means or other weapons or processes, or a
disaster involving an occurrence or threat of catastrophic and widespread
injury or loss of life to Village residents or property in the Village
resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including but not limited to fire,
flood, earthquake, epidemic and explosion. The Village President, President Pro
Tem, or emergency interim successor may not exercise the emergency spending
authority granted herein without first declaring that an emergency, as defined
above, exists, by setting forth, in writing and under oath, a declaration of
emergency describing the nature of the emergency and detailing facts to
substantiate such finding. The declaration of emergency shall be filed with the
Village Clerk as soon as is practicable. The declaration of emergency, and
concurrent spending and other authority, shall expire not later than the
adjournment of the first regular meeting of the corporate authorities after the
state of emergency is declared.
(Ord. C0-04-28, passed 9-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-29, passed 9-20-2004)
CHAPTER 38: VILLAGE POLICIES
Section
   
38.01   Interested parties registries
   
38.02   Dishonored check fees
   
38.03   State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
   
38.04   Whistleblower Reward and Protection Act
   
38.05   Credit card policy
   
38.06   Acceptance of credit card payments
Cross-reference:
   Finance and Taxation, see
Ch. 36
   Building Regulations, see
Ch. 150
   Village Planning, see
Ch. 151
   Adjacent Neighbors Land Acquisition Program, see
Ch. 154
   Tax Reactivation Program, see
Ch. 155
   Zoning Code, see
Ch. 156
§ 38.01 INTERESTED PARTIES REGISTRIES.
   (A)   The recitals contained in the preambles to Ord. C0-00-06 set forth in
this section are incorporated in and made a part of this section.
   (B)   The Village President or his designee is authorized and directed to
create an "interested parties" registry in accordance with§ 11-74.4-4.2 of the
Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act (65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2) for each
redevelopment project area created under the Act and not terminated by the
Village, whether now existing or created after the date of the adoption of this
section.
   (C)   In accordance with § 11-74.4-4.2 of the Tax Increment Allocation
Redevelopment Act (65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2), the President and Board of Trustees
of the Village adopt the registration rules attached to the ordinance set forth
in this section as Exhibit A as registration rules for each such "interested
parties" registry. The Village President, with the consent of the Village
Attorney as to form and legality, shall have the authority to amend such
registration rules from time to time as may be necessary or desirable to comply
with and carry out the purposes intended by the Act.
   (D)   The Village Clerk is authorized and directed to cause notice of the
interested parties registry created by this section and registration rules
adopted pursuant to this section for each redevelopment project area created
under the Act, substantially in the form of Exhibit B, attached to the
ordinance set forth in this section to be published in the Maywood Herald, as
soon as practicable.
(Ord. C0-00-06, passed 9-18-2000)
§ 38.02 DISHONORED CHECK FEES.
   Any person or entity who presents a check, money order, or similar payment
instrument to the Village that is dishonored may be charged a $25 dishonored
check fee. This provision does not preclude the Village from seeking any other
applicable federal, state or local law collection remedies.
(Ord. C0-00-36, passed 12-4-2000)
§ 38.03 STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of Sections 5-15 (5 ILCS 430/5-15) and
Article 10 (5 ILCS 430/10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and
Employees Ethics Act, 5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the
“Act” in this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to
the officers and employees of the Village to the extent required by Section 70-
5 of the Act (5 ILCS 430/70-5).
   (B)   Regulations of State Officials and Employees Ethics Act. The following
regulations of State Officials and Employees Ethics Act apply to the officers
and employees of the Village:
      (1)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited
or accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the Village, is
hereby prohibited.
      (2)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to
an officer or employee of the Village under the Act is hereby prohibited.
      (3)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act,
by any officer or employee of the Village, is hereby prohibited.
      (4)   For purposes of this section, the terms “officer” and “employee”
shall be defined as set forth in Section 70-5(c) of the Act (5 ILCS 430/70-5
(c)).
      (5)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in Section 50-5 of the Act (5 ILCS 430/50-5) for
similar violations of the Act.
      (6)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any
existing ordinances or policies, which regulate the conduct of Village officers
and employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are
less restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section
shall prevail in accordance with the provisions of Section 70-5(a) of the Act
(5 ILCS 430/70-5(a)).
      (7)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the Village.
      (8)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in
its entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the
Illinois Supreme Court’s decision becomes final and not subject to any further
appeals or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further
action by the corporate authorities of the Village if the Act is found
unconstitutional by the Illinois Supreme Court.
      (9)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the Village.
(Ord. C0-04-15, passed 5-17-2004)
§ 38.04 WHISTLEBLOWER REWARD AND PROTECTION ACT.
   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of the Whistleblower Reward and Protection
Act (740 ILCS 175/1 et seq.) (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"), are hereby
adopted by reference and made applicable to the appointed and elected
officials, officers and employees of the Village to the extent required by the
Act. The Act is a comprehensive legislative enactment that creates certain
civil legal actions, remedies and sanctions to deter persons from making
fraudulent claims with public bodies in order to defraud public bodies of
public monies and other public property or to defraud public bodies by
providing less services or goods than are promised.
   (B)   Amendment of Act; severability. Any amendment to the Act that becomes
effective after the effective date of this section shall be incorporated into
this section by reference. However, any amendment that makes its provisions
optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be incorporated into this
section by reference without formal action by the corporate authorities of the
Village. If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the Village.
(Ord. C0-05-32, passed 9-20-2005)
§ 38.05 CREDIT CARD POLICY.
   The Village Board of Trustees has adopted a written policy governing
purchases and the control and use of credit cards by Village employees and
officials as of January 1, 2014. The policy governs the use of credit cards
issued to the Village, cardholder limits, telephone, facsimile and internet
orders, documentation, card restrictions, reconciliation and payment, disputes,
lost or stolen cards, terminated/resigning employees and officials, reporting
requirements in regard to credit card usage to the Finance Committee and Board
of Trustees, and policy violations and penalties. Village credit cards shall
only be used in conformance with the adopted policy, a copy of which is
available from the Village Clerk’s Office, the Village Mayor’s Office or the
Finance Department, or the Village’s website. The policy may be amended from
time to time by action of the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. CO-2013-49, passed 12-17-2013)
§ 38.06 ACCEPTANCE OF CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS.
   (A)   Incorporation. The Village incorporates by reference the provisions of
the Illinois Local Governmental Acceptance of Credit Cards Act (50 ILCS 345/
1 et seq.) (the "Act"), as amended, into this section. The corporate
authorities of the Village held a public hearing on November 14, 2016, as
required by the Act, for the purpose of making a determination of whether to
enact rules to allow the Village to accept payment by credit cards for all
"authorized obligations" (as defined in the Act), such as any fine, fee,
charge, tax, or cost imposed by, owing to, or collected by the Village. The
corporate authorities of the Village passed Ordinance No. CO-2016-24 on
November 14, 2016, that amended the Code to enact this section.
   (B)   Definition of credit card. The Act defines CREDIT CARD as “an
instrument or device, whether known as a credit card, bank card, charge card,
debit card, automated teller machine card, secured credit card, smart card,
electronic purse, prepaid card, affinity card, or by any other name, issued
with or without fee by an issuer for the use of the holder to obtain credit,
money, goods, services, or anything else of value.”
   (C)   Policy regarding acceptance of credit cards. The Village
Administrative Policy Regarding Acceptance of Payments By Credit Cards (the
"Policy") (a copy of which was attached as Exhibit "A" to Ordinance No. CO-
2016-24 and made a part thereof) and any future amendments to the policy are
incorporated into this section by reference without further action by the
corporate authorities of the Village. The policy contains the rules governing
the manner of acceptance of payments by credit cards for all "authorized
obligations" (as defined in the Act), such as any fine, fee, charge, tax, or
cost imposed by, owing to, or collected by the Village. The Village Manager is
authorized to approve and enact any amendments to the Policy that are
consistent with or necessary to comply with the Act. A copy of the policy is
available from the Village Clerk's Office upon request.
(Ord. CO-2016-24, passed 11-17-2016)
CHAPTER 39: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATIONS OF VIOLATIONS
Section
Violations of Village Code
   
39.01   Purpose
   
39.02   Creation
   
39.03   Application
   
39.04   Rules and regulations
   
39.05   Administrative composition
   
39.06   Procedure
   
39.07   Service
   
39.08   Administrative hearings
   
39.09   Violations of orders
   
39.10   Defaults
   
39.11   Petition to set aside default order
   
39.12   Subpoenas
   
39.13   Payment of fines
   
39.14   Vehicle confiscation hearings
   
39.15   Judicial review
   
39.16   Enforcement of judgment
Parking Violations
   
39.30   Purpose; scope; adoption of rules and regulations
   
39.31   Prima facie responsibility for violations and penalty; parking
violation issuance and removal
   
39.32   Notice; contents, distribution, and record keeping
   
39.33   Determination of liability
   
39.34   Grounds for adjudication by mail or administrative hearing
   
39.35   Adjudication by mail; procedure
   
39.36   Administrative hearings; procedure
   
39.37   Hearing; determination of liability or of no liability; petition
   
39.38   Notice of final determination
   
39.39   Immobilization program
   
39.40   Driver’s license suspension
   
39.41   Lessor of vehicle not liable for violation
 
   
39.99   Penalty
VIOLATIONS OF VILLAGE CODE
§ 39.01 PURPOSE.
   The stated purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the fair and
efficient enforcement of Village ordinances as allowed by law, through
administrative adjudication of violations of such Village ordinances, and to
establish a schedule of fines and penalties, and procedures for collection of
unpaid fines and penalties.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 39.02 CREATION.
   (A)   There is established an executive department of the municipal
government to be known as the Village of Maywood Ordinance Enforcement
Department, which shall have the power to enforce compliance with all municipal
ordinances as from time to time authorized by the Village Board of Trustees,
except for any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or a similar offense
that is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for
any reportable offense under § 6-204 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/
6-204).
   (B)   The establishment of the Village of Maywood Ordinance Enforcement
Department does not preclude the Village from using any other method to enforce
municipal ordinances of the Village.
   (C)   The provisions of Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq.)
are adopted and incorporated into this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 39.03 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to administrative adjudication
proceedings conducted by the Ordinance Enforcement Department to the extent
that they are not inconsistent with other provisions of this Code, which set
forth specific procedures for the administrative adjudication of particular
Code provisions.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 39.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The rules and regulations promulgated for the conduct of administrative
adjudication hearings shall be published and kept on file in the office of the
Ordinance Enforcement Administrator where they shall be available to the public
for inspection and copying at standard fees during business hours.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 39.05 ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION.
   The Village Ordinance Enforcement Department shall be composed of a Hearing
Officer, an Ordinance Enforcement Administrator and Hearing Room Security
Personnel, with the powers and authority as hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   The Hearing Officers shall have all powers necessary to conduct fair
and impartial hearings, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Administering oaths and affirmations;
      (2)   Holding conferences for the settlement or simplification of the
issues;
      (3)   Hearing testimony;
      (4)   Ruling upon motions, objections, and the admissibility of evidence;
      (5)   Subject to the restrictions contained in § 39.12, at the request of
any party or on the Hearing Officer's own motion, issuing subpoenas, directing
witnesses to appear and give relevant testimony and directing the production of
relevant books, records or other information;
      (6)   Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing, including
all exhibits and evidence admitted into the record at the hearing;
      (7)   Regulating the course of the hearing in accordance with this
chapter, the rules adopted by the Department for the conduct of administrative
hearings, or other applicable law;
      (8)   Asking questions of the parties and witnesses, if necessary, to
ensure the clarity and completeness of the testimony and record;
      (9)   Issuing and signing a written finding, decision and order stating
whether a Village Code violation exists; and
      (10)   Upon finding a party liable, imposing fines, penalties and costs
consistent with applicable Code violations, except however, that in no event
shall the Hearing Officer have authority to impose a penalty of incarceration,
or impose a fine in excess of $50,000. Where requested by the Village, the
Administrative Hearing Officer is authorized to impose a term of community
service in lieu of a fine. Such community service may be performed through a
program administered by the Village, if available, or at a not-for-profit
organization within the Village. Where a defendant fails to perform community
service as ordered by the Administrative Hearing Officer, the term of community
service may be converted to a fine.
   (B)   Prior to conducting administrative adjudication proceedings under this
chapter, the Hearing Officer shall have successfully completed a formal
training program that includes the following:
      (1)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the administrative
hearings over which the Hearing Officer shall preside;
      (2)   Orientation to each subject area of the Code violations that they
will adjudicate;
      (3)   Observation of administrative hearings; and
      (4)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
   (C)   In addition, a Hearing Officer must be an attorney licensed to
practice law in the State of Illinois for at least 3 years, and be in good
standing with the Attorney Registration and Discipline Commission of the
Supreme Court of Illinois.
   (D)   The Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall have powers, including,
but not limited to:
      (1)   Directing the Department with respect to its management and
structure;
      (2)   Adopting, distributing and processing all notices as may be
required under this chapter or as may be reasonably required to carry out the
purpose of this chapter;
      (3)   Keeping accurate records of the proceedings, including, but not
limited to, appearances, non-appearances, pleas entered, and fines and
penalties assessed and paid;
      (4)   Collecting moneys paid as fines and penalties assessed after a
final determination of liability;
      (5)   Certifying copies of final determinations of an ordinance violation
adjudicated pursuant to this chapter and any factual reports verifying the
final determination of any violation of liability which was issued in
accordance with this chapter, and the laws of the State of Illinois including
Illinois Vehicle Code, § 11-208.3 (625 ILCS 5/11-208.3) as from time to time
amended;
      (6)   Promulgating rules and regulations for the conduct of
administrative hearings;
      (7)   Performing the functions of the Village Traffic Compliance
Administrator as delegated by §§ 39.30 et seq.; and
      (8)   Establishing any other necessary rules and regulations and
performing any other duties and functions as may be required or appropriate to
carry out the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   The hearing room security personnel shall be qualified off-duty, full-
time, part-time or auxiliary police officers and are authorized and directed
to:
      (1)   Maintain hearing room decorum;
      (2)   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the Circuit Court of Cook Country, Illinois; and
      (3)   Perform such other duties and/or acts as may reasonably be required
and as directed by the Hearing Officer or Ordinance Enforcement Administrator.
   (F)   The Village Manager is authorized to employ persons to hold the
positions as set forth above and such other persons as the Village Manager
appoints to assist with the administrative adjudication system provided for in
this chapter.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003; Am. Ord. 32, passed 9-19-2006)
§ 39.06 PROCEDURE.
   The system of administrative adjudication of any Village ordinance
authorized to be adjudicated hereunder shall be in accordance with the
following procedures.
   (A)   Any authorized department or agency of the Village may institute a
hearing proceeding with the Ordinance Enforcement Department by forwarding a
copy of a notice of violation or notice of hearing to the Ordinance Enforcement
Administrator.
   (B)   All full-time and part-time and auxiliary officers and code
enforcement officers, as well as other specifically authorized individuals of
any Village department, shall have the authority to issue a notice of
violation.
   (C)   The notice of violation shall contain, but shall not be limited to,
the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the person or entity charged with the
violation;
      (2)   The date, time and place of the alleged violation (date of
issuance);
      (3)   The section(s) of the Code alleged to have been violated;
      (4)   A legally sufficient description of the activity or conduct alleged
to constitute a violation of each Code section set forth in the violation
notice or a legally sufficient description of the facts giving rise to the
allegations set forth in the violation notice;
      (5)   The name and identification number of the issuer of the notice of
violation;
      (6)   The complainant's name if the complaint is not the issuing Village
officer or employee;
      (7)   The date, time and location of the adjudication hearing of the
alleged ordinance violations; and
      (8)   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to
be held and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
   (D)   A notice of hearing shall include the date, time and location of the
hearing and the penalties for failure to appear at the hearing.
   (E)   The issuer of a notice of violation shall certify the correctness of
the information required by this section by signing his name to the notice.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 39.07 SERVICE.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by law or rule, a notice of violation or
notice of hearing shall be served upon the alleged violator no less than 7
calendar days prior to the date of the hearing by:
      (1)   Certified mail, return receipt requested at the violator’s
residence address or, if the violator is a business entity, at any address
identified for its registered agent or at its principal place of business. A
courtesy copy of the notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested to each owner of record and tax payer of record as shown in the Cook
County public records, including any Illinois land trust having title to the
property, any mortgage company or lender with a mortgage or lien interest shown
in the Cook County public records and the beneficial owners of any Illinois
land trust having title to the property, if known to the Village;
      (2)   Personal service, including personal service upon an employee or
agent of the alleged violator at a place of business of the alleged violator or
otherwise if such service is reasonably calculated to give the alleged violator
actual notice; or
      (3)   If service cannot be made by either of (1) or (2) above, when the
alleged violator is the owner or manager of the property, by posting a copy of
the notice of violation on the front entrance of the building or other
structure where the violation is found, or, if the property is unimproved or
fenced off, by posting a copy of the violation notice in a prominent place upon
the property where the violation is found.
   (B)   The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained
by the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator and kept as a record in the ordinary
course of business.
   (C)   Any violation notice issued, signed and served in accordance herewith,
or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of
the facts shown on the notice.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003; Am. Ord. CO-2012-08, passed 2-21-2012)
§ 39.08 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS.
   (A)   All administrative hearings conducted by the Ordinance Enforcement
Department are open to the public and shall be presided over by a duly
appointed administrative Hearing Officer who is charged with providing the
parties a full and fair opportunity to be heard.
   (B)   Parties to an adjudicatory hearing may be represented by an attorney
or other agent, present witnesses, and cross-examine opposing witnesses.
Parties may request the administrative Hearing Officer to issue subpoenas as
provided for in § 39.12.
   (C)   An attorney or agent who appears on behalf of any respondent shall
file with the Hearing Officer a written appearance on a form provided by the
Ordinance Enforcement Department stating, on oath or affirmation, that he has
been authorized by the respondent to represent the respondent at the hearing.
   (D)   The Village shall not be represented by an employee or other
representative of the Ordinance Enforcement Department; provided, however, that
documentary evidence, prepared by another department of the Village and
submitted to the Ordinance Enforcement Department, may be presented at the
hearing by the administrative Hearing Officer.
   (E)   All administrative hearings shall be conducted on the date set for
hearing. A continuance may be granted for good cause shown at the discretion of
the Hearing Officer. The purpose of administrative hearings is to provide a
prompt resolution of alleged Code violations, and accordingly, the request for,
and granting of, continuances shall be curtailed to the extent fairness
permits. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance.
   (F)   All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
   (G)   The Hearing Officer may issue subpoenas pursuant to § 39.12.
   (H)   The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the
conduct of the hearing. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it
is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct
of their affairs.
   (I)   No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance
of the evidence; provided, however, that the original or a legible copy of the
notice of violation, issued in accordance with the applicable provisions of
this chapter, shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts
specified therein.
   (J)   It shall not be a defense that a compliance violation has been
corrected prior to adjudication of the charge.
   (K)   The record of all hearings before a Hearing Officer shall include:
      (1)   A record of the testimony presented at the hearing, which may be
made by tape recording or other appropriate means;
      (2)   All documents presented at the hearing;
      (3)   A copy of the notice of violation or notice of hearing; and
      (4)   A copy of the findings and decision of the Hearing Officer.
   (L)   Recording by any means by any member of the public is prohibited
unless expressly authorized. However, any party may request that the
proceedings be taken and transcribed by a certified court reporter. The cost of
the reporter shall be borne by the party requesting the court reporter.
   (M)   At the conclusion of a hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue his
final determination. Based on the notice of violation and the evidence
admitted, the Hearing Officer may issue the following determination: liable,
not liable, or liable upon a plea or plea of no contest. The Hearing Officer
also may dismiss the case with or without prejudice or grant a properly made
motion by the Village voluntarily dismissing the case. If the Hearing Officer
issues a final determination of liability, he may impose fines, assess costs
and make specific orders to correct violations, all as are consistent with the
specific Code provision(s) found to have been violated.
   (N)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall inform the
parties orally and in writing of his determination. Except as specified in this
subsection, that determination constitutes a final determination for purposes
of judicial review and is subject to review under the Illinois Administrative
Review Law. Where a person fails to appear at the administrative hearing to
contest the alleged violation on the date and at the time and place specified
in a prior served or mailed notice pursuant to §
39.07, the Hearing Officer’s determination of liability shall become final
either upon a denial of a timely petition to set aside that default order, or
upon the expiration of the period for filing such a petition without a filing
having been made.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003; Am. Ord. CO-2015-27, passed 9-15-2015)
§ 39.09 VIOLATIONS OF ORDERS.
   Any person, having received notice and an opportunity for a hearing as
provided in this chapter, who knowingly fails to comply with an order issued by
an administrative Hearing Officer under this chapter, including the issuance of
a subpoena, shall, if the order is not stayed by a court of competent
jurisdiction prior to its effective date, be guilty of contempt. Contempt shall
be enforceable only by the Cook County judicial system and shall be punishable
by applicable law. Each day that the violation continues shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense. In a prosecution under this section, it shall
not be a defense that a person came into compliance with an order, sought
judicial review of it, or made efforts to comply with an order, subsequent to
its effective date.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 39.10 DEFAULTS.
   (A)   If on the date set for hearing the respondent, or his attorney or
agent of record, fails to appear, the Hearing Officer shall proceed with the
hearing and accept evidence relevant to the issue of liability and may enter a
default finding against the respondent as to the existence of a Code violation,
impose fines, penalties and assess costs.
   (B)   A copy of the order of default shall be served in any manner for
service of a notice of violation permitted by this chapter and applicable to
the violation.
   (C)   A copy of the order of default or letter accompanying such order shall
apprise the respondent of the procedures for setting aside the default
decision.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 39.11 PETITION TO SET ASIDE DEFAULT ORDER.
   (A)   A respondent against whom an order of default is entered may file a
motion with the Ordinance Enforcement Department to set aside the order of
default and for a new hearing date. A motion to set aside an order of default
must be filed within 21 days from the date of mailing or other service.
   (B)   A motion to set aside an order of default shall set forth the reason
(s) the respondent failed to appear on the original hearing date. A Hearing
Officer shall hear and rule on the motion. If the Hearing Officer determines
that the respondent's failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause and
grants the motion, a hearing will be held immediately on the alleged Code
violation set forth in the notice of violation unless the respondent requests
another hearing date and presents a showing of good cause for continuing the
hearing.
   (C)   If any default judgment is set aside pursuant to this section, the
Hearing Officer shall have authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien
which has been recorded for any debt due and owing the Village as a result of
the vacated default judgment.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 39.12 SUBPOENAS.
   (A)   An administrative Hearing Officer may issue a subpoena only if he
determines that the testimony of the witnesses or the documents or items sought
by the subpoena are necessary to present evidence that is:
      (1)   Relevant to the case; and
      (2)   Relates to a contested issue in the case.
   (B)   A subpoena issued under this chapter shall identify:
      (1)   The person to whom it is directed;
      (2)   The documents or other items sought by the subpoena, if any;
      (3)   The date for the appearance of the witnesses and the production of
the documents or other items described in the subpoena;
      (4)   The time for the appearance of the witnesses and the production of
the documents or other items described in the subpoena; and
      (5)   The place for the appearance of the witnesses and the production of
the documents or other items described in the subpoena.
   (C)   In no event shall the date identified for the appearance of the
witnesses or the production of the documents or other items be less than 7 days
after service of the subpoena.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 39.13 PAYMENT OF FINES.
   All fines and other monies to be paid to the Village in accordance with this
chapter shall be remitted to the Village and deposited in the appropriate
Village account as designated by the Village Manager.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 39.14 VEHICLE CONFISCATION HEARINGS.
   (A-1) Whenever the owner of record of a vehicle seized and impounded
pursuant to §§
99.18 through
99.25 of this Code requests a preliminary hearing in person and in writing at
the Ordinance Enforcement Department within 15 days after the vehicle is seized
and impounded, a preliminary hearing shall be held before the Administrative
Hearing Officer at the next administrative adjudication hearing date, unless
the vehicle was seized and impounded pursuant to §
99.19 and the Police Department determines that it must retain custody of the
vehicle under applicable state or federal forfeiture law. If, after the
preliminary hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that there
is probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in a violation of this
Code for which seizure and impoundment applies, the Administrative Hearing
Officer shall order the continued impoundment of the vehicle as provided in
this section unless the applicable bond is paid pursuant to division (G) of
this section. If the Administrative Hearing Officer determines that there is no
such probable cause, the vehicle will be returned without penalty or other
fees.
   (A)   Within 10 days after a vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to §§
99.18 through
99.25 of this Code, the Police Department or other appropriate Department shall
notify by first class mail or personal service the owner of record of the
seizure and impoundment of the vehicle, the penalty assessed, and of his right
to request a hearing before the Ordinance Enforcement Department to challenge
whether a violation of this Code for which seizure and impoundment applies has
occurred pursuant to this division. A copy of the notice shall be forwarded to
the Ordinance Enforcement Department. The notice shall state the penalties that
may be imposed if a hearing is not requested, including that a vehicle not
released by cash bond and remaining in the Village pound may be sold or
disposed of by the Village in accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   The owner of record seeking a hearing must file a written request for
a hearing with the Ordinance Enforcement Department no later than 30 days after
the vehicle was seized and impounded. The date of the hearing must not be more
than 30 days after a request for a hearing has been filed. Hearings are to be
conducted in accordance with §§
39.01 through
39.13, and to the extent that there is a conflict between §§
39.01 through
39.13 and this section, the latter shall prevail.
   (C)   If, after the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer determines
by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was used in the violation
of any applicable provision of the Village Code, the Administrative Hearing
Officer shall enter an order finding the owner of record liable to the Village
for the amount of the administrative penalty prescribed for the violation, plus
towing and storage fees. If, after a hearing, the administrative hearing
officer determines by the preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle was
not used in the violation of this Village Code, the Administrative Hearing
Officer shall enter an order finding for the owner and for the return of the
vehicle or cash bond, unless the vehicle was seized and impounded pursuant to §
99.19 and the Police Department determines that it must retain custody of the
vehicle under applicable state and federal forfeiture law, in which case the
vehicle shall not be returned unless and until the Village receives notices
from the appropriate state, or where applicable, federal officials that
forfeiture proceedings will not be instituted, or forfeiture proceedings have
concluded and there is a settlement or a court order providing that the vehicle
shall be returned to the owner of record.
   (D)   If a request for a hearing is not made within 30 days of the seizure
and impoundment of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and shall
be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of abandoned
vehicles. The vehicle shall not be released to the owner or record until the
administrative penalty prescribed for the violation is paid to the Village, and
only after the applicable towing and storage fees have been paid to the towing
agent.
   (E)   If the owner of record requests a hearing, but fails to appear at the
hearing or fails to request a hearing in a timely manner, the owner of record
shall be deemed to have waived his right to a hearing and an Administrative
Hearing Officer of the Ordinance Enforcement Department shall enter a default
order in favor of the Village in the amount of the administrative penalty
prescribed for the violation, plus towing and storage fees.
   (F)   The owner of record of the motor vehicle may waive his right to a
hearing under this section by agreeing and stipulating in writing that the
seized motor vehicle was being used in violation of this section. Once the
waiver is signed and the penalty and any applicable towing and storage fees are
paid, the seized vehicle will be released.
   (G)   If a bond in the amount of the administrative penalty prescribed for
the violation is posted with the Police Department, the impounded vehicle shall
be released to the owner of record. If the prescribed administrative penalty is
subsequently imposed under this section, the bond shall be forfeited to the
Village; however, in the event a violation is not proven by a preponderance of
the evidence, the bond will be returned to the person posting the bond. All
bond money posted pursuant to this section shall be held by the Police
Department until the Hearing Officer issues a decision, or, if there is a
judicial review, until the circuit court issues its decision.
   (H)   An administrative penalty, plus towing and storage fees, imposed
pursuant to this section shall constitute a debt due to the Village, which may
be enforced pursuant to §
39.16 or in any other manner provided by law. Any cash bond posted pursuant to
this section shall be applied to the penalty. Except as provided otherwise in
this section, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until the administrative
penalty, plus any applicable towing and storage fees, is paid to the Village,
in which case possession of the vehicle shall be given to the person who is
legally entitled to possess the vehicle, or the vehicle is sold or otherwise
disposed of to satisfy a judgment or enforce a lien as provided by law.
   (I)   Any motor vehicle that is not reclaimed within 30 days after the
expiration of the time during which the owner of record may seek judicial
review of the Village's action under this section, or, if judicial review is
sought, the time at which a final judgment is rendered in favor of the Village,
or the time a final administrative decision is rendered against an owner of
record who is in default, may be disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as
provided by law; provided that, if the vehicle was seized and impounded
pursuant to §
99.19 and the proceedings have been instituted under state or federal drug
asset forfeiture laws, the vehicle may not be disposed of by the Village except
as consistent with those proceedings.
   (J)   Fees for towing and storage of vehicles under this section shall be
the same as those charged for other Police Department tows.
   (K)   All penalties collected and retained by the Village under this section
shall be deposited with the Village Treasurer.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003; Am. Ord. C0-04-8, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord.
C0-06-09, passed 4-18-2006; Am. Ord. CO-2015-27, passed 9-15-2015)
§ 39.15 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any final decision by a Hearing Officer that a Code violation does or does
not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial
review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
§ 39.16 ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust judicial review procedure under the Illinois Administrative
Review Law are a debt due and owing the municipality and may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period in which judicial review under the
Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final determination of a
Code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
findings, decision and order of the Hearing Officer may be enforced in the same
manner as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   In any case in which a respondent fails to comply with a Hearing
Officer's order to correct a Code violation or imposing a fine or other
sanction as a result of a Code violation, any expenses incurred by the Village
to enforce the Hearing Officer's order, including, but not limited to,
attorney's fees, court costs, and costs related to property demolition or
foreclosure after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or a
Hearing Officer, shall be a debt due and owing the Village and may be collected
in accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expense being fixed by a
Hearing Officer, the respondent shall be provided with notice that states that
the respondent shall appear at a hearing before a Hearing Officer to determine
whether the respondent has failed to comply with the Hearing Officer's order.
The notice shall set the time for the hearing, which shall not be less than 7
days from the date that notice is served. Notice shall be served by first class
mail and the 7-day period shall begin to run on the date that the notice was
deposited in the mail.
   (D)   A lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or
both, of the defendant in the amount of any debt due and owing the municipality
under this section. The lien may be recorded and enforced in the same manner as
a judgment lien pursuant to a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction. No
lien may be enforced under this section until it has been recorded in the
manner provided by the Code of Civil Procedure, Article XII (735 ILCS 5/12-101
et seq.) or by the Uniform Commercial Code (810 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.)
   (E)   Nothing is this section shall prevent the Village from enforcing or
seeking to enforce any order of a Hearing Officer in any manner which is in
accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. CO-03-11, passed 4-21-2003)
PARKING VIOLATIONS
§ 39.30 PURPOSE; SCOPE; ADOPTION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide for the administrative
adjudication of violations regulating vehicular standing, parking, compliance,
and automated traffic laws within the Village and to establish a fair,
equitable, and efficient system for the enforcement of such ordinances. The
administrative adjudication system set forth in this section is established
pursuant to Illinois Vehicle Code, Division 2.1, and Illinois Vehicle Code, 625
ILCS 5/11-208.3.
   (B)   The Village Manager shall appoint a Village Traffic Compliance
Administrator who is authorized to:
      (1)   Adopt, distribute, and process standing, parking, compliance, and
automated traffic law violation notices and additional notices, and to collect
money paid as fines and penalties for violation of such ordinances;
      (2)   Establish procedures necessary for the prompt, fair and efficient
operation of the administrative adjudication system;
      (3)   Adopt rules and regulations pertaining to: the hearing process, the
content of forms and procedures, and the daily operation of the administrative
adjudication of standing, parking, compliance, and automated traffic laws
violations program; and
      (4)   Certify reports to the Secretary of State concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter as hereinafter set forth, and those of Illinois Vehicle Code, § 6-306.5
(625 ILCS 5/6-306.5).
   (C)   The Village Traffic Compliance Administrator shall delegate to the
Ordinance Enforcement Administrator of the Ordinance Enforcement Department his
authority to adopt rules and regulations pertaining to administrative hearing
proceedings and to conduct administrative hearing proceedings, including the
functions of the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator set forth in §§
39.35,
39.36(B) and (G),
39.37(C),
39.40(C) and (D), and division(B)(3) of this section.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
Editor’s note:
   625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 was repealed by P.A. 101-652, sec. 10-193.
§ 39.31 PRIMA FACIE RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY; PARKING
VIOLATION ISSUANCE AND REMOVAL.
   (A)   Whenever any vehicle is in violation of any provision of the Village
Code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking, standing, or compliance, any
person, whether owner or lessee, in whose name the vehicle is registered with
the Secretary of State of Illinois or other state’s registry of motor vehicles,
shall be prima facie responsible for the violation and subject to the fine and
penalty therefor. The Village and the ticketing agent shall accurately record
the state registration number of the ticketed vehicle. A prima facie case shall
not be established when:
      (1)   The ticketing agent has failed to specify the proper state
registration number of the cited vehicle on the notice;
      (2)   The Village has failed to accurately record the specified state
registration number.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle exhibits a violation of any provision of the
Village Code prohibiting or restricting vehicular parking, standing, or
compliance, any police officer, parking enforcement officer, or other person
designated by the Village Manager, who observes such violation may issue a
notice of violation as provided for in § 39.32, or, in the case of minor
offenses specified in §
70.03, may issue a Compliance “C” ticket and minor violation notice, and serve
the notice on the registered owner of the vehicle by handing it to the operator
of the vehicle, if he or she is present, or by affixing it to the vehicle in a
conspicuous place. The issuer of the notice shall specify on the notice his or
her identification number, the particular ordinance alleged to have been
violated, the make and state registration number of the cited vehicle, and the
place, date, time and nature of the alleged violation and shall certify the
correctness of the specified information by signing his or her name at the time
of service as provided in Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3, or, in
the case of a computer-generated notice, by signing a single certificate to be
kept by the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator or his or her designee
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while it was
under his or her control.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the registered owner
of the vehicle or his or her designee, to remove from a vehicle a parking
violation notice or Compliance “C” ticket and minor violation notice affixed
pursuant to this chapter. The fine for a first-time violation of this section
shall be $250. Subsequent violations shall be penalized by imposition of a $500
fine.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2014-16, passed 4-15-2014)
§ 39.32 NOTICE; CONTENTS, DISTRIBUTION, AND RECORD KEEPING.
   (A)   Standing, parking and compliance violation notices, including
Compliance “C” tickets and minor violation notices, shall contain the
information required under §
39.31. In addition, the notice shall state the applicable fine, the monetary
penalty which shall be automatically assessed for late payment, that vehicle
immobilization and driver’s license suspension may be imposed if fines and
penalties are not paid in full, that payment of the stated fine, and of any
applicable penalty for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of
the violation, and information as to the availability of an administrative
hearing in which the violation may be contested on its merits and the time and
manner in which such hearing may be had.
   (B)   The Village Traffic Compliance Administrator or his or her designee
shall distribute violation notices to parking enforcement officers, other
persons authorized to issue violation notices, and the Department of Police for
issuance pursuant to §
39.31. The Village Traffic Compliance Administrator shall assure the
maintenance of a record of each set of notices issued to all persons authorized
to issue violation notices.
   (C)   The Village Traffic Compliance Administrator or his or her designee
shall compile and maintain complete and accurate records relating to all
violation notices issued pursuant to §§
39.31 and
70.03 and the dispositions thereof. In addition, the Village Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall make certified reports to the Secretary of State pursuant
to Illinois Vehicle Code, § 6-306.5 (625 ILCS 5/6-306.5).
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2014-16, passed 4-15-2014)
Editor’s note:
   625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 was repealed by P.A. 101-652, sec. 10-193.
§ 39.33 DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   A person served with a violation notice pursuant to §
39.31 or §
77.03 shall, within 10 days from the date of the notice:
      (1)   Pay the indicated fine in the manner indicated on the notice; or,
either
      (2)   Submit the materials set forth in §
39.35 to obtain an adjudication by mail; or
      (3)   Request an administrative hearing as set forth in §
39.36 to contest the charged violation. A response by mail shall be deemed
timely if postmarked within 10 days of the issuance of the notice of violation.
      A respondent served with a Compliance “C” ticket and minor violation
notice pursuant to §
70.03 may settle the charge in accordance with §
70.03(B). If the respondent fails to settle the charge within the time frames
set forth in §
70.03(B), he or she must either (1) submit the materials set forth in §
39.35 to obtain an adjudication by mail; or (2) appear at the administrative
hearing on the date specified in the ticket and notice to contest the charged
violation.
   (B)   If the respondent submits documentary evidence to obtain an
adjudication by mail pursuant to §
39.35, the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator shall send respondent a
copy of the Administrative Hearing Officer’s determination in accordance with
division (F) of this section.
   (C)   (1)   If the respondent requests an administrative hearing to contest
the cited violation pursuant to §
39.36, the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator shall notify the respondent
in writing of the location and time available for a hearing in accordance with
division (F) of this section.
      (2)   Where a respondent who has requested an administrative hearing
fails to either pay the stated fine prior to the hearing or appear at the
hearing, a determination of violation liability shall be entered in the amount
of the fine indicated on the notice of violation, plus costs. In addition, a
penalty for late payment shall be immediately assessed in the amount set forth
in division (E) of this section. The Village Traffic Compliance Administrator
will cause a notice of liability to be sent to the respondent in accordance
with division (F) of this section. Upon the occurrence of a final determination
of liability as provided for in §
39.38, any unpaid fine, penalty and/or costs will constitute a debt due and
owing the Village.
   (D)   (1)   If no response is made in accordance with division (A) of this
section, a penalty for late payment shall be immediately assessed in the amount
set forth in division (F) of this section, and the Village Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall cause a second notice of violation to be sent to the
respondent in accordance with division (G) of this section. The notice shall
specify the date, time and location of the violation, the make and state
registration number of the cited vehicle, the Code provision violated, the
applicable fine and penalty, and the time and manner in which the respondent
may obtain an adjudication by mail or request a hearing to contest the
violation. If the respondent requests an administrative hearing to contest the
cited violation, the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator will cause a
notice of hearing to be sent to the respondent as provided in division (D) of
this section.
      (2)   If the respondent fails to pay the indicated fine and penalty,
submit documentary evidence to obtain an adjudication by mail, or request a
hearing to contest the charged violation within 10 days from the date of such
notice, as provided in §
39.33(A), or, for Compliance “C” tickets issued pursuant to §
70.03, fails to settle the charge in accordance with that section, submit
documentation, or to subsequently appear at the assigned administrative hearing
date, a determination of liability shall be entered in the amount of the fine
indicated on the notice of violation, plus the applicable penalty. Upon the
occurrence of a final determination of liability, an unpaid fine, penalty, and/
or cost will constitute a debt due and owing the Village. The second notice of
violation shall provide the above information.
   (E)   A penalty for late payment may be imposed as indicated throughout the
chapter. The penalty for late payment shall be an amount equal to the fine for
the subject violation. Only 1 late payment penalty may be imposed on each
violation. Costs may also be assessed against a respondent in the discretion of
the Hearing Officer.
   (F)   The Village Traffic Compliance Administrator shall serve the notice of
hearing, the second notice of violation, the Administrative Hearing Officer’s
determination, the notice of final determination of liability, the notice of
impending vehicle immobilization, and the notice of impending driver’s license
suspension, where applicable, by first-class mail, postage prepaid, to the
address of the registered owner of the vehicle as recorded with the Secretary
of State of Illinois. If the vehicle is registered in a state other than
Illinois, the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator shall send the notice in
question to the address of the registered owner as recorded in such other
state’s registry of motor vehicles.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2014-16, passed 4-15-2014)
§ 39.34 GROUNDS FOR ADJUDICATION BY MAIL OR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   A person charged with a standing, parking or compliance violation, including
Compliance “C” tickets and minor violation notices, may contest the charge
through an adjudication by mail or at an administrative hearing limited to 1 or
more of the following grounds with appropriate evidence to support:
   (A)   The respondent was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle at the
time of the violation;
   (B)   The cited vehicle or its state registration plates were stolen at the
time the violation occurred;
   (C)   The relevant signs prohibiting or restricting parking were missing or
obscured;
   (D)   The subject parking meter was inoperable or malfunctioned through no
fault of the respondent; or
   (E)   The facts alleged in the violation notice are materially inconsistent
or do not support a finding that the specified regulation was violated.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2014-16, passed 4-15-2014)
§ 39.35 ADJUDICATION BY MAIL; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Administrative hearings to review materials submitted for the
adjudication by mail of notices of standing, parking, compliance (including
Compliance “C” tickets and minor violation notices), or automated traffic law
violations issued pursuant to §
39.31,
70.03 or
77.03 shall be held by an Administrative Hearing Officer and conducted in
accordance with §§
39.31 through
39.41. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, in the event of a conflict between
§§
39.01 through
39.16 and §§
39.30 through
39.41, the latter shall be controlling.
   (B)   The respondent may contest a standing, parking, compliance (including
Compliance “C” tickets and minor violation notices) or automated traffic law
violation based on 1 or more of the grounds provided in §
39.34 or
77.04, as applicable, by mailing to the Department of Administrative
Adjudication the following materials and information: the notice of violation,
the full name, address, and telephone number(s) of the respondent; the make,
model, and year of the vehicle; any documentary evidence to rebut the charge;
and a written statement signed by the respondent setting forth facts relevant
to establishing a defense to the charge. A legible photocopy of any documentary
evidence submitted by any party shall be accepted as the equivalent of the
original document.
   (C)   No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance
of the evidence; provided, however, that a violation notice, or a copy thereof,
issued in accordance with §
39.31 or
77.03, or a Compliance “C” ticket and minor violation notice issued pursuant to
§
70.03 shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts specified
therein.
   (D)   Upon review of the materials submitted in accordance with division (B)
of this section, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall enter a determination
of no liability or of liability in the amount of the fine and any applicable
penalty or costs for the subject violation, Upon issuance, such determination
shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial review under
the Administrative Review Law of Illinois. Failure to pay any fine, penalty, or
costs imposed within 10 days of the date of a determination of liability shall
result in the imposition of a late payment penalty as set forth in §
39.33(F).
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2014-16, passed 4-15-2014)
§ 39.36 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Administrative hearing for the in-person adjudication of violation
notices issued pursuant to §
39.31 or
77.03, and of Compliance “C” tickets issued pursuant to §
70.03 and not otherwise settled shall be held before an Administrative Hearing
Officer and conducted in accordance with §§
39.01 through
39.16. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, in the event of a conflict between
§§
39.01 through
39.16 and this subchapter, the latter shall be controlling.
   (B)   The respondent may appear pro se or, at his or her own expense, by an
attorney. An attorney who appears on behalf of any person shall file with the
Hearing Officer a written appearance on a form provided by the Village Traffic
Compliance Administrator for such purposes.
   (C)   The formal and technical rules of evidence shall not apply in the
conduct of the hearing.
   (D)   All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation, which shall be
administered by the Administrative Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer may
issue subpoenas to secure the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents; provided, however, that a respondent who
appears by an attorney shall not be compelled to attend the hearing and may
submit his or her testimony, if any, by affidavit. In addition, witnesses who
have not been subpoenaed to attend the hearing may submit their testimony, if
any, by affidavit.
   (E)   No violation may be established except upon proof by a preponderance
of the evidence; provided, however that a violation notice, or a copy thereof,
issued, signed, and served in accordance with §
39.31 or
77.03, or a Compliance “C” ticket and minor violation notice issued pursuant to
§
70.03, shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts specified
therein.
   (F)   The Administrative Hearing Officer may, on a showing of good cause,
grant continuances to a date certain.
   (G)   The Village Traffic Compliance Administrator shall cause a record to
be made of each hearing, and recording devices may be used for such purposes.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2014-16, passed 4-15-2014)
§ 39.37 HEARING; DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY OR OF NO LIABILITY; PETITION.
   (A)   Upon conclusion of a hearing under §
39.36, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall issue a determination of no
liability or of liability in the amount of the fine for the subject violation.
Upon issuance, such determination shall constitute a final determination for
the purpose of judicial review under the Administrative Review Law of Illinois.
Failure by the respondent to pay the fine imposed within 10 days shall result
in the imposition of a penalty for late payment pursuant to §
39.33(E). Where requested by the Village, the Administrative Hearing Officer is
authorized to impose a term of community service in lieu of a fine. Such
community service may be performed through a program administered by the
Village, if available, or at a not-for-profit organization within the Village.
Where a defendant fails to perform community service as ordered by the
Administrative Hearing Officer, the term of community service may be converted
to a fine.
   (B)   If a person fails to respond to the violation notice and the second
notice of violation, or fails to appear at a requested hearing, a determination
of liability shall be entered pursuant to either §
39.33(C) or (D) and shall be served upon the person in accordance with §
39.33(F). Such determination shall become final for purpose of judicial review
under the Administrative Review Law of Illinois upon the denial of, or the
expiration of the time in which to file, a timely petition to set aside the
determination as provided in division (C) of this section.
   (C)   Within 21 days from the issuance of a determination of liability
pursuant to division (B) of this section, the person against whom the
determination was entered may petition the Village Traffic Compliance
Administrator by appearing in person, at the location specified in the
determination, to set aside the determination; provided, however, the grounds
for the petition shall be limited to:
      (1)   The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle
on the date the standing, parking, compliance, or automated traffic law
violation notice was first issued;
      (2)   The person having already paid the fine or penalty for the
violation in question; or
      (3)   Excusable failure, based upon criteria established by the Village
Traffic Compliance Administrator, to appear at or request a new date for
hearing.
   (D)   The petitioner shall appear with appropriate evidence, pursuant to §
39.34 or §
77.04, so that if the petition is granted, he or she is prepared to proceed
immediately with a hearing on the merits.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 39.38 NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION.
   (A)   If any fine, penalty and costs are owing and unpaid after a
determination of liability under this chapter has become final and the
respondent has exhausted or failed to exhaust judicial procedures for review,
the Ordinance Enforcement Administrator shall cause a notice of final
determination of liability to be sent to the respondent in accordance with §
39.33(F).
   (B)   Any fine and penalty remaining unpaid after the notice of final
determination of liability is sent shall constitute a debt due and owing the
Village, which may be enforced in the manner set forth in §
39.16. Failure of the respondent to pay such fine or penalty within 14 days of
the notice may result in:
      (1)   The immobilization of the person's vehicle for failure to pay fines
or penalties for 3 or more standing, parking, compliance or automated traffic
law violations; and
      (2)   The suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay
fines or penalties for 10 or more parking violations or 5 or more automated
traffic law violations.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-208)
§ 39.39 IMMOBILIZATION PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Village Traffic Compliance Administrator or his designee is
authorized to direct and supervise a program of vehicle immobilization for the
purpose of enforcing the standing, parking, compliance, and automated traffic
law ordinances of the Traffic Code. The program of vehicle immobilization shall
provide for immobilizing any eligible vehicle located on the public way within
the Village geographical boundaries or any Village-owned property by placement
of a restraint in such a manner as to prevent its operation.
   (B)   (1)   When the registered owner of a vehicle has accumulated 3 or more
final determinations of standing, parking, compliance, or automated traffic law
enforcement violation liability, in any combination, for which the fines and
penalties, if applicable, have not been paid in full, or accrues 2 unpaid
standing, parking, compliance, or automated traffic law enforcement violations
liability, the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator shall cause a notice of
impending vehicle immobilization to be sent, to the registered owner, in
accordance with §
39.33(F). The notice of impending vehicle immobilization shall state the name
and address of the registered owner, the state registration number of the
vehicle or vehicles registered to such owner, the serial number of violation
notices which have resulted in final determinations of liability for which
fines and/or penalties remain unpaid, and that the motor vehicle is subject to
immobilization and/or towing and impoundment if the fines and penalties are not
paid within, but not later than, 21 days of the date of notice. Furthermore,
the notice shall state that a person may challenge the validity of the notice
of impending vehicle immobilization by requesting a hearing and appearing in
person to submit evidence which would conclusively disprove liability within 21
days of the date of the notice. Documentary evidence which would conclusively
disprove liability shall be based on the following grounds:
         (a)   That all fines and penalties for the violations cited in the
notice have been paid in full; or
         (b)   That the registered owner has not accumulated 3 or more final
determinations of parking violation liability which were unpaid at the time the
notice of impending vehicle immobilization was issued.
      (2)   If a registered owner has tickets listed in the seizure section of
a notice, he or she must pay all fines and penalties within 21 days of the
first seizure notice of such fines and penalties or any vehicle registered in
his or her name may be booted. Payment for all required tickets is necessary or
a registered owner’s vehicle(s) will remain boot eligible.
   (C)   Upon immobilization of an eligible vehicle, a notice shall be affixed
to the vehicle in a conspicuous place. Such notice shall warn that the vehicle
is immobilized and that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in its
damage. The notice shall also state that the unauthorized removal of or damage
to the immobilizing restraint is a violation of Illinois Criminal Code, §§ 16-
1 and 21-1 (720 ILCS 5/16-1 and 21-1). The notice shall also provide
information specifying how release of the immobilizing restraint may be had,
and how the registered owner may obtain an immobilization hearing. If the
restraint has not been released within 24 hours of its placement, the restraint
shall be released and the vehicle towed and impounded.
   (D)   The owner of an immobilized vehicle or other authorized person may
secure the release of the vehicle by paying the immobilization, towing and
storage fees provided in division (G) of this section and all fines and
penalties remaining due on each final determination of liability issued to such
person.
   (E)   The owner of an immobilized vehicle shall have the right to a hearing
to determine whether the immobilization or any subsequent towing was erroneous,
if the owner files a written request for a hearing with the Village Traffic
Compliance Administrator within 15 days after immobilization or 15 days of the
date of the notice sent pursuant to division (F) of this section, whichever is
later. Hearings requested pursuant to this section shall be conducted on any
business day within 15 business days upon receipt of a written request for a
hearing. The determination regarding the validity of the immobilization shall
become final for the purpose of judicial review under the Administrative Review
Law of Illinois upon issuance. Failure to request or attend a scheduled hearing
shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. A hearing provided by this
section shall not determine the validity of or otherwise adjudicate any
citation or notice of ordinance violation issued relative to the immobilized
vehicle, but shall only relate to whether the vehicle was properly immobilized
or towed.
   (F)   Within 10 days after an immobilized vehicle has been impounded, a
notice of impoundment shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the address of the registered owner as listed with the Secretary
of State. The notice shall state that the owner has the right to request a
post-immobilization and post-towing hearing as provided in division (E) of this
section, and that if the vehicle is not claimed within 30 days from the date of
the notice, the vehicle may be sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with
Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/4-208.
   (G)   The fine for immobilization shall be $60, and the fine for towing,
subsequent to immobilization, shall be an amount not to exceed $500. The owner
of the vehicle shall also be charged reasonable storage fees should the vehicle
be removed to a private storage facility, provided that no fees shall be
assessed for any immobilization or tow which has been determined to be
erroneous.
   (H)   The Village Traffic Compliance Administrator shall appoint or retain
the services of an individual agency or company to tow and impound vehicles in
accordance herewith, provided that the individual, agency or company is fully
insured and licensed according to local and state law and has available a
secured impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For
purposes of this section, a secured area shall mean an area bounded by a fence,
chainlink or otherwise, of sufficient height and with locking gates so as to
minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful to remove or damage the immobilizing dev ice or
to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained by an immobilization device without
the prior approval of the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator. Any person
who violates this section shall be subject to a penalty of $500 for such
violation.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2018-39, passed 9-18-2018)
§ 39.40 DRIVER’S LICENSE SUSPENSION.
   (A)   When a person has failed to pay any fine or penalty due and owing
pursuant to this chapter on 10 or more standing, parking or compliance
violations, or 5 or more automated traffic laws violations, the Village Traffic
Compliance Administrator shall cause a notice of impending driver's license
suspension to be sent, in accordance with §
39.33(F). The notice shall state that failure to pay the amount owing within 45
days of the date of the notice will result in the Village's notifying the
Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension
proceedings pursuant to Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5.
   (B)   If a person sent a notice pursuant to division (A) of this section
fails to pay the amount owing within the time stated on the notice, the Village
Traffic Compliance Administrator may file with the Secretary of State a
certified report, in accordance with Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5
(c), that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings, and
the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator shall assess a $20 filing fee
against the person named in the certified report with the Secretary of State.
   (C)   (1)   A person named in a certified report filed pursuant to division
(B) of this section may, within 21 days of the date of the notice sent by the
Secretary of State pursuant to Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(b),
file with the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator a written statement and
supporting documentation to challenge the report; provided, however, the
grounds for such challenge shall be limited to:
         (a)   The person not having been the owner or lessee of the vehicle or
vehicles receiving the violation notices on the date or dates such notices were
issued; or
         (b)   The person having already paid the fine and penalty for the
violations indicated on the report.
      (2)   The Traffic Compliance Administrator shall send, within 3 business
days, notice of the decision on the challenge of the report after receipt
thereof.
   (D)   If a person named in a certified report has paid the previously
reported fine or penalty or if the report is determined by the Village Traffic
Compliance Administrator to be in error, the Village Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall notify the Secretary of State in accordance with Illinois
Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(d). A certified copy of such notification
shall be given, upon request, and at no charge, to the person named therein.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
Editor’s note:
   625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 was repealed by P.A. 101-652, sec. 10-193.
§ 39.41 LESSOR OF VEHICLE NOT LIABLE FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   In accordance with Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1306, no
person who is the lessor of a vehicle pursuant to a written lease agreement
shall be liable for a violation of any standing or parking regulation involving
such vehicle during the period of the lease, if upon receipt of a notice of
violation sent within 120 days of the violation, he shall, within 60 days
thereafter, provide to the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator, the name
and address of the lessee, a copy of the lease, and any other additional
information as may be required by the Village.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a lessor's notification of the name and address of his
lessee, provided pursuant to Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1305 and 11-
1306, the Village Traffic Compliance Administrator shall cause a notice of
violation to be sent to the lessee as provided for in §
39.33(D). The lessee of the vehicle shall be afforded the same opportunities to
contest the notice of violation as are afforded to the registered owner.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 39.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The violation of any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   The violation of any provision of the Village Traffic Code
related to vehicular standing, parking and compliance shall be a civil offense
punishable by applicable fine and penalties, and no criminal penalty or civil
sanction other than that prescribed in the Traffic Code shall be imposed.
      (2)   Unless otherwise specified in a specific section of this code, the
fines listed below shall be imposed for a violation of the Traffic Code related
to vehicular standing, parking and compliance. For violation of any provision
of any Village ordinance regulating, restricting or prohibiting the standing,
parking and compliance of motor vehicles along the streets, by-ways, alleyways,
regulated parking lots or such other locations as may be controlled by off-
street parking agreements, located within the geographical boundaries of the
Village, the fine shall be:
         (a)   Forty-five dollars for all violations of
Chapter 72 where no other fine is otherwise specified;
         (b)   Three hundred and fifty dollars for all violations of §
72.33;
         (c)   One hundred dollars for all automated traffic law violations
(violation of 625 ILCS 5/11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or §
71.16 or
71.17 of the Village Code; and
         (d)   The settlement amounts set forth in §
70.03(B) for minor offenses defined in §
70.03(A) if settled. If not settled, the penalty shall be the full fine
specified on the Compliance “C” ticket and/or minor violation notice, or, if no
fine is specified, a fine as set forth in §
10.99.
      (3)   Penalties for late payment in the amount equal to the fine shall be
imposed for failure to pay a fine pursuant to the time for doing so as set
forth in §
39.33.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008; Am. Ord. CO- 2010-07, passed 5-4-2010; Am. Ord.
CO-2012-45, passed 11-5-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2014-16, passed 4-15-2014; Am. Ord.
CO- 2020-06, passed 3-3-2020)
CHAPTER 40: PSEBA BENEFIT ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
40.01   Purpose
   
40.02   Policy and procedure for administering applications for PSEBA benefits
   
40.03   Policy and procedure for hearings for PSEBA benefits
   
40.04   PSEBA benefits granted by the Village
§ 40.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient method of
determining the eligibility of a full-time Village employee for the benefits
enumerated under the Public Safety Employee Benefits Act, 820 ILCS 320/1 et
seq., as amended ("PSEBA"). All benefits provided by the Village to employees
pursuant to the PSEBA shall be consistent with the PSEBA.
(Ord. 2018-21, passed 5-1-2018)
§ 40.02 POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTERING APPLICATIONS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS.
   (A)   Employees, or family member(s) of injured or deceased employees, who
may qualify for PSEBA benefits (hereinafter "Applicant") must file a full and
complete application in writing with the Village Manager no later than 60
calendar days from the date of issuance of a written decision by the Police
Pension Fund Board or Firefighter Pension Fund Board, whichever is applicable,
granting a line of duty disability pension. Failure to timely file a full and
complete application shall result in a forfeiture of benefits under PSEBA.
   (B)   A complete application shall include the following:
      (1)   The applicant's name and date of hire, detailed information
regarding the incident for which PSEBA benefits are sought, including
information relating to how the injury was sustained in the line of duty,
including the date, time, place, nature of injury, and other factual
circumstances surrounding the incident.
      (2)   The applicant's firsthand knowledge explaining, to the Village's
satisfaction, how the injury directly resulted from:
         (a)   Response to fresh pursuit;
         (b)   Response to what is reasonably believed to be an emergency;
         (c)   Response to an unlawful act perpetrated by another; or
         (d)   The investigation of a criminal act.
      (3)   A signed unconditional PSEBA medical authorization release which
authorizes the Village to collect information related to the incident
including, but not limited to, disability pension proceedings, worker's
compensation records, and medical records, and a complete list of the names and
addresses for all health care providers involved in the diagnosis, treatment,
review or handling of the injury for which PSEBA benefits are sought.
      (4)   A signed unconditional PSEBA general information release specifying
the name and signature of the applicant or her/his authorized representative
along with legal proof of said representation and name and signature of witness
authorizing the collection of information necessary to review the application.
      (5)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses to the
incident resulting in the injury for which PSEBA benefits are sought, along
with any statements of the witnesses which the applicant either possesses, may
obtain or is aware of.
      (6)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of witnesses the
applicant intends to call at the PSEBA hearing, along with their anticipated
subjects of testimony and any opinions the witnesses are expected to give.
      (7)   Information and documentation filed with the appropriate Pension
Board.
      (8)   Information regarding other sources of health insurance benefits
currently enrolled in, received by, or available to the applicant and/or the
applicant's family members, including the source of the benefits and the
benefits provided or available.
      (9)   Any other information supporting the PSEBA eligibility
requirements.
   (C)   The PSEBA application must be sworn to by the applicant and notarized
to certify the truthfulness of the application's contents. A review of the
application shall not occur until the application is complete.
   (D)   On the date that the PSEBA application is deemed complete by the
Village, the completed application shall then be submitted to the Village
Manager as the preliminary record, and a copy of the same shall be date stamped
and provided to the applicant.
   (E)   Upon receipt of a complete application for PSEBA benefits, the Village
Manager shall set the matter for an administrative hearing with the Village
Manager or his or her designee serving as the hearing officer to make a
determination on whether to grant the application and provide the applicant
with benefits under PSEBA.
   (F)   The applicant shall be given written notice of the date for the
administrative hearing not less than ten calendar days prior to the
commencement of the hearing. If the applicant, upon receiving written notice of
the administrative hearing, cannot attend said date, the applicant must contact
the hearing officer in writing within seven calendar days after being served.
The hearing officer shall establish an alternative hearing date within 30
calendar days of the original hearing date. The applicant's failure to appear
at the administrative hearing shall result in denial of PSEBA benefits.
   (G)   The Village Manager may delegate any of his/her authority, duties and
obligations under this chapter, in whole or part, to a designee, or designees.
(Ord. 2018-21, passed 5-1-2018)
§ 40.03 POLICY AND PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS FOR PSEBA BENEFITS.
   (A)   Hearing officer. The Village Manager or his or her designee shall be
the hearing officer for hearings on applications for PSEBA benefits. The
hearing officer shall have all of the authorities granted under statute and
common law relative to the conduct of administrative hearings, including to:
      (1)   Adopt, revise and enforce rules of procedure for hearings;
      (2)   Preside over hearings;
      (3)   Administer oaths;
      (4)   Hear testimony and accept evidence that is relevant to the issue of
eligibility under PSEBA;
      (5)   Issue subpoenas to secure attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant papers or documents upon the request of the parties,
their representatives or the hearing officer;
      (6)   Rule upon objections to the admissibility of evidence;
      (7)   Preserve and authenticate the record of the hearing and all
exhibits in evidence introduced at the hearing; and
      (8)   Issue a final written determination on each application for PSEBA
benefits based on the evidence presented at the hearing which shall include
findings of fact, decision and order.
   (B)   Hearings. Hearings for the determination of eligibility for benefits
under PSEBA shall be initiated by the Village after the submission of a full
and complete PSEBA application, and a determination by the hearing officer that
it is appropriate to proceed with the hearing, which determination shall
include consideration of the status of any disability pension proceeding
related to the applicant and whether the disability pension proceeding has
resulted in a final and non-appealable decision. A hearing shall be held to
adjudicate and determine whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under
the PSEBA. If the applicant is found eligible, the PSEBA benefits provided to
the applicant shall be consistent with the PSEBA.
      (1)   Record. Hearings shall be attended by a certified court reporter,
and a transcript of all proceedings shall be made by said certified court
reporter.
      (2)   Procedures. The Village and the applicant shall be entitled to
representation by counsel at hearings and may present witnesses, testimony and
documents, may cross-examine opposing witnesses, and may request the issuance
by the hearing officer of subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant
witnesses or the production of relevant documents. The hearing officer may
issue subpoenas to compel the appearance of relevant witnesses or the
production of relevant documents in his/her discretion.
      (3)   Evidence. The Illinois Rules of Evidence shall apply to the extent
practicable unless, by such application, the hearing officer determines that
application of the rule would be an injustice or preclude the introduction of
evidence of the type commonly relied upon by a reasonably prudent person in the
conduct of her/his affairs. Such determination shall be in the sole discretion
of the hearing officer. The hearing officer must state on the record his or her
reason for that determination.
      (4)   Final determination. A written determination by the hearing officer
of whether the applicant is eligible for benefits under the PSEBA shall
constitute a final administrative determination for the purpose of judicial
review under the common law writ of certiorari. Motions to reconsider, set
aside or challenge the final determination of the hearing officer are not
permitted.
      (5)   Burden of proof. At any administrative hearing, the applicant shall
have the obligation and burden of proof to establish that the applicant is
eligible and qualified to receive PSEBA benefits. The standard of proof in all
hearings shall be by the preponderance of the evidence.
(Ord. 2018-21, passed 5-1-2018)
§ 40.04 PSEBA BENEFITS GRANTED BY THE VILLAGE.
   (A)   Basic group insurance plan. If an applicant is determined to be
eligible for PSEBA benefits, the applicant will be eligible to receive
continued health coverage consistent with the PSEBA under the Village's basic
group health insurance plan. The basic group health insurance plan shall be the
least expensive health plan offered to Village employees at the time PSEBA
benefits are awarded as determined solely by the Village from time to time.
PSEBA benefits do not include benefits not provided in the Village's basic
group health insurance plan, such as, but not limited to, dental, vision, life
insurance, etc.
   (B)   Reduction or elimination of PSEBA benefits by other health coverage.
If an applicant becomes eligible to receive health insurance benefits from any
other source, including, but not limited to, Medicare, the applicant's PSEBA
coverage may be reduced or eliminated as determined by the Village consistent
with PSEBA.
   (C)   Affidavit of continued PSEBA eligibility. All recipients of PSEBA
benefits from the Village shall complete and return to the Village Manager on
an annual basis an affidavit verifying the recipient's continued eligibility
for PSEBA benefits. The affidavit must be completed and returned to the Village
Manager within 60 calendar days of written notice from the Village. If the
recipient does not complete and return the affidavit within the time required,
the Village Manager shall give the recipient an additional written notice
providing an additional 30 calendar days for the recipient to complete and
return the affidavit. Failure to return the affidavit within the time required
shall result in the recipient incurring responsibility for reimbursing the
Village for premiums paid during the period the affidavit is due and not filed.
(Ord. 2018-21, passed 5-1-2018)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter
   
50.   GARBAGE AND WASTE
    
51.   WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
   
52.   PREVAILING RATE OF WAGES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND WASTE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Department of Public Works duties
   
50.03   Collection and disposal of wastes
   
50.04   Village garbage disposal service
   
50.05   Fees
Containers and Collection
   
50.20   Collection frequency
   
50.21   Waste containers
   
50.22   Waste materials
   
50.23   Location of containers
   
50.24   Inspection of containers
   
50.25   Schedule of collection fees
Regulations
   
50.40   Picking through refuse
   
50.41   Accumulation of waste on premises
   
50.42   Garbage deposited in containers
   
50.43   Disposal of wastes other than licensed firm
   
50.44   Disposal of wastes other than by collection
   
50.45   Commercial type incinerators
   
50.46   Transporting wastes over streets
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a separate meaning.
   FAMILY UNIT. One or more persons occupying premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by birth, adoption or
marriage, but no unrelated group shall consist of more than 5 persons, as
distinguished from a group occupying a licensed rooming house or hotel.
   GARBAGE. Any rejected or waste household food, offal, swill or carrion and
every accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that attends the
preparation, use, cooking and dealing in, or storage of, meats, fish, fowl,
fruits or vegetables and any other matter of any nature, which is subject to
decay, putrefaction and the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odor,
or which during or after decay, may serve as a breeding or feeding material for
flies or other germ-carrying insects.
   PREMISES. Any house, residence, building, flat, apartment, room, dwelling
place, or place of abode.
   WASTE. Any or all of the following: domestic garbage, refuse, ashes, tin
cans, bottles, cartons, books, newspapers, boxes and other household trash,
including discarded household furniture, furnishings, fixtures and appliances
of all kinds, manure, dead animals or parts thereof, trees, tree branches, tree
roots, tree trunks, brush, shrubs, grass clippings, plant stalks and leaves.
   WASTE CONTAINER. A can of galvanized iron or noncorrodible metal or plastic,
rodent-proof and flyproof, durable and leakproof, of the type commonly sold as
a garbage can, of a suitable gauge and construction to insure durability, with
suitable handles on can and lid, and of a capacity of not less than 10 gallons
and not more than 32 gallons. The term shall also mean a plastic or paper bag
container specifically  manufactured and sold as a garbage container which bag
shall be rodent-proof and flyproof, durable and leakproof and the
specifications for which have been approved by the Director of Public Works on
the recommendation of the Building Director.
   WASTE DISPOSAL CONTRACTOR. The contractor with whom the Village has
contracted for the removal of waste from all residential premises in the
Village using the Village’s waste disposal services.
   WASTE DISPOSAL FIRM. Any person engaged in the business of removal and
disposal of waste as defined herein.
(1997 Code, § 15.01) (Ord. 71-3, passed 2-11- 1971; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 50.02 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS DUTIES.
   All matters relating to or affecting the accumulation, collection, removal
or disposal of waste, unless specifically otherwise assigned by the
administrative discretion of the Village Manager, shall be subject to and under
the supervision of the Department of Public Works.
(1997 Code, § 15.03)
§ 50.03 COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL OF WASTES.
   (A)   All waste, dead animals and other materials shall be called for and
disposed of by a waste disposal firm licensed by the Village and shall not be
collected or disposed of in any other manner except by building and other
contractors who are removing wastes resulting from the performance of work done
by such contractor within the Village, or as hereinafter provided in this
chapter. All waste containers containing any waste shall be emptied and all
waste removed at least once each 7 days, or more frequently if so determined as
necessary by the Director of Public Works or the Building Director.
   (B)   If the waste is of such character or quantity that the crews of the
waste disposal contractor makingthe scheduled pickups are not required to
collect the same, the person in possession of such premises shall immediately
make a request for special services from the Village or its waste disposal
contractor. Charges as designated in §
50.05 shall be made for such special services.
(1997 Code, § 50.11) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 50.04 VILLAGE GARBAGE DISPOSAL SERVICE.
   (A)   Residential buildings containing 3 or less dwelling units. Every
person who owns or manages any residential building within the Village which
contains 3 or less dwelling units shall be required to have accumulations of
waste collected and disposed of regularly by the waste disposal contractor
employed by the Village for the sum specified for each service. The occupancy
of a building for residential purpose shall be prima facie evidence that waste
is being produced and accumulated in such building.
   (B)   Residential buildings containing more than 3 dwelling units,
commercial and industrial buildings. Every person who owns or manages any
residential building within the Village containing more than 3 dwelling units,
any commercial building and any industrial building must arrange for disposal
of waste of the building by a licensed waste disposal contractor. Such
buildings shall not have waste removed by the Village waste disposal
contractor, except with the approval of the Village Manager and then only when
such removal is deemed to be in the best interests of preserving the public
health and safety of the Village. (1997 Code, § 15.17) (Ord. 91-8, passed 8-8-
1991)
§ 50.05 FEES.
   (A)   A fee of $24.42 per month per unit, payable in advance, shall be paid
for each dwelling unit for Village garbage removal service.
   (B)   All charges for such garbage removal services shall be billed to and
paid by the person in whose name the Village water account then appears.
   (C)   Charges listed above shall be billed in advance as a separate item on
the monthly water bill, payable on or before the due date. Collection of the
charges for water furnished to such person and waste to be collected shall not
be made separately from each other. Each bill shall be collected in full for
both items at one time.
   (D)   The number of dwelling units to be billed shall be determined by the
number of units registered with the Water Department and verified by the
Building and Code Enforcement Department. Upon presentation of satisfactory
evidence that garbage removal service paid for in advance will not be required
or has not been required, the Director of Finance and/or Water Administrator
may adjust on a monthly pro-rata basis an amount equal to such garbage removal
service paid for, but no adjustments will be allowed for discontinuance of
garbage removal service for less than 30 days.
(1997 Code, § 15.18) (Ord. 91-10, passed 8-22-1991; Am. Ord. CO-99-26, passed
12-20- 1999; Am. Ord. CO-00-09, passed 11-20-2000; Am. Ord. CO-06-10, passed 4-
24-2006; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2012-16, passed 4-30-
2012; Am. Ord. CO-2013-23, passed 3-19-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2014-07, passed 1-21-
2014; Am. Ord. CO-2015-32, passed 12-15-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-
2021)
CONTAINERS AND COLLECTION
§ 50.20 COLLECTION FREQUENCY.
   For the purpose of fulfilling the requirements of this chapter, the Village
Manager shall cause all waste to be collected regularly and systematically at
least once each 7 days throughout the Village, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 15.04)
§ 50.21 WASTE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Required. Every person in possession of any premises in the Village
where persons reside shall provide for each family unit residing therein and at
all times maintain in good order and repair a sufficient number of waste
containers for a weekly accumulation of normal waste. Every person in
possession of any premises shall cause to be deposited in such waste containers
all waste produced in or on, or brought into or on, such premises as soon as
practicable after same is produced, or brought therein or thereon, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Cleanliness. Filthy, leaking or defective waste containers shall be
cleaned, repaired or replaced as directed by the Director of Public Works or
the Building Director or their respective representatives. All containers shall
be disinfected with an effective antiseptic solution as often as is necessary
to maintain them in a sanitary condition. Evidence of neglect of these
requirements or unsafe containers shall be determined by the Director of Public
Works or the Building Director or their representatives.
(1997 Code, § 15.06) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 50.22 WASTE MATERIALS.
   (A)   Waste of every character shall be securely wrapped or bound in such
manner as may be necessary to prevent the scattering of same by the wind and
shall be deposited in a waste container or otherwise deposited as prescribed
herein.
   (B)   All waste of a size or nature which renders it unsuitable for deposit
in waste containers shall be placed on the ground at the designated pickup
point in neat and orderly bundles or stacks not to exceed 50 pounds in weight
or 1 foot 6 inches by 4 feet in size, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter.
(1997 Code, § 15.08)
§ 50.23 LOCATION OF CONTAINERS.
   It shall be the duty of every person in possession of any premises in the
Village for which a waste container is provided to place the same at a location
designated by the Director of Public Works in order that the same may be
conveniently and economically serviced. It shall be unlawful for any person to
place any such waste container within the alley, street, or walkway, except
where there is no parkway between such walkway and the street of the Village.
In all cases when a waste container is placed on the rear of a lot for the
purpose of having its contents removed, it shall be entirely within the lot
line, and when it is placed at the curb line, it shall be adjacent to the curb.
(1997 Code, § 15.09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 50.24 INSPECTION OF CONTAINERS.
   All waste containers shall be subject to inspection and approval or
condemnation by inspectors of the Department of Public Works or the Health
Department.
(1997 Code, § 15.10)
§ 50.25 SCHEDULE OF COLLECTION FEES.
   A schedule of the fees charged by every licensed waste disposal firm shall
be on file at the Village Hall and shall require the approval of the Village
Manager based upon the provisions of this chapter before becoming effective.
(1997 Code, § 15.12)
REGULATIONS
§ 50.40 PICKING THROUGH REFUSE.
   No unauthorized person shall collect or remove from any street, alley or
other public places in the Village any garbage, refuse, ashes, manure or
miscellaneous waste, which shall also include without limitation waste paper,
rags, cardboard, metal, brass and any similar refuse, or interfere with or
disturb any of the receptacles for garbage or other refuse provided for by this
chapter, or remove therefrom any of the contents thereof.
(1997 Code, § 50.02)
§ 50.41 ACCUMULATION OF WASTE ON PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall permit any waste to accumulate on his premises except
in covered waste containers or except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
   (B)   All commercial and industrial establishments and all apartments or
other buildings occupied by more than 5 family units shall remove or cause to
be removed all waste at least once each 7 days, or oftener if necessary, to
protect the health and safety of the inhabitants of the Village.
(1997 Code, § 15.05)
§ 50.42 GARBAGE DEPOSITED IN CONTAINERS.
   It shall be the duty of every person in possession of any premises to cause
all garbage brought on or produced on the premises to be thoroughly drained of
all surplus liquid, securely wrapped in paper or packed in a covered box or
carton of such dimensions as will permit its free passage into and out of the
waste container, and deposited, after such wrapping, in such waste container as
soon as practicable after the same is produced or brought thereon. Waste
containers from which garbage cannot be readily emptied and all containers
which are other than as specified in this chapter will not be serviced by the
waste disposal crews of the Village waste disposal contractor.
(1997 Code, § 15.12)
§ 50.43 DISPOSAL OF WASTE OTHER THAN LICENSED FIRM.
   No garbage shall be burned, dumped or buried within the Village limits,
except upon written permit of the Director of Public Works and the Health
Officer and as they may direct in conformity with recognized sanitation
practices. In all cases in which waste is removed and disposed of by persons
other than the waste disposal contractor or a licensed waste disposal firm, it
shall be done under the direct supervision of the Director of Public Works or
the Building Director or their respective representatives.
(1997 Code, § 15.13) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 50.44 DISPOSAL OF WASTES OTHER THAN BY COLLECTION.
   (A)   Dead leaves and other wastes from any vegetation may be burned upon
the lot or parcel of ground upon which such waste has accumulated, if proper
precautions are taken to prevent the spread of fire, provided that there is a
person over 15 years of age assigned to watch such fire at all times, and
provided further that no nuisance is created by such fire.
   (B)   Garbage and other combustible wastes may be disposed of within the
building where it is accumulated or within a closed building accessory thereto
situated on the same premises by complete incineration of such garbage or waste
in such manner as to create no noxious odors, smoke or other nuisance, or by
grinding or shredding such waste finely and disposing of it through pipes
leading to a public sanitary sewer. All garbage or combustible matter disposed
of in pipes leading to a public sanitary sewer shall have been ground or
shredded to such a degree that all particles are carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in the sewers into which such is deposited, with
no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. All incinerators or
grinders used for such disposal of wastes shall be approved by the Director of
Public Works.
(1997 Code, § 15.14)
§ 50.45 COMMERCIAL TYPE INCINERATORS.
   (A)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL TYPE INCINERATOR means an exterior
free standing mechanical device for the incineration of wastes, and does not
include simple wire baskets, or similar containers wherein wastes may be
burned, nor does it include any incinerator located within a building where
wastes are loaded therein from inside the building.
   (B)   The installation of any commercial type incinerator within the Village
limits shall comply with all Village ordinances relating thereto, and in
addition, shall be subject to the provisions of this section.
   (C)   No person shall install or cause to be installed any commercial type
incinerator within the Village limits without first having secured a license
therefor. No commercial type incinerator installed within the Village limits
prior to June 27, 1963 shall be used after said date without a license
therefor. After June 27, 1963 no unlicensed commercial type incinerator shall
be used within the Village limits. The annual license fee for a commercial type
incinerator is $25.
   (D)   Before any commercial type incinerator is approved, the Director of
Public Works and the Chief of the Fire Department shall inspect, in operation,
the type of incinerator to be installed. The type of incinerator shall be
approved if it does not create a nuisance and conforms to all Village
ordinances. Every installed commercial type incinerator shall be inspected by
the Chief of the Fire Department and Director of Public Works at least twice
each year for which the incinerator is licensed. Such licenses shall be revoked
whenever the incinerator does not conform to Village ordinances or is operated
in violation thereof.
   (E)   Every commercial type incinerator shall stand at least 4 feet from any
building and shall be enclosed by a wire chain-link fence at least 5 feet in
height, with openings not more than 3 inches wide. Such fence shall be at least
3 feet from the incinerator at all places. The gate to such fence shall be
securely locked at all times when the incinerator is not attended. No
commercial type incinerator shall be loaded from within any building.
   (F)   No commercial type incinerator shall be used or operated by any person
under 18 years of age.
(1997 Code, § 15.15) (Ord. 63-5, passed 6-27-1963)
§ 50.46 TRANSPORTING WASTES OVER STREETS.
   No person shall transport waste, or cause waste to be transported, over the
streets in the Village unless such waste being transported is entirely and
securely covered. Garbage shall not be transported over or along the streets of
the Village or other public property thereof, except in a liquid-tight bed
approved by the Director of Public Works or the Building Director.
(1997 Code, § 15.16) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
CHAPTER 51: WATER AND SEWER SERVICE
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Application for water or sewer service
   
51.02   Rates for water and sewerage service
   
51.03   Bills for service, liability of customer
   
51.04   Revenues; Water and Sewer Fund
   
51.05   Accounting system
   
51.06   Map of system
   
51.07   Charges for water taps
   
51.08   Sewer service charge; sewer connection permit fee
   
51.09   Rates for emergency service
   
51.10   Deposit required of applicant for water service
   
51.11   Water supply emergency
   
51.12   Permits granted to licensees only
   
51.13   Filing copy with county
   
51.14   Water Service Commission
Meters
   
51.30   Required
   
51.31   Location
   
51.32   Authority
   
51.33   Cost
   
51.34   Repairs
   
51.35   Damaging
   
51.36   Access to water meters
   
51.37   Failure of meter to operate
   
51.38   Vacation of premises; notice
   
51.39   Two or more meters on one service
   
51.40   Water hydrant meter rental
Requirements and Regulations
   
51.50   Supplying 2 or more premises
   
51.51   Pipes for automatic sprinkler systems
   
51.52   Testing of sprinkler systems
   
51.53   Obstructing access to hydrants; interfering with flow of water
   
51.54   Unauthorized turning on of service cocks
   
51.55   Defacing or breaking of seal on water meters
   
51.56   Unauthorized use of water from fire hydrant
   
51.57   Permit for digging in a public right- of-way for purpose of installing
or repairing water and sewer lines
   
51.58   Water pipes; joints; cocks
   
51.59   Inspection of water service pipes; duty of property owner to maintain
water pipes
   
51.60   Water for construction purposes
   
51.61   Construction of house drains
   
51.62   Storm water drainage
   
51.63   Water supply for sewer connections
   
51.64   Inspection of sewer connections; correction of defective work
   
51.65   Uncovering sewers
   
51.66   Injuring or obstructing sewers
   
51.67   Damaging open ditches and drains
   
51.68   Obstructing street drains
   
51.69   Plumbers and sewer builders
   
51.70.1   Adoption of Manual of Procedures for Processing Sewer Permits
   
51.70.2   Building wall openings; overhead sewers
   
51.70.3   Certain discharges prohibited
   
51.70.4   Stormwater; unpolluted drainage
   
51.70.5   Prohibited discharges enumerated
   
51.70.6   Restricted discharges
   
51.70.7   Interceptors
   
51.70.8   New construction in combined sewer areas
   
51.70.9   Inflow sources on combined sewer system
   
51.70.10   New sewer connection separations
   
51.70.11   Discharge of sanitary and industrial wastewater into storm sewers
prohibited
   
51.70.12   Discharges and maintenance of private sewer
   
51.71   Responsibility for the repair and maintenance of sewer lines
   
51.72   Lawn sprinkling
   
51.73   Cross-connection control
   
51.74   Prohibited installation or use of potable water supply
   
51.75   Water conservation plumbing products (Watersense products)
   
51.98   Violations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 APPLICATION FOR WATER OR SEWER SERVICE.
   (A)   Any householder, property owner or other person desiring water or
sewer service from the Village shall make an application therefor to the Water
Department and/or Director of Public Works on a form to be furnished by such
Department. Every such applicant shall state specifically and in detail the
name of the applicant, the permit desired, the place, location and kind of
connection and appendages sought, the purpose for which the water is to be
used, and all the plumbing and plumbing work in any manner or water connected
therewith, the character and location of any and all proposed drains, the
number and location of all water closets, sinks, bathtubs and other sanitary
fixtures. The application may require such additional information as may be
needed for the proper guidance of the Village officials in the issuing of the
permit. The application shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant
that all provisions of ordinances relating to the waterworks and sewerage
system and street openings will be complied with; that all water rates,
assessments and rents, and all fines and penalties assessed, charged, or
imposed against the applicant or the property described in the application will
be paid. Where such application includes the installation of sewer and/or water
lines, the applicant shall acknowledge that the property must be in full
compliance with the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, other applicable state, federal,
county or other laws or regulatory requirements relating to sewer and/or water
lines and service, and any applicable ordinance set forth in this Code. The
applicant will provide the name and other identifying information as to the
owner of the property where water service is to be provided and will give
credit information on the applicant.
   (B)   When the applicant has complied with the provisions of the ordinances
of the Village, and any other applicable land and water pollution requirements
of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution
Control and Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, other applicable state,
federal, county or other laws or regulatory requirements relating to sewer and/
or water lines and service, and any applicable ordinance set forth in this
Code, and has paid all fees, a permit shall then be issued by the Director of
Public Works authorizing the connection to be made and specifying the size
thereof. The permit shall also authorize all plumbing and plumbing work and all
excavating in accordance with the provisions of this Code or other applicable
ordinances. The construction work in connection with the water service and the
sewer service shall be performed by a licensed and certified plumber and, where
applicable, by a drain layer who have properly executed bonds on file in the
office of the Village Clerk. Where any building or structure has been found to
be abandoned for 90 days or more, or is being improved, upgraded, demolished,
or rehabbed at 50% or more of the building’s assessed value, or where the
habitable space is being increased (additional bedrooms, sleeping rooms, or
bathrooms), and/or there are changes to interior supply lines (except those in
the course of ordinary repairs) or where plumbing is being substantially
upgraded, the applicant shall be required to ensure all water service piping,
which includes all piping from the water meter location to the terminating
fixture, shall be piped from the street main to the water distribution system
for the building. If flushometers or other devices requiring a high rate of
water flow are used, the water service pipe shall be designed and installed to
provide the additional flow.
(1997 Code, § 8.01) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 86-17A, passed 11-
24- 1984; Am. Ord. CO-2023-54, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 51.02 RATES FOR WATER AND SEWERAGE SERVICE.
   (A)   For the purpose of defraying the expense of the operation of the
Department of Public Works and Water Department, and for the purpose of paying
the outstanding combined water works and sewerage bonds and interest thereon,
the following rates are established. The following rates shall be charged to
the users of the combined water works and sewerage system within the corporate
limits of the Village:
      (1)   Effective January 1, 2013, the rate charged shall be $9,782 per 100
cubic feet of water for all water used and the minimum charge shall be $29.35
per month.
      (2)   Effective September 1, 2013, the rate charged shall be $9,132 per
100 cubic feet of water for all water used and the minimum charge shall be
$27.40 per month.
      (3)   Effective on January 1, 2014, the rate charged shall be $9,452 per
100 cubic feet of water for all water used and the minimum charge shall be
$28.36 per month.
      (4)   Effective on January 1, 2015, the rate charged shall be $10,870 per
100 cubic feet of water for all water used and the minimum charge shall be
$32.61 per month.
      (5)   Effective January 1, 2016 and all other future adjustments to water
rates based on Chicago water rate increases. For any future water rate
increases that are imposed on the Village by the City of Chicago, the Village
shall automatically raise the water rate charge and the minimum charge per
month in an amount at least equal to the increase imposed by the City of
Chicago. The Village's water rate and charge increases shall become effective
on the same date that the city's water rate increase takes effect. However, the
Village, by action of the corporate authorities, reserves the right to charge a
lesser increase or a greater increase regardless of the adjustment in the water
rate fee imposed by the City of Chicago under any future annual or periodic
water rate adjustments.
      (6)   Effective on January 1, 2016, the rate charged shall be $10.870 per
100 cubic feet of water for all water used and the minimum charge shall be
$32.61 per month.
      (7)   Effective on June 1, 2017, the rate charged shall be $10.870 per
100 cubic feet of water for all water used and the minimum charge shall be
$32.61 per month.
      (8)   Effective on June 1, 2018, the rate charged shall be $10.870 per
100 cubic feet of water for all water used and the minimum charge shall be
$32.61 per month.
      (9)   Effective on June 1, 2019, the rate charged shall be $10.870 per
100 cubic feet of water for all water used and the minimum charge shall be
$32.61 per month.
   (B)   For the purpose of defraying the expense of the operation of the
Village’s sewerage system and for the purpose of paying any outstanding
sewerage bonds and interest thereon, the following rates are established. The
following rates shall be charged to the users of the sewerage system within the
corporate limits of the Village. Effective January 1, 2012, the rate charged
shall be $0.51 per 100 cubic feet of sewage for all sewage produced and the
minimum charge shall be $1.53 per month.
   (C)   The payment of such rate charges for service to users located within
or without the corporation limits shall cover all reasonable usage of the
facilities of the combined waterworks and sewerage system. The Board of
Trustees reserve the right to enter into separate contracts with any user of
the facilities of the combined system for special rates and charges where the
particular circumstances render the regular rates for service inadequate or
unjust.
(1997 Code, § 8.02) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 89-3, passed 5-11-
1989; Am. Ord. 91-12, passed 12-19-1991; Am. Ord. CO-99-25, passed 12-20-1999;
Am. Ord. CO-07-53, passed 12-18-2007; Am. Ord. CO-09- 25, passed 8-4-2009; Am.
Ord. CO-2011-18, passed 12-6-2011; Am. Ord. CO-2012-42, passed 11-5-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2013-45, passed 12-3-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2014-34, passed 11-5- 2014; Am.
Ord. CO-2015-29, passed 11-17- 2015; Am. Ord. CO-2017-11, passed 4-20-2017; Am.
Ord. 2018-22, passed 5-1-2018; Am. Ord. CO-2019-21, passed 5-21-2019)
§ 51.03 BILLS FOR SERVICE, LIABILITY OF CUSTOMER.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the duty of the Water Administrator to cause a
statement of charges for sewer and water service to be delivered at least once
every month to each customer. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof,
and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for
the service on such premises. The service is furnished the premises by the
Village only upon the condition that the owner of premises, the occupant and
the user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor.
      (2)   All bills for service shall be rendered as of the first day of the
month succeeding the period for which the service is billed, and except where a
timely request for hearing has been filed as set forth in division (H), shall
be payable not later than the close of business on the fifteenth day after the
date of the bill. If payment of the full amount of the bill is not made within
said 15 day period, then a penalty of 10% shall be added thereto. In cases
where a request for hearing has been filed as set forth in division (H), a bill
shall become payable immediately upon the rendering of a final decision
pursuant to division (H), and a penalty of 10% shall be added thereto if not
paid within 1 day of such final decision.
   (B)   In the event the charges for service are not paid within 30 days from
the date of the bill for such service, and no timely request for hearing has
been filed as set forth in division (H), the charges shall be deemed to be
delinquent, and the Village may pursue any of the remedies set forth in
divisions (C), (D), (E) and (F) of this section. The amount of any delinquent
charges shall be a lien upon the real estate on which the premises to which
service was provided are located. In cases where a request for hearing has been
filed as set forth in division (H), a bill shall be deemed delinquent if not
paid within 1 day of the rendering of a final decision pursuant to division
(H).
   (C)   In the event that charges for service to premises are deemed to be
delinquent under division (B) of this section, the Village shall have the right
to shut off in whole or in part the water supply to such premises. Prior to
disconnection of water service for non-payment of water charges, the Water
Administrator shall cause a notice to be sent to the occupants of the premises
and to the person to whom the water bill for the premises is sent. Courtesy
copies of the notice will also be sent to the owner of record, mortgage
company, taxpayer of record and/or management company of the premises where the
account is located, if different than the occupants of the premises and/or
person to whom the water bill for the premises is sent, based on information
ascertained from County records and the Village's account and landlord
registration records. Failure to send courtesy copies of the notice or non-
receipt of said notice shall not be a defense to the obligation of any
responsible party to pay the outstanding charges. The notice shall specify the
outstanding overdue balance of charges, and provide options to pay the
outstanding balance, to pay a percentage of the outstanding overdue balance of
charges and enter into a payment plan with the Village, or to request a hearing
to be held by a hearing officer or the Water Administrator or an appointee
appointed by the Village Manager, at which hearing said requesting party may
show cause as to why the water service to the premises should not be
disconnected for non-payment of the delinquent charges. The notice shall be
entitled "Notice of Options and Right to Request a Hearing as to Whether Water
Service Should be Shut Off for Non-Payment of Bills" and shall be mailed or
delivered personally to the various parties. In addition, where the premises
are a multi-family dwelling, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place
upon or near the premises.
   Any recipient of such a notice or resident of a multi-family dwelling where
such a notice is posted may request a payment plan or a hearing at which they
may show cause as to why the water service to the premises should not be
disconnected for nonpayment of the delinquent charges. If such notice as is
required by this subsection is served by personal delivery, then a request for
a payment plan or a hearing must be made to the office of the Water Department
on a form to be provided by the Water Department within 72 hours of the date
such notice was delivered. If such notice as is required by this subsection is
served by mail, then a request for a payment plan or a hearing must be made to
the Water Department within 5 days of mailing of such notice. Water service
shall not be disconnected to any premises if a payment plan is entered into and
its terms followed, or until after any hearing requested under this subsection
is held as provided for in this subsection. If no request for a payment plan or
a hearing is submitted within the time periods established herein, the Village
shall have the right to shut off in whole or in part the water supply to the
premises listed in said notices.
   (D)   If charges for water service have been deemed to be delinquent under
division (B) of this section, then the Water Administrator shall be entitled to
file a notice with the Recorder of Deeds or the Registrar of Titles of Cook
County, stating that the Village has a lien on the premises in the amount of
the delinquent charges. Such notice shall be entitled “Notice of Lien” and
shall contain a legal description of the real estate on which the premises is
located, the amount of the unpaid charges and a statement that the Village
claims a lien against the real estate for the amount of the unpaid charges as
well as for all charges for water service incurred subsequent to the filing of
the Notice of Lien. A copy of the notice of the lien shall be sent to the
person to whom the water bill for the premises has been sent. The Corporation
Counsel, Prosecuting Attorney or whatever attorney designated by the Village
Manager shall file suit to foreclose any lien for which a Notice of Lien has
been filed pursuant to this subsection upon the direction of the Water
Administrator.
   (E)   In the event that charges have been deemed to be delinquent under
division (B) of this section, then the attorney designated by the Village
Manager, at the direction of the Water Administrator or Village Manager, shall
file an action in the Circuit Court against the premises to which service was
supplied, the occupant of the premises and/or the user of the service to
recover the amount of charges due.
   (F)   In the event that charges have been deemed to be delinquent under
division (B) of this section and the shutting off of water service to the
delinquent account will interfere with another customer’s service the Water
Administrator shall order the joint line service to be separated and the
charges for such severance shall be assessed to the delinquent account customer
and/or owner and charged as part of the costs of collection.
   (G)   The remedies set forth in divisions (C), (D), (E) and (F) of this
section may be applied severally or cumulatively. In addition to the charges
and penalty due, should the Village pursue any of the remedies set forth in
divisions (C), (D), (E) and (F) of this section, the Village shall be entitled
to collect the costs of filing any Notice of Lien, foreclosing on the lien,
separating any service lines and any other costs, including but not limited to
attorneys fees, the Village may incur in collecting delinquent charges. The
Village shall not be obligated to resume service if service has been shut off,
or release any lien, if notice of a lien has been filed, until:
      (1)   All charges in arrears on the premises have been paid and all
expenses incurred by the Village with respect to the collection of delinquent
charges at the premises have been paid; and
      (2)   A fee of $150 has been paid to reimburse the Village for the
services of the Village’s Department of Public Works and Water Department in
reinstating water service to the premises.
   (H)   (1)   Any person liable for a bill for service hereunder who disputes
the accuracy of a particular bill may do so by requesting in writing a hearing
before the Finance Director of the Village within 10 days of the date of the
bill. A request for hearing shall be made to the Finance Department on a form
provided by the Finance Department. On the designated hearing date set by the
Finance Director, the petitioning party may present evidence in support of
their claim that the bill is inaccurate. The Finance Director will provide
written notice to the petitioning party of the hearing date. The Finance
Director shall, within 3 days following the hearing, make a written
determination as to the accuracy of the bill and is authorized to make
adjustments to the bill of up to 20% of the total bill amount. The person
disputing the bill may then either accept the decision of the Finance Director,
and make payment in full of the bill or adjusted bill amount, or may appeal the
decision of the Finance Director to the Finance Committee of the Village Board
of Trustees by requesting in writing an appeal within 5 days of the date of
decision by the Finance Director. Failure to submit a request for an appeal
hearing within the specified time shall cause the decision of the Finance
Director to become a final decision. A request for an appeal hearing shall be
filed with the Finance Director on a form provided by the Finance Department.
On the designated appeal hearing date before the Finance Committee, and after
written notice of the date is provided to the petitioning party, the
petitioning party may again present evidence concerning the accuracy of the
bill and a representative of the Village may present evidence in support of the
bill. The Finance Committee, based on the evidence presented, shall render a
final decision on the bill amount by either overruling or sustaining the
Finance Director’s decision, or the Finance Committee may sustain the decision
but make a further adjustment to the bill amount of up to 50% of the total due
amount.
      (2)   No continuances for hearings or appeal hearings shall be granted
and a failure to appear shall cause a bill to become immediately due in the
originally stated amount, along with a 10% penalty as set forth in division (A)
of this section.
      (3)   A final decision under this division for purposes of calculating
the due date, penalty date, and delinquency date as set forth in divisions (A)
and (B) of this section shall occur when either the time for appealing the
decision of the Finance Director has expired without a request for an appeal
hearing having been made, or a final decision has been rendered by the Finance
Committee.
(1997 Code, § 8.03) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24- 1968; Am. Ord. 86-17A, passed
11-24-1984; Am. Ord. C0-00-25, passed 12-20-1999; Am. Ord. C0-00-10, passed 11-
20-2000; Am. Ord. C0-03-14, passed 4-11-2003; Am. Ord. CO-2012-43, passed 11-5-
2012; Am. Ord. CO-2016-01, passed 2-2-2016 ; Am. Ord. CO-2021-22, passed 8-17-
2021 )
§ 51.04 REVENUES; WATER AND SEWER FUND.
   (A)   All the revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system shall be held by the Director of Finance
separate and apart from all other moneys that may come into his hands as
Director of Finance or otherwise and shall be deposited in a separate bank
account and all of such sums, without any deductions whatsoever, shall be
delivered to the Village Treasurer not more than 5 days after the receipt of
the same or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be
directed by the President and Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all of the revenues from the
combined waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incident
to the operation of such combined system as may be delivered to him by the
Director of Finance, and he shall deposit the same in a separate bank account
which shall be accounted for as a separate fund designated as the “Water and
Sewer Fund” of the Village. The Village Treasurer shall administer such Water
and Sewer Fund in every respect in the manner provided by law.
(1997 Code, § 8.04) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.05 ACCOUNTING SYSTEM.
   The Village Treasurer shall establish proper systems of accounts and shall
keep proper books, records and accounts in which complete and correct entries
shall be made of all transactions relative to the combined waterworks and
sewerage system, and at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the combined waterworks and sewerage system.
(1997 Code, § 8.05) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.06 MAP OF SYSTEM.
   The Director of Public Works shall cause to be made a complete and correct
atlas of the waterworks and sewerage system showing the location of all pipes,
lines, connections, valves, hydrants, cutoffs, and the like.
(1997 Code, § 8.06) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.07 CHARGES FOR WATER TAPS.
   (A)   Wherever any permit for a connection to the combined waterworks and
sewerage system is issued, the Director of Public Works or some person
authorized by him shall tap the main of the system or plant where such
connection is to be made and shall insert the corporation cock. All applicants
shall be charged the cost thereof as herein fixed and pay the same at the time
the application herein provided for is made.
      (1)   For a single 3/4 inch pipe connection, $45;
      (2)   For a double 3/4 inch pipe connection, $45;
      (3)   For a single 1 inch pipe connection, $60;
      (4)   For a double 1 inch pipe connection, $60.
   (B)   In addition thereto, the applicant shall make the required street
opening and make preparations for tapping and shall pay a fee of $100 for each
15 square feet of street opening, or portion thereof, to cover the cost of
repair to street surfacing to be done by the Village.
   (C)   For large size taps, special prices may be established by the Director
of Public Works. An extra charge shall be made for the corporation cock and
gooseneck.
(1997 Code, § 8.17) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.08 SEWER SERVICE CHARGE; SEWER CONNECTION PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   Sewer service charge. A sewer service fee shall be charged to all
consumers of water furnished by the Village for the purpose of funding the
operation and maintenance of the Village’s sewer system and for payment of
other expenses related to the Village’s providing of sewer service. The sewer
service charge shall be $.30 per 100 cubic feet of water per month for each
dwelling or commercial unit and shall be billed as part of the Village’s bill
for water service.
   (B)   Sewer connection permit fee. The fee for a permit to construct sewers
and drains or to lay pipes to connect with any sewers or drains built in any of
the streets, alleys or avenues of the Village shall be $50 in each case, but
such permission shall not be granted except upon the agreement in writing, of
the person applying therefor, that such work will be performed by a duly
licensed and certified plumber and that such applicant will comply with the
provisions of this chapter and the other ordinances of the Village in relation
to excavating the streets, and that they will indemnify the Village for any
damages or costs to which it may be put by reason of injuries resulting from
neglect or carelessness in performing the work so permitted; and that no claim
will be made by them or their successors in interest against the Village or for
exemption from any assessment lawfully imposed for constructing sewers or
drains in the vicinity of their property.
(1997 Code, § 8.18) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 84-35, passed 7-
12-1984; Am. Ord. 91-5, passed 5-23-1991; Am. Ord. C0-00-25, passed 12-20-1999;
Am. Ord. C0-00-10, passed 11-20-2000)
§ 51.09 RATES FOR EMERGENCY SERVICE.
   For the purpose of defraying the expense of the Public Works and Water and
Sewer Departments, the following rates are established. For emergency services
after normal working hours the rate shall be $35 an hour for labor and $35 an
hour for equipment with a minimum of 2 hours.
(1997 Code, § 8.18A) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 86-1A, passed 1-
22-1986; Am. Ord. C0-00-10, passed 11-20-2000)
§ 51.10 DEPOSIT REQUIRED OF APPLICANT FOR WATER SERVICE.
   (A)   Each applicant for water supply service shall first meet the following
deposit requirement:
      (1)   For water service to serve a single-family dwelling, a deposit of
$50 shall be required;
      (2)   For water service to serve a two-family dwelling, a deposit of $75
shall be required;
      (3)   For water service to serve a three-family dwelling, a deposit of
$125 shall be required;
      (4)   For water service to serve all other residential buildings over 3
families and all other businesses, industrial and commercial buildings, a
deposit of $200 shall be required;
      (5)   For any and all water activation services
enumerated in this section, an additional $50 nonrefundable water activation
fee shall be required.
   (B)   Such deposits shall be made with the Department of Finance, as
security for the payment of water to be used, for which a certificate of
deposit shall be issued. Upon surrender of such certificate and the payment of
all indebtedness, if any is due, the deposit, less the $50 nonrefundable water
activation fee, shall be returned to the depositor, or to his assigns, whenever
the Village shall have discontinued the supply of water to such premises, after
due notice in writing to the Department of Finance, to do so. Upon such
discontinuance, if there be any unpaid indebtedness due the Village for water
or material supplied to such premises, the amount of such indebtedness shall be
deducted from such deposit, exclusive of the $50 nonrefundable water activation
fee.
(1997 Code, § 8.23) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 78-14, passed 9-
28-1978; Am. Ord. C0-92-9, passed 7-23-1992; Am. Ord. C0-00-25, passed 12-20-
1999)
§ 51.11 WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY.
   (A)   The Village President is authorized and empowered from time to time as
he, in his discretion, may see fit, should he find and determine that a water
supply shortage exists in the Village, to meet the health, sanitary, safety,
fire protection and public welfare needs of the people of the Village, to
declare that a water supply emergency exists and to prohibit the drawing of
water from the water supply lines of the Village or use of such water for any
of the following purposes during such emergency period:
      (1)   Sprinkling;
      (2)   Car washing;
      (3)   Air conditioning or cooling;
      (4)   Commercial or industrial uses beyond requirements for sanitation or
preserving health;
      (5)   Any other use that is not directly connected with the preservation
of health, sanitation, safety or public welfare.
   (B)   The Village President is further authorized during such emergency
period to prohibit the burning of any combustible material in any public way or
public space or upon any private property within the Village, except in an
incinerator, stove or furnace installed within a building so constructed as to
prevent the escape of burning material or sparks which might endanger
surrounding property.
(1997 Code, § 8.25) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24- 1968; Am. Ord. CO-2015-25,
passed 9-15-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Lawn sprinkling, see §
51.72
   Water conservation plumbing products, see §
51.75
§ 51.12 PERMITS GRANTED TO LICENSEES ONLY.
   No permit shall be granted under any section of this chapter to any person
not licensed according to state law.
(1997 Code, § 8.35) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.13 FILING COPY WITH COUNTY.
   A copy of this chapter, properly certified by the Village Clerk, shall be
filed in the offices of the Recorder of Deeds and the Registrar of Titles, Cook
County, Illinois, and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of
their liability for service supplies to any user of the service of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system of the Village on their properties.
(1997 Code, § 8.37) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.14 WATER SERVICE COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is created a Water Service Commission consisting of 5 members
who shall serve without compensation. The 5 members shall be the Village
Manager, 1 Village resident to be appointed by the President with the advice
and consent of the Board of Trustees, and the 3 other positions are to be
filled by Village staff appointed by the Village Manager. The Village Manager
shall serve indefinitely. The Village resident shall serve for a term of 2
years. The Village staff members who are appointed shall serve at the pleasure
of the Village Manager.
   (B)   The Commission shall be known as the “Maywood Water Service
Commission,” and it shall be the duty of the Commission to convene at the
direction of the Village Manager to review the purpose, applicability, and
suitability of this chapter and to address and review concerns of Village water
and sewer customers. After any review of the purpose, applicability and/or
suitability of any provision of the Water and Sewer Service Ordinance, the
Commission may make advisory recommendations to the Village President and Board
of Trustees. After any review of a customer’s water and/or sewer service
concern, the Commission shall make an advisory recommendation to the Village
Water Administrator regarding a proposed resolution of the customer’s concern.
   (C)   It shall also be the duty of the Commission to address and provide
information and advisory recommendations regarding water and sewer service
matters referred to the Commission by the President and Board of Trustees.
(Am. Ord. —, passed - -2000)
METERS
§ 51.30 REQUIRED.
   (A)   All water consumers supplied by the Village shall be supplied through
meters only, except as provided in § 51.60, and shall pay for the water at the
rates and in the manner specified in this chapter, and no deductions shall be
allowed for leaks in the plumbing or fixtures.
   (B)   All meters must be purchased through the Department of Public Works,
and the kind and pattern of such water meters shall be as determined by the
Board of Trustees. No other kind shall be installed or used.
   (C)   Meter purchase prices are as follows:
      (1)   5/8 inch meter:         $90;
      (2)   3/4 inch meter:         $120;
      (3)   1 inch meter:            $155;
      (4)   1-1/2 inch meter:         $345;
      (5)   2 inch meter:            $530.
(1997 Code, § 8.14(a)) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. C0-00-41,
passed 12-4-2000)
§ 51.31 LOCATION.
   All meters shall be placed in the basement of buildings where service pipes
enter the same and so as to afford easy access for examining and reading. Where
there is no basement the meter shall be placed in a tile or concrete box inside
the curb line not more than 1 foot distant from the service cock. The box shall
be so constructed as to amply protect the meter against frost and shall be
easily accessible to the employees of the Department of Public Works. The
Director of Public Works or his representative shall be permitted at all
reasonable times to inspect the meter for such purposes.
(1997 Code, § 8.14(b)) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.32 AUTHORITY.
   After the meter is placed, only officers or employees of the Department of
Public Works and Water Department shall be allowed to repair, remove or in any
manner interfere with the same. A stopcock or valve shall be placed on each
side of the meter.
(1997 Code, § 8.14(c)) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 86-17A, passed
11-24-1984)
§ 51.33 COST.
   The cost of such meter and the installation thereof shall be paid by the
applicant or the owner of the premises where the same is placed.
(1997 Code, § 8.14(d)) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.34 REPAIRS.
   All repairs and renewals of meters shall be at the expense of the Department
of Public Works, except that the owner of or applicant for such meter shall at
all times be responsible for any damage done to such meter, including that
caused by freezing, heat, or breakage, or for theft thereof.
(1997 Code, § 8.14(e)) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.35 DAMAGING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface, mar, destroy or in
any manner interfere with any such meter. It shall be the duty of such owner of
or applicant for such meter to promptly notify the Department of Public Works
of all defects in any such meter or its failure to properly register the
quantity of water used.
(1997 Code, § 8.14(f)) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.36 ACCESS TO WATER METERS.
   (A)   The Village’s obligation to provide water service is subject to the
condition that the owner and occupants of the premises to which water service
is provided allow the Village to have access at reasonable times to any water
meter located on the premises for the purposes of repairing, replacing or
maintaining the water meter. All owners and/or occupants of premises on which a
water meter is located must permit the Village to have access to that part of
the premises on which the water meter is located for the purpose of repairing,
replacing or maintaining the water meter upon the request of the Village during
the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday excluding legal
holidays. If the owner or occupant of premises on which a water meter is
located fails to provide the Village with access to that part of the premises
on which the water meter is located as required by this subsection within 7
days after a written request to do so is mailed by the Village addressed to the
person to whom the water bill for the premises is sent, then the Village shall
have the right to terminate water service to the premises.
   (B)   Prior to terminating water service for failure to allow access to the
premises, the Village Manager shall cause a notice to be sent to the occupants
of the premises and to the person to whom the water bill for the premises is
sent, advising them that they may request a hearing to be held by a hearing
officer appointed by the Village Manager, at which hearing said occupant or
occupants and the person to whom the water bill for the premises has been sent
may show cause as to why the water service to the premises should not be
terminated for failure to allow the Village to have access to the premises for
the purpose of repairing, replacing or maintaining the water meter located on
the premises. The notice shall be entitled “Notice of a Right to Request a
Hearing as to Whether Water Service shall be Terminated for Failure to Allow
Access to a Water Meter” and shall be mailed or delivered personally to the
occupants of the premises and to the person to whom the water bill for the
premises has been sent. In addition, when the premises are a multifamily
dwelling, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon or near the
premises. Any recipient of such a notice or resident of a multifamily dwelling
where such a notice is posted may request a hearing at which they may show
cause as to why the water service to the premises should not be terminated for
failure to allow access to the water meter on the premises. If such notice as
is required by this subsection is served by personal delivery, then a request
for hearing must be made to the office of the Village Manager on a form to be
provided by the Village Manager’s office within 72 hours of the date such
notice was delivered. If such notice as required by this subsection is served
by mail, then a request for a hearing must be made to the office of the Village
Manager on a form to be provided by the Village Manager’s office within 5 days
of the date of mailing of such notice. Water service shall not be terminated to
any premises until after any hearing requested under this subsection is held as
provided for in this subsection. If no request for a hearing is submitted
within the time periods established herein, the Village shall have the right to
terminate in whole or in part the water supply to the premises listed in said
notice.
(1997 Code, § 8.14(g)) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 85-53, passed
10-24-1985)
§ 51.37 FAILURE OF METER TO OPERATE.
   Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out of repair, or for any cause,
fails to properly register the water passing through the same, the consumer
shall be charged at the rate shown for a corresponding time of a previous year
under like conditions. If no record of a previous year exists, then it shall be
the duty of the Director of Public Works to estimate or determine so far as he
can, the amount of water consumed during the time such meter fails to operate,
and the consumer shall pay the amount estimated by the Director of Public
Works.
(1997 Code, § 8.15) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.38 VACATION OF PREMISES; NOTICE.
   Any person who shall vacate any premises or any person who shall enter upon
and occupy any premises shall immediately, before vacating such premises or
removing to such premises, notify the Department of Public Works and request a
reading of the meter.
(1997 Code, § 8.22) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.39 TWO OR MORE METERS ON ONE SERVICE.
   Property owners may have, at the option of the Department of Public Works,
more than 1 meter installed in 1 building on one service and controlled by a
single stopcock in the parkway; provided, that the meters are not connected in
tandem. Nothing less than the minimum charge will be made for each meter so
installed, and the bills for the whole supply furnished through such service
shall be made to the owner of the premises.
(1997 Code, § 8.24) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.40 WATER HYDRANT METER RENTAL.
   The Village may lease a water hydrant meter upon the submission of a
completed application form provided by the Public Works Department, payment of
a refundable deposit, and approval of the application by the Director of Public
Works or the Director’s designee. The refundable deposit is $1,000. The user of
the meter shall be billed at the rates established in § 51.02. The refundable
deposit will be offset by the amount of water billed and the balance will be
refunded within 7 business days of return of the meter.
(Ord. C0-00-37, passed 12-4-2000)
REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS
§ 51.50 SUPPLYING 2 OR MORE PREMISES.
   No service pipe shall be laid or used to supply water to 2 or more distinct
premises or buildings.
(1997 Code, § 8.07) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.51 PIPES FOR AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
   Water pipes entering premises and used for fire protection only and
connected with automatic sprinkler devices shall be supplied from a separate
pipe having an independent connection with the main and shall be provided with
an outside controlling valve and a meter of a type, design and size to be
approved by the Director of Public Works, all at the expense of the person
using same, and shall be so constructed as to permit in case of necessity an
uninterrupted flow of water.
(1997 Code, § 8.08) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.52 TESTING OF SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
   Whenever the owner of a sprinkler system desires to make a test thereof, he
shall first notify both the Director of Public Works and the Chief of the Fire
Department in writing to that effect at least 24 hours prior to the time of
such test. No sprinkler system shall be tested on Monday in any week. All water
used in connection with such test shall be measured and paid for by the owner
of such sprinkler system.
(1997 Code, § 8.09) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.53 OBSTRUCTING ACCESS TO HYDRANTS; INTERFERING WITH FLOW OF WATER.
   (A)   No person shall in any manner obstruct the access to any stopcock,
hydrant or valve, or any public faucet or opening for taking water in any
street, alley, public ground or place connected with or a part of the water
system or plant, nor pile or place any material or article, or thing so as to
hinder, delay or obstruct the members of the Fire Department in reaching the
same.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or obstruct the
flow, retention, storage or authorized use of water in the water system, plant
or water main, hydrant, service pipe, water meter, shutoff box, public
fountain, valve, engine or building connected with the water system or plant,
or to cause or permit any of such things to be done. Any person who shall
perform any act in violation of this section shall be punished as provided for
violation of this Code and shall in addition be liable for actual damage done
or caused to be done.
(1997 Code, § 8.10) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.54 UNAUTHORIZED TURNING ON OF SERVICE COCKS.
   No person not duly authorized shall turn the water on at any service cock or
use water therefrom when so turned on, and the person so using or wasting water
in such unlawful manner shall be liable to pay therefor at the regular rates
without discount and shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of
this Code.
(1997 Code, § 8.11) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.55 DEFACING OR BREAKING OF SEAL ON WATER METERS.
   No seal placed by the Department of Public Works for the protection of any
meter, valve, fitting or other water connection shall be defaced or broken
except on written authority from the Director of Public Works. If any reseals
are caused by the consumer, said consumer shall be subject to a service charge
of $20 per seal.
(1997 Code, § 8.12) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. C0-00-10, passed
11-20-2000)
§ 51.56 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANT.
   No person other than members of the Fire Department or employees of any
Department of the Village shall use water from any fire hydrant connected with
the Village water system, except for extinguishing fires or unless specially
authorized by the Director of Public Works or the Village Manager.
(1997 Code, § 8.13) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 86-17A, passed 11-
24-1984)
§ 51.57 PERMIT FOR DIGGING IN A PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR PURPOSE OF INSTALLING
OR REPAIRING WATER AND SEWER LINES.
   No street, alley, parkway, or other public right-of-way shall be disturbed,
dug up or opened for the purpose of repairing or laying water or sewer lines or
making connections with water or sewer lines unless a permit is first obtained
from the Department of Public Works. Such permit shall be granted only to
licensed and certified plumbers and shall be granted only after all utility
lines are located. The provisions of this section do not apply to the
Department of Public Works itself.
(1997 Code, § 8.16) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 85-52, passed 10-
24-1985)
§ 51.58 WATER PIPES; JOINTS; COCKS.
   (A)   Location of pipe. The connections from the water main to the service
cock shall be placed at least 5 feet below the level of the ground and shall be
of lead or copper material. The pipe shall be so laid that it shall be at least
1 foot longer than if laid straight and placed in such manner as to prevent
rupture or breakage from settling of the ground.
   Diameter of Pipe      Weight per Lineal Foot
      5/8 inch      3 pounds
      3/4 inch      3-1/2 pounds
   (B)   Joints. All lead pipe and all lead connections shall have wiped
joints.
   (C)   Stopcocks.
      (1)   A stopcock, to be known as the “service cock,” shall be inserted in
each connection at a convenient joint in the street, alley, public ground or
place through which such connection passes, and whenever there are curb lines
established, the service cock shall be placed not less than 1 foot nor more
than 3 feet inside of such curb line with a cast iron stop box to grade. In all
cases it shall be located under the direction of the Director of Public Works,
and a record of the exact location thereof shall be kept.
      (2)   There shall be a stop and waste cock attached to every supply pipe
at the point where it enters any building in such manner as to permit the water
to be shut off in cold or freezing weather and the pipes to be emptied.
      (3)   All stopcocks used in connection with the waterworks system or
plant shall be “round way” and made of good brass and shall be of a quality
known as “standard.” They shall be strong enough to stand a pressure of 300
pounds per square inch.
(1997 Code, § 8.19) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.59 INSPECTION OF WATER SERVICE PIPES; DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNER TO MAINTAIN
WATER PIPES.
   (A)   All water service pipes and connections shall be inspected and
approved by the Director of Public Works or other persons under his direction,
and no such service pipes shall be covered until they have been so inspected.
   (B)    It shall be the duty of every person owning or controlling any
property or building to which water pipes have been connected to maintain that
portion of the water pipe from the stop cock to the water meter in good working
order, free of any leaks. Upon notification from any source, including
notification by a Village employee, tenant or through observation that the
water pipe from the stop cock to the water meter is either leaking or frozen,
the person responsible shall immediately cause the water pipe to be repaired
and returned to good operating condition.
   (C)   In the event that the water pipe is not repaired within 48 hours of
notice of a defect, the Village shall have the right to shut off in whole or in
part the water supply to such property or building. Prior to disconnection of
water service for failure to repair the water pipe, the Village Manager shall
cause a notice to be delivered to the occupants of the property or building,
the person to whom the water bill is directed, and the person who owns or
controls the property or building, advising them that a hearing will be held by
a hearing officer appointed by the Village Manager on a date, not less than 3
days following the date of the notice, at which time the parties named above
may show cause as to why water service for the property or building should not
be disconnected for failure to repair the water pipe. The notice shall be
entitled “Notice of Hearing as to Whether Water Service Should Be Shut Off for
Failure to Repair Water Pipe,” and shall be delivered personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested. In addition, where the premises are a
multi-family dwelling, the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon
or near the premises. Water service shall not be disconnected to any property
or building until after a hearing is held as provided for in this subsection.
(1997 Code, § 8.20) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 82-19, passed 9-
23-1982)
§ 51.60 WATER FOR CONSTRUCTION PURPOSES.
   (A)   Persons desiring to use Village water for construction purposes shall
in all cases apply to the Director of Finance for a permit on a form provided
by the Department of Public Works for that purpose and shall be required to pay
for all water consumed at the following rate:
      (1)   For a single-family dwelling:    $30;
      (2)   For a two-family dwelling:       $45;
      (3)   For residential buildings in excess of 2 families, $45 plus $10
additional for each apartment in excess of 2 apartments;
      (4)   For commercial or industrial buildings, $45 for each 25 feet of
frontage for one story buildings, plus $15 for each 25 feet of frontage for
each story above the first story of such building.
   (B)   The flat rate charge for water supplied for construction under any
building permit shall terminate when occupancy of the premises begins. Any
water used after the beginning of occupancy shall be charged at the rates
provided in § 51.02.
(1997 Code, § 8.21) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. C0-00-10, passed
11-20-2000)
§ 51.61 CONSTRUCTION OF HOUSE DRAINS.
   All private or house drains laid in the Village must be constructed in
accordance with the following rules and regulations.
   (A)   Slope. The least inclination that shall be allowed for water closets,
kitchen and all other drains, not over 6 inches in diameter, liable to receive
solid substances, is one-half inch in 2 feet and for cellar and all other
drains to receive water, one-quarter inch in 2 feet. The ends of all pipes not
to be immediately connected with the water closets, sinks, downspouts or catch
basins must be securely guarded against the introduction of sand and earth by
brick or cement or other watertight or imperishable materials.
   (B)   Catch basins. All pipes that must be left open in drains, cellars,
areas, yards or gardens must be connected with suitable catch basins, which
catch basins shall be constructed of brick or cement pipe, and be circular in
section, and not less than 3 feet in internal diameter and at least 3 feet 10
inches in depth and shall be 2 feet 6 inches in the clear from the bottom of
the outlet pipe to the bottom of the basin and trapped. The bottom of the trap
shall be 6 inches below the bottom of the outlet pipe. The brick work shall not
be less than 4 inches in thickness, set upon a bottom of one layer of brick,
and the brick shall be laid flat, and shall not show more than 4 inches space
on the inner surface of the basin, and shall be laid in a workmanlike manner,
and shall be thoroughly imbedded in hydraulic cement mortar so as to make the
basin watertight.
   (C)   Location of catch basins. No catch basin of any private or house drain
shall be built in a public street, but shall be placed inside of the line of
the lots or parcels of ground sought to be drained.
   (D)   Privy vaults. No privy vaults shall be connected with any public sewer
or drains, except through an intervening catch basin, and the discharge pipe of
the vault shall be high enough to prevent anything but the liquid contents of
the vault from passing into the sewer or drain.
(1997 Code, § 8.26) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.62 STORM WATER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   Roof and foundation drainage. Drainage from roofs and paved parking or
other areas smaller than 40,000 square feet and from foundation footing drains
shall not be connected directly into sewers.
   (B)   Larger area roof and lot drainage. Drainage from roofs and paved
parking or other areas larger than 40,000 square feet along any street shall be
stored temporarily on the premises, in detention ponds on roofs or at ground
level or otherwise, which storage areas shall be equipped with outlets that may
be set or regulated to empty slowly the stored runoff water into storm sewers
or surface channels according to their ability to handle the flow safely.
   (C)   Roof drainage disposal on lawns. Roof drainage through downspouts or
otherwise shall not be connected directly to any street or public sewer (storm,
sanitary or combined) but shall be directed away from the building onto the
lawn or yard or into a seepage well.
   (D)   Foundation footing drainage. Foundation footing drainage shall not be
disposed of in a street or public sanitary or combined sewer but may be
disposed of in a seepage well or pumped out away from the building onto the
lawn or yard.
   (E)   Downspout connections. All downspout connections leading to any street
or public sewer shall be disconnected forthwith and all roof drainage shall be
in accordance with the terms and provisions of this section.
(1997 Code, § 8.27) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 75-3, passed 5-22-
1975)
§ 51.63 WATER SUPPLY FOR SEWER CONNECTIONS.
   All connections with sewers or drains used for the purpose of carrying
animal refuse from water closets or otherwise and slop of kitchens shall have
fixtures for a sufficiency of water to be so applied as to properly carry off
such matter.
(1997 Code, § 8.28) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.64 INSPECTION OF SEWER CONNECTIONS; CORRECTION OF DEFECTIVE WORK.
   All work in connection with the installation of sewer connections done by
licensed and certified plumbers or by competent servants, agents or employees
in the employ of such plumbers, other than work done on local improvements paid
for wholly or in part by special assessment, while such work is under the
supervision and control of the Board of Local Improvements shall be subject to
the inspection, supervision and approval of the Director of Public Works. All
sewer pipe and catch basin work shall be left exposed for thorough inspection
as to grades and quality of pipe, brick, cement and comparison with plans and
shall not be covered up until passed upon by the Director of Public Works. Any
violation of this rule shall be sufficient cause for suspension of license. Any
faulty or defective work done by any licensed and certified plumber or by any
servant, agent or employee of such plumber which may at any time be discovered
by the Director of Public Works shall be made satisfactory. Any licensed
plumber who shall neglect, refuse or fail to make good any defects or faults in
his work, which shall be discovered by the Director of Public Works, shall not
be permitted to do any further or additional work until the defects or faults
so discovered have been made good in a manner satisfactory to the Board of
Trustees. Any licensed plumber who shall refuse, neglect or fail to make good
such defects or faults, when requested so to do by the Director of Public Works
or who otherwise violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter or the other ordinances of the Village, shall have his license or
certificate revoked by the President and shall not again be permitted to
conduct, carry on or engage in the business of drain laying until satisfactory
assurance shall be given to the President that such person will thereafter
faithfully observe the provisions of this chapter and the other ordinances of
the Village and until such plumber shall have made good any loss, damage or
expense caused by or on account of any negligence or misconduct on his part
which was the cause of the revocation of his license.
(1997 Code, § 8.29) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.65 UNCOVERING SEWERS.
   No person shall uncover or excavate under or around any catch basin or brick
or pipe sewers in the Village without the written consent of the Board of
Trustees. The person by whom such work is done and his employees shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this section.
(1997 Code, § 8.30) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.66 INJURING OR OBSTRUCTING SEWERS.
   (A)   No person shall, by himself or another, directly or indirectly,
wilfully or maliciously, damage, injure or obstruct any sewer, house drain,
cesspool, water closet pipe, catch basin, manhole, protection pier or any
appurtenance thereto laid or constructed in the Village. Such person shall
further be liable to pay all expenses incurred on account of repairs or damages
resulting from such wilful or malicious act.
   (B)   No butcher’s offal or garbage, dead animals, or obstructions shall be
placed, thrown or deposited in any receiving basin or sewer. No person shall
cause any such material or any obstructing substance to be placed so as to be
carried into such basin or sewer.
(1997 Code, § 8.31) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.67 DAMAGING OPEN DITCHES AND DRAINS.
   No person shall destroy or injure the bank of any ditch, gully or open
drain, or place any substance therein tending to obstruct the same or render it
obnoxious, or shall obstruct the free passage of water through the same, or
shall directly or indirectly tap any public ditch or open drain in the Village,
or connect any private sewer, drain or ditch therewith, without the written
consent of the Board of Trustees.
(1997 Code, § 8.32) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.68 OBSTRUCTING STREET DRAINS.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any drain in any public street or alley.
(1997 Code, § 8.33) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.69 PLUMBERS AND SEWER BUILDERS.
   (A)   License.
      (1)   Any person desiring to engage in business affecting sewers and
drains in the Village as a sewer builder or plumber shall first obtain and
exhibit to the Director of Finance a plumber’s license issued by the Department
of Public Health of the State of Illinois under the provisions of 225 ILCS 320/
0.01 et seq., the Illinois Plumbing License Law.
      (2)   Every person desiring to transact business as a sewer builder or
plumber shall file with the Director of Finance a statement in writing, giving
the name and place of business of such person, and the Director of Finance
shall require such applicant to produce his plumber's license from the
Department of Public Health of the State of Illinois, and exhibit the same
before doing any work in the Village as such sewer builder or plumber. Any
person desiring to do work of a sewer builder or plumber shall also submit
proof that his workmen have such licenses.
   (B)   Bond. A bond shall be required of every person engaging in any of the
businesses pertaining to the construction of sewers or drains in the Village in
the sum of $5,000, with sureties conditioned upon the faithful observance and
performance of all the provisions of this chapter or other ordinances of the
Village concerning sewers and drains, and the making or maintaining of any
connection thereto or therewith and conditioned further to save and keep the
Village harmless from loss, cost, damage, expense or liability which the
Village may suffer or which may accrue against it, or be charged to it by any
servant thereof in and about the making of any alterations or repairs to or any
work done in connection with the sewer system or any drain or pipe connection
with the sewer of the Village.
   (C)   Change in name or location of business; display of license. Any change
of the name or location of business of any person doing business as a sewer
builder or plumber under this section must be promptly reported to the Director
of Public Works. The state license shall be kept in a conspicuous place in the
licensee’s place of business.
   (D)   Firms, associations and partnerships. No firm, association or
partnership shall engage in business as sewer builders or represent themselves
as such or as plumbers unless at least one active member or partner thereof
continually engaged in the conduct, supervision or performance of the firm,
association or partnership business shall be a master plumber. Such master
plumber shall exhibit his license before being permitted to work as such in the
Village.
   (E)   Responsibility of licensed master plumbers. All licensed master
plumbers shall be held responsible for all acts of their agents or employees
done under or by virtue of the license required by this section.
(1997 Code, § 8.34) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
§ 51.70.1 ADOPTION OF MANUAL OF PROCEDURES FOR PROCESSING SEWER PERMITS.
   The Manual of Procedures for the Administration of the Sewer Permit
Ordinance, amended April 7, 1994 (and any subsequent amendments) by the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago and the whole
thereof of which not less than 3 copies are on file in the office of the
Village Clerk, the same being adopted as an integral part of the procedures for
the administration of sanitary sewer permits. For flood damage prevention
regulations and other sanitary sewer requirements, including overhead sewers,
see §
51.70.2.
(Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.70.2 BUILDING WALL OPENINGS; OVERHEAD SEWERS.
   (A)   The elevation of door sills, window sills, top of foundations, or the
bottom of any other opening in the outer walls of a building or structure shall
be in accordance with the requirements of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District of Greater Chicago and the flood control ordinance of the Village.
   (B)   When the building walls create habitable space that is below the
floodplain elevation, lower level gravity building drain connections are
prohibited and overhead sewers are required. All new buildings with basements,
floors, rooms or inhabitable areas below ground level on a building site that
will be served by a public or private sewer system, shall have overhead
plumbing. No building permit application will be reviewed nor any permits
issued for construction of any structure unless plans and specifications
therefore provide for overhead plumbing.
(Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.70.3 CERTAIN DISCHARGES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make a connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. This section does not apply to
connections to a combined sewer.
(Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.70.4 STORMWATER; UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.
   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such
sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to
a natural outlet approved by the Village Engineer. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the Village Engineer
to a storm sewer, combined sewer or a natural outlet.
(Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.70.5 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES ENUMERATED.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interactions with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper
operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
un-ground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and
paper dishes, cups, milk containers and the like, either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
(Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.70.6 RESTRICTED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No persons shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, material, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago that
the wastes can harm either the sewer's sewage treatment process or equipment;
have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life,
limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming their opinion as to
the acceptability of these wastes, the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District
of Greater Chicago will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment plant, degree of
treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and maximum limits
established by regulatory agencies. The substances prohibited are:
      (1)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150°F (65°C);
      (2)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F
(0°C and 65°C);
      (3)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 1 horsepower or
greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the Plumbing Inspector;
      (4)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solution, whether neutralized or not;
      (5)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc or
similar objectionable or toxic substances or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago for the
materials;
      (6)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago
as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements
of the state, federal or other public agencies having jurisdiction of such
discharge to the receiving waters;
      (7)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the Metropolitan Water
Reclamation District of Greater Chicago in compliance with applicable state or
federal regulations;
      (8)   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5;
      (9)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l of Hg
at any time, except as permitted by the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District
of Greater Chicago in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations;
      (10)   Any cyanide at any time, except as permitted by the Metropolitan
Water Reclamation District of Greater Chicago in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations;
      (11)   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works; or
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
sludge as defined herein;
      (12)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amendable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are
amendable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
(Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.70.7 INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of
the Village Engineer, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other
harmful ingredients, except that the interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the Village Engineer and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.70.8 NEW CONSTRUCTION IN COMBINED SEWER AREAS.
   Any new construction tributary to the combined sewer system shall be
designed to minimize and/or delay inflow contributions to the combined sewer
system.
(Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.70.9 INFLOW SOURCES ON COMBINED SEWER SYSTEM.
   All inflow sources on the combined sewer system shall be connected to a
storm sewer, within a reasonable period of time, when a storm sewer becomes
available.
(Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.70.10 NEW SEWER CONNECTION SEPARATIONS.
   Any new building domestic waste connection shall be completely separate from
the building storm water (inflow) collection system, within the property line,
to facilitate disconnection when a storm sewer becomes available.
(Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.70.11 DISCHARGE OF SANITARY AND INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER INTO STORM SEWERS
PROHIBITED.
   No person, firm or corporation shall discharge sanitary and industrial
wastewater into any sewer located within the Village which is designed and
intended to be used only to carry storm water.
(1997 Code, § 8.38) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 85-7, passed 3-14-
1985; Am. Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.70.12 DISCHARGES AND MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE SEWER.
   Owners of all non-domestic combined sewers that discharge into the Village's
sewerage collection system must meet the effluent discharge restrictions
outlined in §§
51.70.5 and
51.70.6 and have specific procedures in place to ensure the same objectives and
mechanisms for operation of their sewers that are required of the Village in
the operation of the public sewers.
(Ord. C0-08-15, passed 3-18-2008)
§ 51.71 RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE OF SEWER LINES.
   The owner and occupants of property to which sewer service is provided shall
be responsible for maintaining and repairing all sewer lines servicing the
property up to the point at which such sewer lines connect to the Village’s
sewer mains regardless of whether such lines may be located within a public
right-of-way.
(1997 Code, § 8.39) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. 85-51, passed 10-
24-1985)
§ 51.72 LAWN SPRINKLING.
   Lawn sprinkling shall not be permitted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:
00 p.m. daily during the period of May 15 to September 15. Lawn sprinkling
shall not occur on consecutive days. New lawns, which are less than 3 months
old, shall be exempt from the foregoing restrictions. All new and replacement
sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a WaterSense labeled irrigation
controller and be in compliance with the Illinois Plumbing License Law, 225
ILCS 320/2.5(g).
(1997 Code, § 8.40) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24- 1968; Am. Ord. 89-7, passed 5-
25-1989; Am. Ord. —, passed 6-10-1993; Am. Ord. CO-2015- 25, passed 9-15-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Water conservation plumbing products, see §
51.75
   Water supply emergency, see §
51.11
§ 51.73 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.
   (A)   All plumbing installed within the Village shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890. In
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the certified
pump station operator in responsible charge, an approved backflow prevention
device is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system. The
certified operator in responsible charge will give notice to the water customer
to install such as-approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance
with the Ill. Plumbing Code, Ill. Environmental Protection Agency and all
applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such
approved devices upon installation and as required by the Ill. Plumbing Code,
Ill. Environmental Protection Agency and local regulations.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be
established or maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a
private, auxiliary or emergency water supply other than the regular public
water supply of the Village may enter the supply or distribution system of the
municipality, unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the
method of connection and use of such supply shall have been approved by the
Certified Operator in Responsible Charge and the Ill. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Certified Operator in Responsible Charge
to cause surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other
properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or
potential hazards to the public water supply may exist. Such surveys and
investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be repeated at
least every 2 years, or as often as the Certified Operator in Responsible
Charge shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained and
available for review for a period of at least 5 years.
   (D)   The approved cross-connection control device inspector shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the Village for the purpose
of verifying the presence or absence of cross-connection, and that the
Certified Operator in Responsible Charge or his authorized agent shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the Village for the purpose
of verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required
cross-connection control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants
of any property so served shall furnish the Certified Operator in Responsible
Charge any information which he may request regarding the piping system or
systems of water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when
demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Certified Operator in Responsible
Charge shall be deemed to be evidence of the presence of improper connections
as provided in this section.
   (E)   The Certified Operator in Responsible Charge of the Village is
authorized and directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant
thereof, the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation
of the provisions of this section is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to
such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated
or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this section and until a
reconnection fee of $1,000 is paid to the Village. Immediate disconnection with
verbal notice can be effected when the Certified Operator in Responsible Charge
is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water
supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of
the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party
can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of
the public water supply, provided that, in the reasonable opinion of the
Certified Operator in Responsible Charge or the Ill. Environmental Protection
Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential contamination of
the public water supply. Neither the public water supply, Certified Operator in
Responsible Charge, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer
for injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of the
customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this section whether or
not the termination was with or without notice.
   (F)   The customer responsible for the back- siphoned or back-pressured
material or contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable
water supply system occurs through an illegal cross- connection or an
improperly installed, maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been
bypassed, must bear the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.
   (G)   Cross-connection control - general policy.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
         (a)   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer’s water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system;
         (b)   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-
connections, actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable
water systems and non-potable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources or
systems containing substances of unknown or questionable safety;
         (c)   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public, and consumers potable water systems.
      (2)   Application. These rules and regulations shall apply to all
premises served by the public potable water supply system of the Village.
      (3)   Policy. The owner or official custodian shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or back-siphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection. If, in the judgment of the Certified Operator in Responsible Charge
or his authorized representative, an approved backflow prevention device is
necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the Certified
Operator in Responsible Charge shall give notice to the consumer to install
such approved backflow prevention device at each service connection to the
premises. The consumer shall immediately install such approved device or
devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or inability on the part of the
consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall constitute grounds
for discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices
have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of installation,
maintenance, testing and repair as required in subsection (K)(4)(d) of this
section for a period of at least 5 years. The Certified Operator in Responsible
Charge may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection report
to the Village Water Department to assist in determining whether or not service
line protection will be required. All cross-connection inspections shall be
conducted by a cross-connection control device inspector certified by the Ill.
Environmental Protection Agency.
   (H)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
      AGENCY. Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
      AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or systems on or available to
the premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
      BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of the potable water system from any source other than
the intended source of the potable water supply.
      BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois
Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in control
of any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water
supply.
      CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the consumer’s
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer’s water
system.
      CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of
any substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
      CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between 2
otherwise separate piping systems, 1 of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from 1 system into the other.
      DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross- connection formed when a water system
is physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
      DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single,
independently acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double
check valve assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of
the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each
check valve.
      FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
      HEATH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well
being of consumers. The word SEVERE as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
      INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
      INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installation of a
plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code,
77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
      NONPOTABLE WATER. Water that does not meet public health standards for
drinking water and is not suitable for human consumption or culinary use. (See
77 Illinois Administrative Code 900.) Any water of unknown quality is
considered nonpotable. (77 Illinois Administrative Code 890.120)”
      PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. PLUMBING includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or
at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons live, work or assemble. PLUMBING includes all piping from discharge of
pumping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. PLUMBING
includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a building
drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or
buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of
connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage
disposal system 5 feet beyond the foundation walls.
      POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
      POTABLE WATER. Water that is suitable for human consumption in accordance
with the Drinking Water Systems Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 900.
      POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
      PROCESS FLUID(S). Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not
limited to:
         (a)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
         (b)   Process waters;
         (c)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system
which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
         (d)   Cooling waters;
         (e)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams, or irrigation systems;
         (f)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
         (g)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis, and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purposes.
      PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. All mains, pipes and structures through which water
is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at
least 25 persons at least 60 days per year. A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY is either a
COMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY or a NONCOMMUNITY WATER SUPPLY.
      REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device
containing a minimum of 2 independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between 2
check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow and at
the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these 2 checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply
pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each
end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
      SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances
at the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
      SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within
that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form and should
not be an actual plumbing inspection.
      SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable
or degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer’s potable water system.
      USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a
consumer’s water system after it has passed through the service connection and
is no longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
      WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or official custodian of a public water system.
   (I)   Water system.
      (1)   The water system shall be considered as made up of up to 2 parts:
the public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
      (2)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source
facilities and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities
of the potable water system under the control of the Certified Operator in
Responsible Charge up to the point where the consumer's water system begins.
      (3)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized
in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
      (4)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the
network of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer’s
water system.
      (5)   The consumer’s water system shall include all parts of the
facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public
water supply distribution system to points of use.
   (J)   Cross-connection prohibited.
      (1)   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
      (2)   (a)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the Agency.
         (b)   There shall be no arrangement of connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
   (K)   Survey and investigation.
      (1)   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to
the approved cross-connection device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross-connection within the consumer's premises and
testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within the
consumer's premises.
      (2)   On request by the Certified Operator in Responsible Charge, or his
authorized representative, the consumer shall furnish information regarding the
piping system or systems of water use within the customer’s premises. The
consumer’s premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the Certified
Operator in Responsible Charge for the verification of information submitted by
the inspection consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding cross-
connection inspection results.
      (3)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable
water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must
be conducted in accordance with the 225 ILCS 320/3.
      (4)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
on the public water system by ensuring that:
         (a)   All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage;
         (b)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions;
         (c)   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time
of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
         (d)   Testing and records:
            1.   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacture.
            2.   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall
be available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with 415 ILCS 5/
14 et seq.
            3.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of the
most recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
            4.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
               a.   Date of each test;
               b.   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
               c.   Test results;
               d.   Repairs or servicing requested;
               e.   Repairs and date completed; and
               f.   Servicing performed and date completed.
   (L)   Where protection is required.
      (1)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77
Ill. Adm. Code 890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In
addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system servicing premises, where in the
judgment of the Certified Operator in Responsible Charge, actual or potential
hazards to the public water supply system exist.
      (2)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
         (a)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the Certified Operator in
Responsible Charge and the source is approved by the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency;
         (b)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the Certified Operator in Responsible Charge;
         (c)   Premises having internal cross- connections that, in the
judgment of the Certified Operator in Responsible Charge and/or the Cross-
Connection Control Device Inspector, are not correctable or intricate plumbing
arrangements which make it impractical to determine whether or not cross-
connections exist;
         (d)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey;
         (e)   Premises having a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or re-established.
      (3)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections
to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890. In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on
each service line to a customer's water system serving, but not necessarily
limited to, the following type of facilities unless the Certified Operator in
Responsible Charge determines that no actual or potential hazard to the public
water supply system exists:
         (a)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, and nursing homes;
         (b)   Laboratories;
         (c)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities;
         (d)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations;
         (e)   Food or beverage processing plants;
         (f)   Chemical plants;
         (g)   Metal processing or storage plants;
         (h)   Petroleum processing or storage plants;
         (i)   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors;
         (j)   Car washes;
         (k)   Pesticides or herbicides or extermination plants and trucks;
         (l)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
   (M)   Type of protection required.
      (1)   The type of protection required under subsection (L) of this
section of these regulations shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists
as follows:
         (a)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that
could cause a severe health hazard;
         (b)   An approved fixed air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard;
         (c)   An approved fixed air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or a double check valve
assembly shall be installed where the public supply system may be installed
where the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could
cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
      (2)   The type of protection required under subsection (1) of this
section of these regulations shall be an approved fixed proper air gap
separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
device.
      (3)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used
for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow preventers
shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply
when:
         (a)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant, or
other chemicals;
         (b)   Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
         (c)   Water flows by gravity from a non-potable source; or water can
be pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
         (d)   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced
into the fire safety system;
         (e)   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water
supply shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service
lines and a double check valve assembly on unmetered service lines.
   (N)   Backflow prevention devices.
      (1)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules
and regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water
Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American
National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation
to be in compliance with applicable industry specification.
      (2)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with
the manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer
of the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be
available on-site.
   (O)   Inspection and maintenance.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions.
         (a)   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within 24 hours.
         (b)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at
time of installation and at least annually thereafter and required service
performed within 5 days.
         (c)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall
be tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently
if recommended by the manufacturer and required service performed within 5
days.
      (2)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
      (3)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of the most
recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
      (4)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
         (a)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
         (b)   Name and approved number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
         (c)   Test results;
         (d)   Repairs or servicing required;
         (e)   Repairs and date completed; and
         (f)   Servicing performed and date completed.
      (5)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations
are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of
the consumer without delay as required by subsection (O)(1) of this section.
      (6)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made
inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific
authorization by the Certified Operator in Responsible Charge.
   (P)   Booster pumps.
      (1)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line in the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the Certified
Operator in Responsible Charge, at least once a year, that the device is
operable.
   (Q)   Violations.
      (1)   The Certified Operator in Responsible Charge shall deny or
discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupants thereof, the water
service to any premises wherein any backflow prevention device required by
these regulations is not installed, tested, maintained and repaired in a manner
acceptable to the Certified Operator in Responsible Charge, or if it is found
that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an
unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure cut-
off required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in working
order.
      (2)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Certified Operator in
Responsible Charge, and the required reconnection fee is paid.
      (3)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Certified Operator in
Responsible Charge.
      (4)   Neither the Village, Certified Operator in Responsible Charge, or
its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer of the Village Water
Department for any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from
termination of the customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this
section, whether or not the termination of the water supply was with or without
notice.
      (5)   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of clean-up of the potable water supply system.
      (6)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this section
shall be served with written notice stating the notice of violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently
cease all violation.
      (7)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section in
addition to the fine shall become liable to the Village for any expense, loss
or damage occasioned by the Village by reason of such violation, whether the
same was caused before or after notice.
(1997 Code, § 8.41) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968; Am. Ord. —, passed 7-25-
1994)
§ 51.74 PROHIBITED INSTALLATION OR USE OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   Incorporation of recitals. The recitals to the resolution set forth in
this section are incorporated in this section as if set out in full.
   (B)   Potable water defined. Potable water is any water used for human
consumption, including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing,
washing dishes, swimming, preparing foods and watering gardens in which produce
intended for human consumption is grown.
   (C)   Prohibited installation or use of potable water supply wells. No
groundwater well, cistern or other groundwater collection device may be used as
a potable water supply source. Without in any way liming the generality of this
section, the prohibition contained herein expressly applies to the Village.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be subject to a fine
of up to $500 for each violation.
   (E)   Authority to enter into MOUs and related agreements. The Village
Manager shall have the power and duty to enter into Memorandums of
Understanding and other agreements or contracts with governmental entities
necessary to implement the spirit and intent of this section.
(Ord. C0-99-30, passed 11-15-1999)
§ 51.75 WATER CONSERVATION PLUMBING PRODUCTS (WATERSENSE PRODUCTS).
   All new and replacement plumbing fixtures shall be labeled "Watersense"
products, as specified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and
pursuant to amendments to the Lake Michigan Allocation Rules and Regulations
adopted on November 18, 2014 by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources
("IDNR"), as amended.
(Ord. CO-2015-25, passed 9-15-2015)
Cross-reference:
   Lawn sprinkling, see §
51.72
   Water supply emergency, see §
51.11
§ 51.98 VIOLATIONS.
   Any sewer builder or plumber who shall be guilty of a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be reported by the Director of Public
Works to the Department of Public Health of the State of Illinois, and in
addition thereto for any act performed in violation of this chapter he may be
punished as prescribed for a violation of this Code.
(1997 Code, § 8.36) (Ord. 68-13, passed 10-24-1968)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 52: PREVAILING RATE OF WAGES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS
Section
   
52.01   Prevailing rate of wages for public works projects
   
52.02   Landscape maintenance work
§ 52.01 PREVAILING RATE OF WAGES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS.
   (A)   To the extent and as required by the Prevailing Wage Act, as amended,
the general prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics
and other workers engaged in the construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of this Village is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the Cook County area as
determined by the Department of Labor of the State of Illinois, as of June 1,
2014, a copy of that determination shall be attached to Ordinance No. CO-2014-
22 as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference. The definition of any
terms appearing in this section which are also used in the aforesaid Act shall
be the same as in the Act.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply the general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of this Village to the extent required by the
aforesaid Act.
   (C)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall publicly post or keep
available for inspection by any interested party in the main office of this
Village this determination of such prevailing rate of wages. A copy of this
determination or of the current revised determination of prevailing rate of
wages in effect shall be attached to all contract specifications prepared by
the Village.
   (D)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall mail a copy of this
determination to any employer, to any association of employers and to any
person or association of employees who have filed, or file, their names and
addresses, requesting copies of any determination stating the particular rates
and the particular class of workers whose wages will be affected by such rates.
   (E)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall promptly file, but in
no event later than July 15, 2014 a certified copy of Ordinance No. CO-2014-22
with both the Secretary of State, Index Division, and the Department of Labor
of the State of Illinois.
   (F)   The Village Clerk, or his or her designee, shall cause a notice to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village that the
determination of prevailing wages has been made. The notice shall conform
substantially to the notice attached to Ordinance No. CO-2014-22 as Exhibit B
and incorporated herein by reference. This publication shall constitute notice
that this is the determination of the Village of Maywood and is effective as of
the date of Ordinance No. CO-2014-22.
(Ord. CO-04-17, passed 6-21-2004; Am. Ord. CO-05-22, passed 6-22-2005; Am. Ord.
CO-06-14, passed 6-6-2006; Am. Ord. CO-07-23, passed 6-27-2007; Am. Ord. CO-08-
24, passed 6-16-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-19, passed 6-30-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2012-55,
passed 7-17-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2013-39, passed 6-18-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2014-22,
passed 6-18-2014)
Cross-reference:
   Garbage and waste, see
Ch. 50
   Water and sewer service, see
Ch. 51
Statutory reference:
   Prevailing Wage Act, see 820 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq.
§ 52.02 LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE WORK.
   (A)   Landscape maintenance work is not subject to the prevailing wage rates
of §
52.01. LANDSCAPE MAINTENANCE WORK is generally defined as work performed in
connection with the general maintenance of existing lawns, vegetation and
landscaped areas such as lawn mowing and grass cutting, tree and shrub pruning,
the planting of annuals, the replacement of pre-existing shrubs and trees,
grass seeding and fertilizing and herbicide application, laving sod, and the
planting of trees and shrubs. Landscape maintenance work shall not include
landscape construction work.
   (B)   Landscape construction work is generally defined as any and all work
performed by a landscape contractor, including any of its laborers, foremen,
drivers and operators in connection with contracts for:
      (1)   The original installation of any landscaping materials as part of
any new construction projects;
      (2)   Landscaping done in connection with any road, boulevard, street,
highway, bridge, park, sewer or underground utility construction project;
      (3)   Lawn and landscape restoration where there has been construction
involving trenches and manholes, pipes, cables and conduits;
      (4)   The preparation and landscaping of approaches associated with
construction involving shafts, tunnels, subways and sewers;
      (5)   The landscaping of the old and new site where underpinning,
lagging, bracing, propping and shoring has occurred; and
      (6)   Landscaping associated with construction involving general
excavation and grading and the general landscaping of sites of demolished
structures. Landscape construction work is covered by the prevailing wage rates
of §
52.01.
(Ord. CO-2012-55, passed 7-17-2012)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
Chapter
   
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
   
72.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
    
73.   BICYCLES
    
74.   RAILROADS
    
75.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
   
76.   PARKING SCHEDULES
   
77.   AUTOMATED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   State traffic laws adopted
   
70.02   Immobilization of vehicles
   
70.03   Processing of minor offenses
Vehicles Licenses
   
70.20   License required
   
70.21   Application for license
   
70.22   License fees
   
70.23   Expiration of license
   
70.24   Decalcomanias and plates
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 STATE TRAFFIC LAWS ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., is hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter by reference and shall be applicable in the
Village.
   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of the Illinois Vehicle Code
within the Village shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of
this Code.
(1997 Code, 41.01) Penalty, see 10.99
§ 70.02 IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Immobilization. A motor vehicle may be immobilized in such a manner as
to prevent its operation after notice and an opportunity for hearing under the
following circumstances:
      (1)   Where the owner of the motor vehicle owes fines for 3 or more
tickets for parking violations. An owner of a motor vehicle will be deemed to
owe fines for purposes of this provision in the following instances:
         (a)   Where the court date set for hearing on the parking violation
has passed and the owner has failed to appear;
         (b)   Where at a court hearing a finding of guilty has been entered
for said parking violation;
         (c)   Provided, however, that as to both (a) and (b) a fine shall not
be deemed owed if the owner has posted bond in the amount of the fine, has paid
the fine, or has entered into an agreement with the proper authorities of the
Village for payment of the fine; or
      (2)   Where the owner of the motor vehicle has failed to obtain a Village
vehicle license for the motor vehicle as required by §§ 70.20 et seq.
   (B)   Notice to owner.
      (1)   Whenever the Police Department has placed a motor vehicle on its
immobilization list, a notice of such listing shall be mailed to the last
registered owner of such vehicle at the address listed in the most current
registration list of Illinois motor vehicles. In the event that no information
is available through the registration list or current Village vehicle license
records, no notice shall be required.
      (2)   The notice shall specify that the motor vehicle has been placed on
the immobilization list, that the owner is entitled to a hearing as set forth
in division (C) of this section, and that the motor vehicle will be immobilized
on or after the eighth day following the date of the notice. The notice shall
set forth the payment required from the owners to satisfy outstanding parking
violations.
   (C)   Hearing.
      (1)   The owner of a motor vehicle that has been placed on an
immobilization list may request a hearing. The request for a hearing must be
made in writing and delivered to the office of the Village Manager not more
than 7 days after the date of the notice that the owner’s motor vehicle has
been placed on the immobilization list.
      (2)   The hearing shall be conducted by the Village Manager or such other
official or employee of the Village as the Village Manager may designate. In no
case shall the hearing officer be a civilian or sworn personnel of the Village
Police Department or any other individual who was involved in the initial
decision to immobilize the vehicle. At the hearing, the owner may present
evidence that the vehicle was improperly designated. If, following the hearing,
the Village Manager, or appointed designee, determines that the vehicle was
improperly designated, the vehicle shall be removed from the immobilization
list and any fees paid to the Village as a result of the vehicle having been
placed on the immobilization list shall be refunded.
   (D)   Release of motor vehicle.
      (1)   If the Village Manager, or appointed designee, determines that the
motor vehicle has been properly placed on the immobilization list, or if no
hearing is requested, the owner may obtain the removal of the motor vehicle
upon the immobilization list by:
         (a)   Making the payment of any fines owed and paying any Village
license fees owed;
         (b)   Posting a bond in the amount of any fines owed and any Village
license fees owed and requesting a court hearing.
      (2)   If the Village has immobilized the motor vehicle, the owner must,
in addition to making payment or posting the bond described above, pay a
booting fee of $50 for such immobilization.
   (E)   Immobilization notice. In any case involving immobilization of a motor
vehicle pursuant to this section, the Police Department shall cause to be
placed on such vehicle, in a conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn any
individual to the effect that such vehicle has been immobilized and that any
attempt to move such vehicle might result in damage to such vehicle.
(1997 Code, § 41.01) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985; Am. Ord. 87-4, passed 7-9-
1987; Am. Ord. C0-00-31, passed 12-4-2000)
§ 70.03 PROCESSING OF MINOR OFFENSES.
   (A)   Minor offenses. The term MINOR OFFENSE as used in this section shall
mean the violation of any of the following, when written as a local ordinance
violation under §
70.01 of this Code:
      (1)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-112(b) (Failure to transfer
title within 20 days);
      (2)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-401(a) (No valid registration -
never applied);
      (3)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-413(a), (b) (Improper display
of license plates);
      (4)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-413(f) (Operation of vehicle
with expired registration plate or sticker);
      (5)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-416 (Failure to notify the
Secretary of State of name/ address change);
      (6)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/3-701(a)(1) (No valid
registration - no valid plate or sticker);
      (7)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/5-202(e) (Failure to display
three tow-truck plates);
      (8)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1406 (Obstruction to driver’s
view or control);
      (9)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1407 (Improper opening of door
into traffic);
      (10)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1410 (Coasting on downgrade);
      (11)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1411 (Following fire
apparatus);
      (12)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/11-1419.01 (Motor Fuel Tax I.D.
Card);
      (13)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-101 (Driving vehicle which is
in unsafe condition or improperly equipped);
      (14)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-201(a) (Daytime lights on
motorcycles);
      (15)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-201(b) (Driving vehicles
without two lighted headlamps and tail lamps when required);
      (16)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-202(a) and (b) (Insufficient
clearance, identification or side marker lamps and reflectors - second division
vehicles);
      (17)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-204 (Lamp or flag on
projecting load);
      (18)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-205 (Failure to display
required safety lights);
      (19)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-207(a) (Improper use of more
than one spot lamp);
      (20)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-207(b) (Improper use of more
than three auxiliary driving lamps);
      (21)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-208 (Signal lamps and signal
devices);
      (22)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-209(c) (Defective backup
lights);
      (23)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-211(a) (Improper lighting on
vehicles other than motorcycles - only one headlamp);
      (24)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-211(b) (Improper use of more
than four lighted headlights/auxiliary driving lamps);
      (25)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-212(a) (Improper use of red
light visible from front of vehicle);
      (26)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-212(b) (Unlawful use of
flashing lights);
      (27)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-215 (Unlawful use of
oscillating, rotating or flashing lights);
      (28)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-301 (Use of defective
brakes);
      (29)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-401 (Restrictions as to tire
equipment);
      (30)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-405(c) (Use of unsafe tire);
      (31)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-501(a) (Operation of vehicle
without windshield);
      (32)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-502 (Mirrors);
      (33)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-503 (Windshields must be
unobstructed and equipped with wipers);
      (34)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-503(e) (Obstructed view due
to defective condition or repair of any window);
      (35)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-601 (Horns and warning
devices);
      (36)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-601(b) (Unlawful possession
or use of siren);
      (37)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-602 (Prevention of noise or
smoke; mufflers);
      (38)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-603 (Seat safety belts);
      (39)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-603.1 (Driver and passenger
required to use seat safety belts);
      (40)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-610 (Operation of vehicle
while wearing headset receiver);
      (41)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-611 (Sound amplification
system);
      (42)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-702 (Certain vehicles to
carry flares or other warning devices);
      (43)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-710 (Splash guards and
replacements);
      (44)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-808 (Operating school bus
without fire extinguisher);
      (45)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-809 (Operating school bus
without first aid kit);
      (46)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-810 (Transporting handicapped
passenger(s) without restraining device);
      (47)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/15-109(b) (Operating loaded
vehicle without securely fastened covering);
      (48)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/15-114 (Unlawful pushing of
disabled vehicle);
      (49)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/18C-4104(a) (Operation without
current cab card and Illinois identifier stamp);
      (50)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/18C-4604(3) (Use of a cab card
and Illinois identifier stamp issued to another carrier);
      (51)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/18C-4604(4) (Failure to display
or present a cab and Illinois identifier stamp);
      (52)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/18C-4701(1) (Operating without
trade name, license and registration number of carrier painted or affixed to
both doors of power unit);
      (53)   Section
70.20 of this Code (requiring Village vehicle license);
      (54)   Section
70.24 of this Code (requiring display of Village vehicle sticker);
      (55)   Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5/12-604.1 (Television visible to
driver).
   (B)   Settlement and compromise of minor offense. Any person charged with
the commission of a minor offense may settle and compromise the charge by
paying the Village the sum of $75 and showing proof of correction (where the
nature of the charged violation permits correction) within 10 days from the
time of the commission of the alleged offense, or by paying to the Village the
sum of $150 and showing proof of correction (where the nature of the charged
violation permits correction) after 10 days but no more than 20 days from the
time of the commission of the alleged offense.
   (C)   Enforcement procedure.
      (1)   An officer observing a minor offense may, in lieu of an arrest,
issue a Compliance “C” ticket along with a Minor Violation Notice. The Minor
Violation Notice shall state that proof of repair or compliance is to be
presented at the Village Hall or Police Department within 10 days, along with
the required $75 fee. The Notice shall also state that the amount due will
increase to $150 after 10 days. The Notice shall further state that, upon
compliance and payment of the required fee, no appearance at an administrative
hearing will be required and notification will not be sent to the Secretary of
State. In addition, the Notice shall state that if the alleged violator fails
to present proof of compliance and to pay the designated fee, the alleged
violator must appear at the administrative hearing on the date specified in the
Compliance “C” ticket.
      (2)   If the alleged violator fails to present proof of compliance and to
pay the designated fee within 10 days, a “final notice” copy of the Compliance
“C” ticket shall be sent to the alleged violator, with a letter requesting
disposition within the next 10 days.
      (3)   If the alleged violator has not shown compliance and paid the
designated fee within 20 days after the commission of the alleged offense, the
Compliance “C” ticket shall be transferred to the Village Traffic Compliance
Administrator for placement on the administrative hearing docket on the date
specified on the ticket.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, all administrative
hearings on Compliance “C” tickets shall be conducted in accordance with §§
39.36 through
39.40 of this Code.
(1997 Code, § 41.37) (Ord. 83-25, passed 11-11-1983; Am. Ord. CO-95-02, passed
3-9-1995; Am. Ord. CO-96-04, passed 6-13-1996; Am. Ord. CO-00-31, passed 12-4-
2000; Am. Ord. CO-2014-16, passed 4-15-2014)
VEHICLE LICENSES
§ 70.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vehicle registered with the
Illinois Secretary of State to any residential, commercial or other address
within the Village limits to fail to obtain and/or display a current Village
License as provided in this chapter. The Village may issue, through the U.S.
Mail, citations to all vehicle owners who the Village find to be in violation
of this section based upon a review of Village and Secretary of State records,
regardless of whether such vehicle is physically present in the Village. Such
citations may be served by mailing the citation to the vehicle owner at the
address provided for the owner in Secretary of State records. In addition,
parking citations for any vehicle within the Village limits failing to display
a current Village License as required by this section may be issued to the
owner of any such vehicle in the same manner as any other parking citation
issued pursuant to this title. Where an officer of the Village authorized to
issue parking citations can see a vehicle parked on private property that is in
violation of this section from a location the officer is legally entitled to
be, such as the street, alley, parkway, or public sidewalk, the officer may
issue a citation by personally serving an individual legally entitled to accept
service on the property, by mailing the citation to the vehicle owner at the
address provided for the owner in Secretary of State records, or by placing the
citation on the windshield of the vehicle where the officer is able to access
the vehicle by going only on areas of the private property in which there is a
limited privacy interest. The vehicle license requirement of this section shall
not apply to railroad cars or trains.
(1997 Code, § 40.01) (Am. Ord. CO-05-51, passed 12-20-2005; Am. Ord. CO-06-01,
passed 2-7-2006) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.21 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Any person desiring a license for any such motor vehicle shall prepare an
application upon a form provided by the Director of Finance, setting forth the
name and address of the applicant, a description of the motor vehicle for which
the license is desired, its state license number, if any, and the place where
such motor vehicle is to be kept by such applicant at such place, and such
other information as may be prescribed.
(1997 Code, § 40.02)
§ 70.22 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
separate meaning.
      FIRST DIVISION VEHICLES. Motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than 10 persons as defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code.
      SECOND DIVISION VEHICLES. Those motor vehicles which are designed for
carrying more than 10 persons; those motor vehicles designed or used for living
quarters; those motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying
freight or cargo; and those motor vehicles of the First Division remodeled for
use and used as motor vehicles of the Second Division. Trucks, tractors, semi-
trailer units or buses, being vehicles of the Second Division designed for the
use of carrying persons, merchandise and materials shall be based upon the
gross weight in pounds of such vehicle, including maximum load capacity.
   (B)   Fees.
   ANNUAL LICENSE FEES
   All motor vehicles   $30
   Recreational vehicle   $30
   Motor driven tricycles, scooters, and
    mopeds   $25
   Dealers plate   $25
   School and church buses   $25
   Trucks: (based on gross)
      A – 3,000 lbs or less   $25
      B – 3,001 to 8,000 lbs   $30
      C – 8,001 to 10,000 lbs   $35
      D – 10,001 to 12,000 lbs   $40
      E – 12,001 to 14,000 lbs   $45
      F – 14,001 to 16,000 lbs   $50
      G – 16,001 to 20,000 lbs   $55
      H – 20,001 and over    $60
   APPLICABLE LATE FEES
   Within 30 days of final due date   Add $15
   More than 30 days past final due date   Add $15
($60 maximum total fee)
      (1)   First Division license fee shall be paid prior to February 1, or
within 30 days after the motor vehicle is initially required to have a Village
vehicle license.
      (2)   Persons who are 65 years of age or over, persons with disabilities,
and persons who are disabled veterans shall be charged a license fee of one-
half of the fee set forth above. This reduction in fee shall be applicable only
to vehicles registered in the name of such a person. A person shall be entitled
to a reduced license fee for only 1 First Division vehicle each year. A person
with disabilities is a person who is currently eligible for and has received
disability license plates or a person with disabilities parking decal under the
provisions of the Illinois Motor Vehicle Act (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.). A
disabled veteran is a person who is currently eligible for and has received
disabled veterans' motor vehicle plates under the provisions of the Illinois
Motor Vehicle Code. The Village Clerk or Director of Finance at the time of
application for a reduced fee license may require reasonable proof of vehicle
ownership and applicant's age. Such proof may include the motor vehicle title,
the current motor vehicle registration card, and the applicant's driver's
license and birth certificate.
      (3)   Second Division license fees shall be paid prior to February 1 or
within 30 days after the motor vehicle is initially required to have a Village
vehicle license.
      (4)   Where any Second Division vehicle is provided with a windshield, a
decalcomania device shall be used; otherwise a plate shall be issued by the
Director of Finance, as required in this chapter.
   (C)   Transfers and duplicates.
      (1)   For transfer of any of the licenses required in this chapter:
   $1.
      (2)   For duplicate license plates or decalcomania devices:    $0.25.
   (D)   Proration. When a license issued under this chapter is issued for a
period of less than 1 year, the fee to be paid for the unexpired license period
shall be the proportionate part of the annual rate, but no fee shall be less
than one-half of the annual rate.
   (E)   Disposition. All revenues derived from license fees required by this
chapter shall be kept as a separate fund and used only for such purposes as are
authorized by the statutes of the state.
   (F)   Late fees. Whenever a vehicle license fee is not paid within the time
required under divisions (A) or (B) of this section, the annual license fee for
the vehicle shall be increased $10 from the applicable fee specified in
divisions (A) or (B) of this section if the license fee is paid within 30 days
after the date the vehicle license fee was required to be paid under the
provisions of divisions (A) or (B) of this section, and thereafter, the license
fee shall be increased an additional $5 for each additional month or part
thereof which elapses between the date the license fee was required to be paid
under divisions (A) or (B) of this section and the date the license fee is
actually paid.
(1997 Code, § 40.03) (Ord. —, passed 9-10-1985; Am. Ord. —, passed 12-27-1984;
Am. Ord. CO-00-30, passed 12-4-2000; Am. Ord. CO-06-42, passed 11-8-2006; Am.
Ord. CO-08-12, passed 3-4-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2010- 07, passed 5-4-2010; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-09, passed 4-20-2021)
§ 70.23 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   All licenses required by this chapter shall expire on December 31 following
the date of issuance.
(1997 Code, § 40.04)
§ 70.24 DECALCOMANIAS AND PLATES.
   The Director of Finance, upon the issuance of a vehicle license, shall issue
a decalcomania device in the form of a sticker, or a metal plate where the
sticker cannot be used, bearing the number and name or class to which such
vehicle belongs and the year for which such license is issued. In the case of
automobiles having a windshield, the licensee shall attach the decalcomania
device to the lower right-hand corner of the windshield in such a manner as to
be easily read from the outside. In the case of motorcycles or motor tricycles,
the license plate shall be placed at the rear thereof. Any person carrying a
license plate or decalcomania device on his vehicle shall keep the same clear
of dust and mud so that the same can be plainly seen at all times.
(1997 Code, § 40.05)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Speed limits
   
71.02   Through streets, stop intersections and truck routes
   
71.03   Establishment of crosswalks, traffic and parking lanes, loading zones
and the like
   
71.04   One-way streets and restricted turning at intersections
   
71.05   Play streets and zones of quiet
   
71.06   Driving within sidewalk and parkway areas
   
71.07   Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices
   
71.08   Spilling loads
   
71.09   Use of safety belts in motor vehicles
   
71.10   Cruising
   
71.11   Use of motorized skateboards and scooters
   
71.12   Placement of traffic and parking signs
   
71.13   Overweight and/or overdimension vehicles
   
71.14   Permits for overweight and/or overdimension vehicles
   
71.15   Truck routes
   
71.16   Traffic-control signal legend
   
71.17   Turns on red signals
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall drive a
vehicle in excess of the speed limit posted.
   (B)   Pursuant to an engineering and traffic investigation conducted by the
Police Department of the Village and the Maywood Traffic Safety Commission it
was ascertained that established speed limits on certain of the urban streets
of the Village are greater or less than is reasonable or safe with respect to
the conditions found to exist within the Village and along the streets thereof.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of 20
miles per hour while passing a school zone or while traveling upon any public
thoroughfare on or across which children pass going to and from school during
school days when school children are present.
      (2)   The Village Manager is authorized and directed to have appropriate
signs posted upon streets and highways under the jurisdiction of and maintained
by the Village wherein school zones are located, and to request the Department
of Public Works and Buildings, Division of Highways and the County Highway
Department to post appropriate signs upon streets and highways within the
Village which are under their jurisdiction and maintenance.
      (3)   Such signs shall give proper due warning that a school zone is
being approached and shall indicate the school zone and the maximum speed limit
in effect during school days when school children are present.
(1997 Code, § 41.02) (Ord. 69-4, passed 3-27-1969)
§ 71.02 THROUGH STREETS, STOP INTERSECTIONS AND TRUCK ROUTES.
   The Village Manager may designate certain streets or portions thereof as
through streets and shall cause to be erected and maintained an appropriate
stop sign on each street intersecting such streets, designate street
intersections in addition to the intersections of through streets as dangerous
or hazardous intersections, and shall cause a stop sign or yield sign to be
erected and maintained at each such dangerous or hazardous intersections, and
designate such streets or portions thereof as truck routes and shall cause to
be erected and maintained appropriate informational signs throughout the
Village at such intersections as are deemed to be necessary for the instruction
of truckers.
(1997 Code, § 41.05) (Ord. 55-3, passed 8-18-1955)
§ 71.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF CROSSWALKS, TRAFFIC AND PARKING LANES, LOADING ZONES
AND THE LIKE.
   The Village Manager may establish, designate, or set off with appropriate
markings, signs or other devices, crosswalks, traffic lanes, parking lanes and
spaces, bus stops, taxicab stands, passenger zones and loading zones, and other
places established, designated, or set off for the enforcement of this chapter,
and determine the character and kind of such markings, signs or other devices.
A single space may be designated to be both a passenger zone and loading zone.
(1997 Code, § 41.06)
§ 71.04 ONE-WAY STREETS AND RESTRICTED TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The Village Manager may designate certain streets or alleys or
portions thereof along which vehicles shall travel only in 1 prescribed
direction, and to designate certain intersections at which vehicles shall not
make left-hand or right-hand or U turns, as the case may be; and cause the
placement of proper signs along such streets and alleys and at such
intersections indicating the direction of travel and the kinds of turns which
are prohibited.
   (B)   One-way streets are designated in Chapter 75, Schedule III.
(1997 Code, § 41.07)
§ 71.05 PLAY STREETS AND ZONES OF QUIET.
   (A)   Authority. The Village Manager may declare any street or part thereof
a play street and shall cause to be placed appropriate signs or devices in the
roadway indicating and helping to protect the same; and he may establish zones
of quiet in streets adjacent to hospitals whenever, in his judgment, such quiet
zones are necessary for the welfare of inmates of such hospitals and shall
cause to be placed appropriate signs designating such zones as zones of quiet.
   (B)   Play streets. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any
street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon
any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business
or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall
exercise the greatest care in driving upon such street or portion thereof.
   (C)   Zones of quiet. Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a
zone of quiet, no person operating a motor vehicle within any such zone shall
sound the horn or other warning device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
(1997 Code, § 41.08)
§ 71.06 DRIVING WITHIN SIDEWALK AND PARKWAY AREAS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area or within
any parkway area between a sidewalk area and the curb of a roadway except at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
(1997 Code, § 41.12) (Ord. 64-10, passed 10-22-1964)
§ 71.07 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES, AND SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play streets when
and as authorized by ordinance.
(1997 Code, § 41.31)
§ 71.08 SPILLING LOADS.
   No vehicle shall be so loaded that any part of its load spills or drops on
any street or alley.
(1997 Code, § 41.32)
§ 71.09 USE OF SAFETY BELTS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Each driver and front seat passenger of a motor vehicle operated on a
roadway in this Village shall wear a properly adjusted and fastened seat belt,
except that a child less than 8 years of age shall be protected as required
pursuant to the Illinois Child Passenger Protection Act (625 ILCS 25/1 et
seq.). Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting a child 8 years of age or
more, but less than 16 years of age, shall secure the child in a properly
adjusted and fastened safety belt. Each driver of a motor vehicle transporting
a passenger who is unable, due to infirmity, illness, or age, to properly
adjust and fasten a seat safety belt and is not exempted from wearing a seat
safety belt under division (B) shall secure the passenger in a properly
adjusted and fastened seat safety belt as required under this section.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the
following:
      (1)   A driver or passenger frequently stopping and leaving the vehicle
for delivering property from the vehicle, if the speed of the vehicle between
stops does not exceed 15 miles per hour;
      (2)   A driver or passenger possessing a written statement from a
physician that such person is unable, for medical or physical reasons, to wear
a safety belt;
      (3)   A driver or passenger possessing an official certificate or license
endorsement issued by the appropriate agency in another state or
countyindicating that the driver or passenger is unable for medical, physical
or other valid reasons to wear a safety belt;
      (4)   A driver operating a motor vehicle in reverse;
      (5)   A motor vehicle with a model year prior to 1965;
      (6)   A motorcycle or motor driven cycle;
      (7)   A moped;
      (8)   A motor vehicle which is not required to be equipped with safety
belts under federal law.
   (C)   The requirement to wear a properly adjusted and fastened seatbelt
shall also apply to the driver or passenger of an authorized emergency vehicle,
including all Police and Fire Department personnel, unless the delivery of
life-saving measures prohibits the use of a seat safetybelt.
   (D)   Violation of any provision of this section is declared to be a petty
offense, and any operator or passenger of a passenger motor vehicle convicted
of a violation hereunder shall be fined up to $100.
   (E)   Failure to wear a seat belt in violation of this section shall not be
considered evidence of negligence, shall not limit the liability of an insurer,
and shall not diminish any recovery for damages arising out of the ownership,
maintenance, or operation of a motor vehicle.
   (F)   Any Village police officer may stop any motor vehicle or driver or
passenger of such vehicle solely on the basis of a violation or suspected
violation of this section while such motor vehicle is being operated on any
roadway within this jurisdiction.
(Ord. —, passed - -1999; Am. Ord. CO-2014-33, passed 11-5-2014)
§ 71.10 CRUISING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
separate meaning.
      CRUISING or TO CRUISE. To operate a motor vehicle, or as a custodian
thereof to permit its operation, past a traffic control point more than 3 times
in any direction within the restricted cruising area during any 3 hour period.
      CUSTODIAN. Any person who is the owner of a motor vehicle, or has custody
thereof, and is present at the time of its operation.
      DESIGNATED AREAS. As follows:
         (a)   West border 9th Avenue to east border 1st Avenue and south
border Main Street to north border Chicago Avenue;
         (b)   East border 9th Avenue to west border 21st Avenue and north
border St. Charles Road to south border Harrison Street.
      ENFORCEMENT PERIOD. The period designated by the Chief of Police or his
designee.
      RESTRICTED CRUISING AREA. Streets, or portions thereof, designated by the
Chief of Police or his designee as a traffic congestion thoroughfare.
      TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT. The point or points within the restricted cruising
area established by the Maywood Chief of Police for the purpose of monitoring
cruising.
   (B)   Cruising prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to cruise in
the restricted area during the enforcement period. Signs indicating that
cruising is prohibited shall be posted at periodic intervals immediately
adjacent to the restricted area. Such signs shall state substantially as
follows:
"No cruising from (time to be designated) between (designated) street and
(designated) street."
   (C)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to
the operator of any municipal, police, fire, emergency vehicle, utility or
governmental vehicle when same is being operated in an official capacity. The
provisions of this section shall not be applicable to the operation of any
licensed public transportation vehicle or any vehicle being utilized for
business or commercial purposes.
   (D)   Penalty. Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a
traffic infraction and shall be subject to a fine of up to $500, a separate
offense shall be deemed to be committed for each successive trip past a traffic
control point after a violation has occurred.
   (E)   Vehicle seizure and impoundment. A motor vehicle used in violation of
this section shall be subject to seizure and impoundment.
      (1)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a
vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment, pursuant to this section, the
police officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility
controlled by the Village or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police
officer shall notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at
the time of the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of
the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to request a preliminary hearing
to be conducted under this section. Said vehicle shall be impounded, pending
the completion of the hearings provided for below, unless the owner of the
vehicle posts with the Village a cash bond in the amount of $500, plus fees for
towing and storage of the vehicle.
      (2)   Whenever the owner of a vehicle seized pursuant to this section
makes a written request for a hearing after the seizure, an administrative
hearing officer of the Village shall conduct such hearing. All interested
persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The
formal rules of evidence will not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence
shall be admissible. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines that
there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle was used in the violation
of this section, the administrative hearing officer shall order the continued
impoundment of the vehicle as provided in this section unless the owner of the
vehicle posts with the Village a cash bond in the amount of $500 plus fees for
towing and storing the vehicle. If the hearing officer determines that there is
no such probable cause, the vehicle will be returned without penalty or other
fees.
      (3)   All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
be heard at the hearing. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines
by a preponderance of evidence that the vehicle was used in the commission of
any of the violations described in this section, the hearing officer shall
enter an order requiring the vehicle to continue to be impounded until the
owner pays a penalty of $500 plus fees for towing and storage of the vehicle.
The penalty and fees shall be applied to the penalty. If the hearing officer
determines that the vehicle was not used in such a violation, he or she shall
order the return of the vehicle or cash bond. Notwithstanding any other
provision of this section, whenever a person with a lien of record against a
vehicle impounded under this section has commenced foreclosure proceedings,
possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he or she agrees in
writing to refund to the Village the net proceeds of any foreclosure sale, less
any amount necessary to pay all lienholders of record, up to the total amount
of penalties and fees imposed under this section. Any motor vehicle that is not
reclaimed within 30 days after the expiration of the time during which the
owner of record may seek judicial review of the Village's action under this
section, or the time at which a final judgment is rendered in favor of the
Village, or the time a final administrative decision is rendered against an
owner of record who is in default may be disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as
provided by law.
(Ord. C0-99-20, passed 11-1-1999)
§ 71.11 USE OF MOTORIZED SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a motorized skateboard or scooter means
a device with 2 or more tandem axles and a combination of wheels connected by a
platform designed for standing and which is propelled by some type of motor. A
motorized skateboard or scooter shall not include the following:
      (1)   Any police vehicle, fire vehicle, municipal vehicle, special
district vehicle or other governmental vehicle driven by an employee in the
course of his duties.
      (2)   Motorized wheelchairs. For the purposes of this section, a
motorized wheelchair means any motorized vehicle designed for and used by a
person with disabilities.
      (3)   Electric personal assistance mobility devices, as defined in
Section 1-117.7 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.).
   (B)   No person shall use, operate, or be in control of a motorized
skateboard or scooter, in or upon any public or private street, parking lot,
sidewalk, bike path, or other right-of-way or area open to the public. Use,
operation, or control of a motorized skateboard or scooter may be permitted
upon private property with the permission of the property owner, or in public
or quasi-public areas where signs are posted permitting motorized skateboards
or scooters. The absence of such signage is prima facie evidence that use of
motorized skateboards or scooters is prohibited.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person to
allow or permit an unemancipated minor residing with that parent, legal
guardian or other person to violate the provisions of this section. Such parent
shall be presumed to have allowed or permitted such a minor to violate this
section under the following conditions:
      (1)   Such minor has been either adjudicated to have violated this
section, has been charged with such violation (except if found to be not
guilty); has incurred nonjudical sanctions from any peace officer or
conservator of the peace resulting from an admission of guilt regarding such
violation; and
      (2)   Such parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by
certified mail (return receipt requested) or by personal service, stating that
the minor has been involved in a violation of this section.
   (D)   Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be fined not
less than $25, nor more than $750 for each violation hereunder. Each and every
violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. C0-04-22, passed 7-19-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-24, passed 8-2-2004)
§ 71.12 PLACEMENT OF TRAFFIC AND PARKING SIGNS.
   (A)   
Chapter 75, Schedule VI contains the designations for the placement of certain
traffic signs.
   (B)   
Chapter 76, Schedule VI contains the designations for the placement of certain
parking signs.
(Ord. C0-05-34, passed 9-20-2005)
§ 71.13 OVERWEIGHT AND OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES.
   (A)   Except as specifically allowed by statute or other ordinance, no
person shall permit to remain on any public way within the Village, any vehicle
or combination of vehicles exceeding the size and weight limitations stated in
Section 15-102 (width), Section 15-103 (height), Section 15-107 (length) and
Section 15-111 (weight) of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/15-102, 15-
103, 15-107, 15-111).
   (B)   Size and weight limitations while operating on Village streets shall
not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice removal operations
owned or operated by or for any governmental body, or to any vehicle or
combination of vehicles operating under the terms of a valid oversize and/or
dimension permit issued by the Village under the authority of §
71.14 hereof.
   (C)   Where lower size and weight limits or other restrictions are imposed
by ordinance under authority of Sections 15-111, 15-316 and 15-317 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/15-111, 15-316 and 15-317) and signs
indicating such limitations or restrictions are posted, it shall be unlawful to
operate any vehicle or combination of vehicles in excess of such size or weight
limitations or in violation of such restrictions.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle or combination of vehicles is operated in
violation of this section, the owner and/or driver of such vehicle shall be
deemed liable for such violation and either or both the owner and driver of
such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation.
   (E)   Any violations written under this Code of the size and weight
limitations stated in the Illinois Vehicle Code sections cited in §
71.13(A) shall be subject to the following penalties:
Weight Fine
Weight                                     Fine
Up to an including 2,000 pounds overweight $100
From 2,001 through 2,500 pounds overweight $270
From 2,501 through 3,000 pounds overweight $330
From 3,001 through 3,500 pounds overweight $520
From 3,501 through 4,000 pounds overweight $600
From 4,001 through 4,500 pounds overweight $850
From 4,501 through 5,000 pounds overweight $950
5,001 or more pounds overweight            See below
 
For vehicles that are 5,001 or more pounds overweight, the fine shall be
computed by assessing $1,500 for the first 5,000 pounds overweight and $150 for
each additional increment of 500 pounds overweight or fraction thereof.
   (F)   Any person, firm or corporation found liable of four or more
violations under §
71.13(A) within any 12-month period shall be fined an additional amount of
$5,000 for the fourth and each subsequent finding of liability within the 12-
month period. With regard to a firm or corporation, a fourth or subsequent
finding of liability shall mean a fourth or subsequent finding attributable to
any one employee-driver.
   (G)   Any violations written under this code of a width, height or length
violation stated in the Illinois Vehicle Code sections cited in §
71.13(A) shall be subject to a fine for the first or second violation of not
less than $50 nor more than $500 for each offense, and for the third and
subsequent violations by the same person, firm or corporation within a period
of one year after the date of the first offense not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000.
   (H)   A person issued a notice for a violation of any weight limitations
imposed by this section, or any term or condition of a permit issued under §
71.14, shall, upon issuance of the citation, deposit with the Village a bond in
the form of a money order issued by a money transfer service company in an
amount equal to the minimum fine established for such violation. The money
order shall be made payable to the Village of Maywood.
   (I)   Within 15 days after the issuance of any citation for a violation of
any size or weight limitations imposed by this section, or any term or
condition of a permit issued under §
71.14, the owner or operator may file a written request for a hearing before
the Ordinance Enforcement Department to challenge whether a violation has
occurred. The hearing date must be scheduled no later than 30 days after the
request for a hearing is filed.
   (J)   If, at the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines that the owner or
operator violated any size or weight limitations imposed by this section, or
any term or condition of a permit issued under §
71.14, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the owner and/or
operator liable to the Village for the amount of the administrative penalty
prescribed for such violation in §§
71.13(E) and
71.13(G). Any penalty imposed shall first be satisfied from the proceeds of the
deposit required in §
71.13(H).
   (K)   If, at the hearing, the Hearing Officer determines that the owner or
operator did not violate any size or weight limitations imposed by this
chapter, or any term or condition of a permit issued under §
71.14, the Hearing Officer shall enter an order finding the owner and/or
operator not liable to the Village and order the return of the proceeds of the
deposit.
   (L)   If the owner or operator fails to request a hearing in a timely
manner, or requests a hearing but fails to appear at the hearing, the owner and
operator shall be deemed to have waived his or her right to a hearing and, if a
money order deposit bond was deposited pursuant to §
71.13(H), the funds so deposited shall be forfeited to the Village.
   (M)   An administrative penalty shall constitute a debt owing to the
Village, which may be collected in accordance with applicable law.
   (N)   Service of the citation on the operator of the vehicle for a violation
of this section or §
71.14 shall constitute service of notice of the violation on the owner of the
vehicle.
(Ord. C0-07-26, passed 7-17-2007; Am. Ord. CO-2021-03, passed 3-2-2021)
§ 71.14 PERMITS FOR OVERWEIGHT AND/OR OVERDIMENSION VEHICLES.
   (A)   A permit shall be required for the operation of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles with a non-divisible load on roadways and bridges
within the jurisdiction of the Village which exceeds the dimensions and weights
permitted for the particular roadways to be traversed whether they be non-
designated or designated roadways.
   (B)   The Village with respect to any street or highway under its
jurisdiction may, upon application to the Village Police Department on forms
provided by the Police Department and good cause being shown therefor, issue a
special permit authorizing the applicant to operate a vehicle or combination of
vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified
in §
71.13. The applicant shall furnish the following information in the special
permit application:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle.
      (2)   Applicant’s name.
      (3)   Type of permit request whether it be for a single trip, round trip
or multiple routing.
      (4)   The description and registration (or the Illinois Department of
Transportation’s (IDOT) registration number of classification) of the power
unit.
      (5)   Description of the object or vehicle to be moved.
      (6)   The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of vehicles.
      (7)   The maximum axle weights of all single, tandem or series axles.
      (8)   Maximum gross weight of the vehicle.
      (9)   The maximum width, length and height of the vehicle and load.
      (10)   Requested routing over Village streets to and from a specific
location.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      MULTIPLE MOVES. Those in such close proximity to each other in distance
or in time that the Police Department would consider incorporating 2 or more
permit moves within 1 permit application. Multiple move permits when granted by
the Police Department shall be for a period of time not to exceed 3 months from
the date of issuance.
      ONE-WAY or SINGLE TRIP MOVEMENT. One move from the point of origin to the
point of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the
point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are
effective for 7 consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise
directed by the Police Department.
      ROUND TRIP MOVEMENT. Two trips over the same route in opposite
directions. Round trip permits are effective for 14 consecutive days from the
date of issuance.
   (D)   The owner or his or her agent shall submit an application fee based on
the chart below for a single routing which will be valid for 7 calendar days,
round trip routing valid for 14 calendar days and multiple routings valid for a
base period of 3 months. Permits may be issued for a maximum of 4 consecutive
permit periods (365 days) with the permit fee calculated in the appropriate
multiples of the base 3-month multiple trip permit. Permits are valid only for
the dated periods specified on the permit and for the specific vehicle, load
and routing as established by the Chief of Police or designee. No substitution
of vehicle, load or routing is permitted without the express written permission
of the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The permit must be carried in
the vehicle to which the permit applies.
   FEE SCHEDULE
 
Permit Size - Weight Fee
(with load)
                     Single Trip Round Trip Multiple
Up to 100,000 pounds $ 50        $ 75       $150
100,001 - 120,000    75          100        200
120.001 - 150,000    100         125         
Over 150.000         100*        125*        
*Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage
fees
 
 
Permit Size - Weight Fee
(with load)
                     Single Trip Round Trip Multiple
Up to 12'            $25         $40        $ 75
12'1" - 13'6"        50          75         100
Over 13'6" wide      50*         75*         
*Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage
fees
 
 
Permit Size - Weight Fee
(with load)
                     Single Trip Round Trip Multiple
13'6" - 14'6"        $25         $40        $75
Over 14'6"           50*         75*         
*Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage
fees
 
 
Permit Size - Weight Fee
(with load)
                     Single Trip Round Trip Multiple
Up to 100'           $25         $40        $75
Over 100'            50*         75*         
*Plus necessary and appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage
fees
 
NOTE: If a vehicle requires a permit due to multiple weight and/or dimension
issues, the total fee will be based on the largest individual weight or
dimension factor only.
   (E)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee is authorized to approve
the application for approved routes. Upon approval and payment of all required
fees, the Police Department shall issue a permit allowing passage of the
oversize and/or overweight vehicles over Village streets. The permit shall be
specific and contain:
      (1)   Permit number.
      (2)   The dates the permit is valid.
      (3)   Whether the permit is for single, round or multiple trip routing.
      (4)   The description of object or vehicle to be moved.
      (5)   Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and height.
      (6)   The authorized routing over Village streets including the origin
and termination point within the Village.
      (7)   The fee paid.
      (8)   The date and signature of the Chief of Police or his or her
designee.
      (9)   In addition, the permit will specify general conditions with which
the permittee must comply that are consistent and reasonable for the protection
of the general public and Village streets. A copy of all permits issued will be
provided to the Village Manager for informational purposes.
   (F)   It is the duty of the permittee to read and familiarize himself or
herself with the permit provisions upon receipt. Undertaking of the permit move
is deemed prima facie evidence of acceptance of the permit and that:
      (1)   The permittee is in compliance with all operation requirements;
      (2)   All dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit will
not be exceeded;
      (3)   All operation, registration and license requirements have been met;
      (4)   All financial responsibilities, obligations and other legal
requirements have been met;
      (5)   The permittee assumes all liability for any and all damages for
injury or damage to persons or to public property, including streets, bridges,
sidewalks, curbs, light poles, infrastructure in public right-of-ways, Village-
owned appurtenances, or to private property, including his or her own, or to
the object being transported or movement of vehicles and objects authorized
under the permit. The measure of liability shall be the actual cost for all
repairs or replacement of property damaged by permittee; and
      (6)   Permittee agrees to and shall indemnify and hold harmless the
Village and its appointed and elected officials, officers, President and Board
of Trustees, engineers, attorneys, volunteers, agents or employees, from any
and all suits, claims, damages, costs, judgments, settlements or proceedings of
any kind arising from physical injuries, including loss of life, or damage to
or loss of property related to acts or omissions by permittee, its officers,
agents or employees, pursuant to the permit or arising from the movement
authorized by the permit.
   (G)   The permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which the permit applies
at all times while operating on streets within the Village and shall be
exhibited upon demand to any law enforcement officer, police officer or
authorized official of the Village.
   (H)   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a
Village permit whether it be by size, weight or general provisions, either or
both the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed liable for such
violation and either or both the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be
prosecuted for such violation.
   (I)   (1)   The permits issued under this section constitute the grant of a
privilege by the Village and may be denied, suspended or revoked for such
reasons as the Village may deem rationally related to its governmental
interests, including but not limited to:
         (a)   A permittee’s knowingly providing incorrect information on an
application for a permit;
         (b)   A permittee, its agents or employees acting on a permit which
has been altered;
         (c)   Non-compliance by permittee, its agents or employees with
federal, state or locals laws pertaining to the transport of goods or operation
of a vehicle engaged in the transportation of goods;
         (d)   Overdue fines or fees due to the Village; and
         (e)   Moving on Village streets without a valid permit as is required
by this section.
      (2)   Suspension or revocation of a current permit shall be for the time
determined appropriate by the Chief of Police or his or her designee.
Reinstatement may be made upon conditions determined by the Village and payment
of all outstanding settlements or judgments. The charges for reinstatement are:
denial = no charge; suspended = $50; revoked = $75.
   (J)   Police escorts shall be required for certain vehicles and loads as
determined by the Chief of Police or his or her designee. The total number of
officers necessary to provide for a safe move shall be determined by the Chief
of Police or his or her designee. Fees for escorts shall be in addition to any
permit fees and shall be $65 per hour per officer assigned with a minimum fee
of $130, irrespective of the time or number of officers actually used.
(Ord. C0-07-26, passed 7-17-2007; Am. Ord. CO-2021-03, passed 3-2-2021)
§ 71.15 TRUCK ROUTES.
   (A)   As provided under the authority of Sections 15-111 and 15-316 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/15-111 and 15-316), it shall be unlawful to
operate any vehicle upon any street where the operation of that vehicle is
prohibited by ordinance and where signs of such prohibition are posted.
Vehicles operating under the authority of Sections 15-111 and 15-316 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/15-111 and 15-316) while utilizing Village
streets under “reasonable access” rules will be considered in violation of this
section if they are not utilizing the most direct route to points of loading
and unloading.
   (B)   (1)   As provided under the authority of Section 15-111(f) of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/15-111(f)), the Village reserves the right to
designate streets and/or highways under the Village’s jurisdiction as Class II
designated streets. Vehicles utilizing those as such can be of a weight, length
and width consistent with Section 15-102 (width), Section 15-107 (length) and
Section 15-111 (weight) of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/15-102, 15-
107, 15-111).
      (2)   The streets and/or highways, if any, designated as Class II
designated streets by the Village may be found in Ch. 75, Schedule V of this
Code.
   (C)   The Director of Public Works is authorized and directed to post or
cause to be posted, streets where trucks are prohibited as governed by division
(A) above or streets designated as Class II truck routes as governed by
division (B) above.
(Ord. C0-07-26, passed 7-17-2007)
§ 71.16 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control devices exhibiting
different colored lights or color-lighted arrows, successively 1 at a time or
in combination, the following colors only shall be used and the signals shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
   (A)   Green indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left except as such movement is modified by
lane-control signs, turn prohibition signs, lane markings, or roadway design.
Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal indication is
exhibited.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by such arrow or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal,
pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal is a
turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
   (B)   Steady yellow indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being terminated or
that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular
traffic shall not enter the intersection.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal,
unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, are thereby advised
that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway before a red indication is
shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross the roadway.
   (C)   Steady red indication.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
71.17, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop
at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the
intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is
shown.
      (2)   Except as provided in §
71.17, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not enter the
intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering
the intersection to make a movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at
a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection, or if none, then before entering the
intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication permitting the
movement indicated by such red arrow is shown.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 71.17 TURNS ON RED SIGNALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C), the driver of a vehicle may
cautiously enter the intersection and turn right when facing a steady red
signal; provided, however, he may do so only from the lane closest to the
right-hand curb or edge of roadway, must come to a full stop prior to
proceeding in the manner set forth in §
71.16(C) and must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and to other traffic
lawfully using the intersection.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C), the driver of a vehicle on a 1-way
roadway, facing a steady red signal, may cautiously enter the intersection and
turn left into an intersecting 1-way roadway in which traffic travels to the
left; provided, however, he may do so only from the lane closest to the left-
hand curb or edge of roadway, must come to a full stop prior to proceeding in
the manner set forth in §
71.16(C) and must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians and to other traffic
lawfully using the intersection.
   (C)   Drivers may not turn left or right on a steady red signal when
official traffic-control devices have been erected indicating that such turns
are prohibited.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In addition to any penalties provided for elsewhere in this chapter,
any person, firm or corporation who or which violates, disobeys, neglects,
fails to comply with or resists enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
will be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each offense. A separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each calendar day a violation occurs.
Local ordinance violations under this chapter may be prosecuted in the Cook
County Circuit Court or through the Village’s Administrative Adjudication
Program, as directed by the Village Manager.
   (B)   In addition to seeking a fine, as herein above provided, the Village
Attorney may institute any proper action in the name of the Village of Maywood
to enjoin the violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. C0-07-26, passed 7-17-2007)
CHAPTER 72: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Permits relative to loading and unloading
   
72.02   Parking meters
   
72.03   Responsibility of owner
   
72.04   Parking scofflaw
   
72.05   Registration required on parked vehicles
   
72.06   Display of registration plates on parked vehicles
   
72.07   Property owner parking responsibility
Regulations
   
72.20   Truck stopping and parking
   
72.21   Loading zones
   
72.22   Parking on public parkway
   
72.23   Parking or abandoning truck trailers prohibited
   
72.24   Parking vehicles for sale or repair
   
72.25   Parking prohibited
   
72.26   Limited parking
   
72.27   Overnight parking prohibited
   
72.28   Parking on private property
   
72.29   Parking in alleys
   
72.30   Parking during snowfall
   
72.31   Parking of buses and taxicabs
   
72.32   Use of bus stops and taxicab stands by other vehicles
   
72.33   Parking for handicapped
   
72.34   Overnight parking permits
   
72.35   Drop-off zones for persons with disabilities
   
72.36   Parking of abandoned or inoperable vehicles
   
72.37   Parking in electric vehicle charging station space
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 PERMITS RELATIVE TO LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   (A)   The Chief of Police may issue to any owner of a vehicle used to
transport merchandise or materials a special permit, renewable annually, and
stating therein the terms and conditions thereof, allowing the driver of such
vehicle the privilege of loading and unloading while the vehicle is backed
against the curb, when in their opinion such privilege is reasonably necessary
in the conduct of the owner’s business and will not seriously interfere with
traffic.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or driver to violate any of the
special terms and conditions of any such permit.
(1997 Code, § 41.24)
Penalty, see § 10.99 
§ 72.02 PARKING METERS.
   (A)   Definition. The term PARKING METER ZONES as used in this section shall
mean any of the streets or other areas where parking meters are installed as an
aid to the regulation of vehicular parking or as an aid to the enforcement of
this chapter or any other ordinance of the Village regulating vehicular parking
in the Village.
   (B)   Designating zones. Subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees,
the Village Manager may cause to have designated such zones of the Village as
parking meter zones during such hours as necessary when such parking meter
zones may be required for the proper regulation of parking within the Village.
   (C)   Authority of Village Manager. The Village Manager shall provide for
the installation of meters, including curb or street marking lines, and the
regulation and operation thereof, and shall cause such meters to be maintained
in good workable condition. Meters shall be placed upon the curb next to
individual parking places. Such meters shall be so constructed as to display a
signal showing legal parking upon deposit therein of the proper coin of the
United States as indicated by instructions on the meter and for a period of
time conforming to the parking limits of the Village. Such signal shall remain
in evidence until expiration of the parking period so designated, at which time
a change of signal or some other mechanical operation shall indicate the
expiration of the parking period.
   (D)   Purchase and installation of meters. The Village is vested with the
authority to enter into a contract for the purchase and installation of parking
meters and to provide payment therefor exclusively from the receipts obtained
by the Village from their operation. Such means of payment shall be in addition
to any other purchasing powers heretofore granted the Village by the laws of
the state.
   (E)   Use of parking spaces.
      (1)   When any vehicle shall be parked next to a parking meter the owner
or operator of such vehicle shall park within the area designated by the curb
or street marking lines as indicated for parallel or diagonal parking, and upon
entering the parking space shall immediately deposit in the meter 1 or more
coins of the United States as indicated by instructions on the meter. It shall
be unlawful for any person to fail to park within such designated area, or fail
or neglect to so deposit the proper coins.
      (2)   Such parking space may then be used by such vehicle during the
legal parking limit provided, and such vehicle shall be considered as
unlawfully parked if it remains in such space beyond the legal parking limit or
when such parking meter displays a signal showing such illegal parking. It
shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any vehicle registered in
their name to be unlawfully parked as set out in this section.
   (F)   Extension of parking time. It shall be unlawful for any person to
deposit, or cause to be deposited, in a parking meter 1 or more coins for the
purpose of extending the parking time beyond the maximum time fixed for such
location.
   (G)   Use of slugs. It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited
in any parking meter any slug, device or a metallic substitute for a coin of
the United States.
   (H)   Tampering with meters. It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper
with, open, wilfully break or destroy any parking meter.
   (I)   Duties of police and meter checkers.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of police and meter checkers to take the
parking meter number and the state vehicle tag number of all persons violating
the provisions of this section and make complaint therefor in any court having
jurisdiction in such matters.
      (2)   Meter checkers are designated as conservators of the peace and
shall have all of the powers specified in the 65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25 and shall
primarily direct their activities to the assistance of the enforcement of this
chapter.
      (3)   Meter checkers shall be under the direction and control of the
Village Manager and shall be responsive in the event of an emergency to the
orders of the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department of the
Village as the situation may warrant.
   (J)   Use of parking meter fees. The fee required to be deposited in parking
meters is levied as a police regulation and inspection fee to cover the cost of
providing parking spaces, parking meters and the installation and maintenance
thereof; for the cost of regulation and inspection, operation, control and use
of the parking meter spaces and zones created herein; for the regulation and
control of traffic moving in and out of, and parking in, such parking spaces
and zones so created; and for the cost of any resultant traffic administration
expense.
   (K)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person who violates or permits the violation of this section
shall be fined $35 for each offense. Any such fine shall be paid to the Village
Collector.
      (2)   Any person who violates divisions (G) or (H) of this section shall
be fined $750 for each offense.
(1997 Code, § 41.27) (Ord. 64-5, passed 6-25-1964; Am. Ord. 66-1, passed 1-13-
1966; Am. Ord. CO-00-31, passed 12-4-2000; Am. Ord. CO-2010-07, passed 5-4-
2010)
§ 72.03 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER.
   The fact that a vehicle is registered in a person’s name shall be prima
facie proof that such person was responsible for any violation of any parking
regulation of this chapter involving such vehicle.
(1997 Code, § 41.28)
§ 72.04 PARKING SCOFFLAW.
   (A)   Definition. The term PARKING SCOFFLAW as used in this section shall
mean any person or corporate entity which has received 3 or more citations for
violations of §§ 71.06, 72.01, 72.20 through 72.31, inclusive, and who has
failed to either:
      (1)   Pay the fine for such citations;
      (2)   Appear in court and have the citations dismissed; or
      (3)   Enter into an agreement with the authorities of the village to pay
the outstanding fines on an installment basis.
   (B)   Issuance of licenses and permits prohibited. The Directors of Finance
and Sustainability and Innovation shall not issue any licenses or permits or
certificates of the village, including, but not limited to vehicle licenses,
business licenses, liquor licenses, building permits and certificates of
housing to any person or corporation who has been designated by the Chief of
Police to be a parking scofflaw as defined in division (A) of this section
until the scofflaw shall appear before the Chief of Police or their designee
and enter into an agreement to pay the fines outstanding. Provided the required
vehicle license fees are paid, the Director of Finance shall issue vehicle
licenses, even if a person has been designated as a parking scofflaw under this
chapter.
   (C)   List to be submitted. The Chief of Police or their designee shall
submit a complete list of all those persons and corporations who are parking
scofflaw, as defined in division (A) of this section, to the Directors of
Finance and Code Enforcement on December 15 of each year. The list shall be
updated each month.
   (D)   Additional penalty. The foregoing penalty shall be in addition to all
other fines and penalties which may be imposed under the Maywood Village Code.
(1997 Code, § 41.34) (Ord. 81-16, passed 11-24-1981; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2019-30, passed 11-25- 2019; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12,
passed 6-10-2025)
§ 72.05 REGISTRATION REQUIRED ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park on any highway or other
public way in the Village any vehicle of a type required to be registered under
the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/3-401) which is not
registered or for which the appropriate fee, as set forth in the Illinois
Vehicle Code, has not been paid, except when application accompanied by proper
fee has been made for registration of a vehicle it may be parked temporarily
pending complete registration upon displaying a duplicate application duly
verified or other evidence of such application.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle on any highway or other public way in
the Village, nor permit the parking of a vehicle, upon which is displayed a
state registration plate, plates or registration stickers after the termination
of the registration period for which issued or after the expiration date set
pursuant to Sections 3-414 and 3-414.1 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS
5/3-414, 3-414.1).
   (C)   If the defendant claims that they had previously paid the appropriate
state registration fees and taxes for the vehicle before the alleged violation,
the defendant shall have the burden of proving the existence of the payment by
competent evidence. Proof of proper state registration issued by the Secretary
of State, or the appropriate registration authority from the foreign state,
shall be the only competent evidence of payment.
(Ord. C0-04-27, passed 8-16-2004)
§ 72.06 DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION PLATES ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Registration plates issued by the state for a motor vehicle other than
a motorcycle, trailer, semitrailer, truck-tractor, apportioned bus, or
apportioned truck, as those vehicles are defined in the Illinois Vehicle Code
(625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.), shall be attached thereto whenever such vehicle is
parked on any highway or other public way in the Village, one in the front and
one in the rear. The registration plate issued by the state for a motorcycle,
trailer, or semitrailer required to be registered by the state pursuant to the
Illinois Vehicle Code and any apportionment plate issued to a bus under the
provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be attached to the rear thereof
whenever such vehicle is parked on any highway or other public way in the
Village. The registration plate issued for a truck-tractor or an apportioned
truck required to be registered under the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be
attached to the front thereof whenever such vehicle is parked on any highway or
other public way in the Village.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is parked in the Village, every registration
plate shall at all times be securely fastened in a horizontal position to the
vehicle for which it is issued so as to prevent the plate from swinging and at
a height of not less than 5 inches from the ground, measuring from the bottom
of such plate, in a place and position to be clearly visible and shall be
maintained in a condition to be clearly legible, free from any materials that
would obstruct the visibility of the plate, including, but not limited to,
glass covers and tinted plastic covers. Clear plastic covers are permissible as
long as they remain clear and do not obstruct the visibility of the plates.
Registration stickers issued as evidence of renewed annual registration shall
be attached to registration plates on vehicles parked on any highway or public
way in the Village as required by the Secretary of State, and be clearly
visible at all times.
(Ord. C0-04-27, passed 8-16-2004)
§ 72.07 PROPERTY OWNER PARKING RESPONSIBILITY.
   The offense of Property Owner Parking Responsibility is committed when a
property owner, having received a written notice or warning from the Village at
any time in the preceding 12 months, fails to actively prevent persons residing
at, utilizing or visiting their property from committing violations of §
72.22 (Parking on Public Parkway), §
72.25 (Parking Prohibited), §
72.28 (Parking on Private Property) and/or §
72.29 (Parking in Alleys) of this Code, regardless of whether or not the
offending vehicles are owned by or controlled by the property owner and
regardless of whether or not the violations occur on the owner’s property. A
property owner is defined as the legal owner or beneficial owner of real
property or a property manager or a landlord of such real property. The legal
owner or beneficial owner of real property, the property manager and/or the
landlord are joint and severally liable for violations of this provision.
(Ord. CO-2021-14, passed 7-13-2021)
REGULATIONS
§ 72.20 TRUCK STOPPING AND PARKING.
   (A)   No truck or commercial vehicle bearing a Class D or heavier State of
Illinois "license plate," as such classes are defined in Section 3-815 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/3-815), or having a gross weight capacity
(including vehicle and maximum load) in excess of 8,000 pounds, shall be parked
or stored on any street, alley, right-of-way or easement in the Village, except
as otherwise posted to the contrary. The provisions of this division shall not
apply to any vehicle making a delivery or picking up a load or performing a
requested service at a particular residence, in which case the vehicle may be
driven on such street, alley, right-of-way or easement only for the minimum
distance necessary to make the delivery or pickup or to perform the requested
service and shall remain parked only the minimum time required to make the
delivery or pickup or to perform the requested service.
   (B)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, it
shall be unlawful to stop a truck or commercial motor vehicle while it is
running on any street, alley, right-of-way or easement in residential zoning
districts and in areas of non-residential zoning districts where more than 50%
of the structures on the block are residential, except if such vehicle is
stopped at a traffic control light or as directed by another traffic control
device.
(1997 Code, § 41.10) (Ord. 55-9, passed 8-18-1955; Am. Ord. C0-07-20, passed 7-
2-2007)
§ 72.21 LOADING ZONES.
   The Village Manager may determine the location of loading zones and shall
erect or maintain or cause to be erected or maintained appropriate signs
indicating the same. It shall be unlawful to stop, stand or park a vehicle for
a period of time longer than necessary for the unloading and delivery or pick-
up of materials in any place marked as a loading zone.
(1997 Code, § 41.11) (Ord. 74-28, passed 12-19-1974)
§ 72.22 PARKING ON PUBLIC PARKWAY.
   No person shall park a vehicle on or within any public parkway except that a
vehicle may be parked on that part of a driveway for a corner lot which is on
the parkway, provided that the vehicle does not block more than half the width
of the sidewalk. A public parkway is declared to be that area between the
street curb line and the inside curb line.
(1997 Code, § 41.14) (Ord. 84-22, passed 3-29-1984)
§ 72.23 PARKING OR ABANDONING TRUCK TRAILERS PROHIBITED.
   Parking or abandoning a “trailer,” as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-209, that is
not attached to or drawn by a "motor vehicle," as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-146,
or not attached to or drawn by a "truck," as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-211 is
prohibited in the Village, except as permitted under § 111.41 of this Code.
(1997 Code, § 41.15) (Am. Ord. CO-97-05, passed 10-9-1997; Am. Ord. C0-06-27,
passed 9-7-2006)
§ 72.24 PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE OR REPAIR.
   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon any street, yard or unpaved
area for the purpose of displaying it for sale or for repair except in
emergency, or to park any vehicle upon any business street from which vehicle
merchandise is peddled, or to park any vehicle upon any street without state
license plates upon it, issued for such vehicle, to the owner of the vehicle,
in accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(1997 Code, § 41.16) (Am. Ord. CO-2012-41, passed 11-5-2012)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.25 PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, the Village Manager
may prohibit the parking of vehicles at all times, or between certain hours, on
any street or portion of street and when such parking may impede the free flow
of traffic on such streets and shall cause appropriate signs to be erected and
maintained giving notice thereof.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle during the time prohibited at places so
indicated by official signs. No parking zones are designated in
Chapter 76, Schedule III.
   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle on a vacant lot or lot with a vacant
building without the express written permission of the property owner.
      (1)   Vehicles parked without such permission are subject to a $100 fine.
      (2)   Any vehicle not listed on the list of authorized persons and
vehicles submitted by the owner of a lot with a vacant lot pursuant to §
150.031(A)(4) shall be considered a nuisance and an “unlawful vehicle” pursuant
to § 99.01 of this Code and may be abated through towing in conformance with
the applicable provisions for the towing of an unlawful vehicle, in addition to
a fine of $100.
      (3)   Inclusion on a list submitted pursuant to §
150.031(A)(4) of this Code or express written permission from the owner of the
property on which a vacant building sits to park on the property shall be a
defense to a violation of this section.
   (D)   No person shall park a vehicle in whole or in part on any unimproved
or unapproved surface in residential districts.
      (1)   Approved surfaces include impervious surfaces that are constructed
from materials in compliance with the Maywood zoning ordinance.
      (2)   Unapproved surfaces include, but are not limited to, any unimproved
surface, or any surface constructed from materials not in compliance with the
Maywood zoning ordinances such as grass, mulch, dirt, wood chips, and/or
gravel.
      (3)   Any vehicle which is parked and maintained on blocks or stands that
keep the wheels of the vehicle from touching the ground and/or from bearing the
weight of the vehicle shall be deemed to be parked on an unapproved surface,
unless repairs are actively being made to the vehicle and the blocks or stands
are on an approved surface.
(1997 Code, § 41.17) (Am. Ord. CO-2012-41, passed 11-5-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2023-
51, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 72.26 LIMITED PARKING.
   (A)   Subject to the approval of the Board of Trustees, the Village Manager
may designate either side, or both sides, or any portion of, either side, of
any street as a restricted parking area, and shall determine the time of the
day and any such parking restriction shall be effective as well as the duration
of time allowed for continuous vehicular parking, and shall cause appropriate
signs to be erected and maintained in such areas designating the effective time
of day of such parking restriction as well as the duration of time that
continuous vehicular parking is allowed. Such designation shall be evidenced by
the physical presence of such signs or legends or notices on or near the
parking lane of the streets or portions thereof where such restriction is to be
effective.
   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle for any period of time in excess of the
time posted on the officially erected sign or legend or notice effective for
the parking space for which it is erected during the effective time thereof.
Limited parking zones are designated in
Chapter 76, Schedule IV.
(1997 Code, § 41.18)
§ 72.27 OVERNIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Overnight parking prohibited. Except as otherwise set forth in this
section or §
72.34, when signs are erected at the entrances of highways into the Village or
at other locations on Village property, giving notice thereof, no person shall
park a vehicle on the public streets or on Village property, between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. of any day, except physicians on calls.
   (B)   Temporary permits. Temporary permits to park a vehicle on the street
overnight may be informally approved for periods during which construction is
occurring on a resident’s property. To obtain such approval, a resident must
show that building permits have been pulled. Approval for temporary parking
requests terminate upon completion of the construction or earlier where the
construction no longer prevents parking on the property.
   (C)   Call-in parking exceptions. A call-in exception to the overnight
parking prohibition may be obtained by calling the Police Department between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 1:30 a.m. immediately prior to the overnight period
for which parking is requested and providing the Department with the resident
name, address, vehicle make, model and license plate number and parking
location. Such requests are limited to 5 times each calendar month for each
dwelling unit in the Village. Such requests may be denied in the discretion of
the Village Manager, or his or her designee, where there is reason to believe
the request would jeopardize the health, welfare and safety of the Village’s
residents.
(997 Code, § 41.20) (Am. Ord. C0-07-35, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. CO-2017-18,
passed 5-16-2017)
§ 72.28 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle on any private property
without the consent of the owner of the property.
(1997 Code, § 41.21) (Ord. 64-8, passed 10-8-1964)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 72.29 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley except for the purpose of
loading and unloading merchandise and then in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway
for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway
entrance to any abutting property.
(1997 Code, § 41.22)
§ 72.30 PARKING DURING SNOWFALL.
   No person shall park any vehicle for a period of time longer than 3 minutes
for loading and unloading of passengers or 15 minutes for loading and unloading
of property in any place, whether designated as a loading zone or not so
designated, at any time after snow begins to fall and for a period of 8 hours
after snow stops falling, if the snow on the street exceeds 1 inch in depth,
provided that said 8 hour parking restriction shall continue during snow
removal operations until completed.
(1997 Code, § 41.23) (Ord. 60-17, passed 11-17-1960)
§ 72.31 PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXICABS.
   The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any
business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand
respectively, except that this provision shall not prohibit the driver of any
such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading passengers.
(1997 Code, § 41.25)
§ 72.32 USE OF BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS BY OTHER VEHICLES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand
has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver
of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping
does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter
such zone.
(1997 Code, § 41.26)
§ 72.33 PARKING FOR HANDICAPPED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any public
parking area posted “No Parking Except Handicapped Persons” or bearing the
international symbol indicating a handicapped parking restriction except a
vehicle which has registration plates designated for handicapped persons as
provided in 625 ILCS 5/3-616. The registration plates must be displayed on the
vehicle parked in the designated area.
   (B)   Upon request of a handicapped person who has been issued a Certificate
of Registration pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-616, a parking space in the street
adjacent to the residence of the handicapped person shall be designated by
official sign of the Department of Public Works as reserved for handicapped
persons. No person shall park a motor vehicle in the space so designated unless
it bears special registration plates issued pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-616.
   (C)   Any person who violates this section shall be fined as set forth in §
39.99 of this Code.
(1997 Code, § 41.36) (Ord. 83-10, passed 5-26- 1983; Am. Ord. CO-2012-45,
passed 11-5-2012) Penalty, see §
39.99
§ 72.34 OVERNIGHT PARKING PERMITS.
   (A)   Overnight parking permit program established. There is hereby
established in the Village an overnight parking permit program. An overnight
parking permit issued pursuant to this section shall entitle the permittee to
park 1 vehicle in a designated place for a period not to exceed 12 months. The
program shall be administered by the Finance Director, or his or her designee.
   (B)   Overnight parking permit applications. To obtain an overnight parking
permit, an application must be submitted to the Finance Director, on a form
created by the Finance Director, along with a permit fee of $100 for 6 months
or $200 for 1 year of overnight parking. Each such application shall set forth
the name and address of the applicant; the license number of the vehicle, the
make, year and type of vehicle; the reason an overnight parking permit is
necessary for the period requested and such other pertinent information as the
Finance Director may require. Only residents of the Village shall be eligible
to receive annual or biannual overnight parking permits.
   (C)   Investigation. Upon receipt of an overnight parking permit
application, the Finance Director shall cause to be made such investigation as
he may deem proper to ascertain whether such permit should be granted. No
overnight parking permit shall be issued for vehicles without current Village
vehicle stickers or to individuals with outstanding Village parking citations.
Proof of residency of the applicant in the form of a lease or proof of property
ownership shall be required. The vehicle for which parking is requested must be
registered to the resident whose name is reflected on the lease or property
ownership documents. The applicant’s driver’s license must reflect the address
for which the parking permit is requested. No permit shall be issued for
single-family homes where the applicant has a driveway or otherwise has access
to the backyard through an alley or has a garage on the property. No more than
2 overnight parking permits may be issued per dwelling unit. If, upon
submission of the application and all materials required, the Finance Director,
after investigation, determines there is no adequate off- street parking space
reasonably obtainable by the applicant at the place of his residence, or within
300 feet thereof, for the overnight parking of the vehicle described in the
application, an overnight parking permit shall be granted; otherwise, it shall
be denied.
   (D)   Permits: contents; term. Each permit shall contain a brief description
of the vehicle, the area within which the vehicle may be parked and the
expiration date thereof. An overnight parking permit shall authorize the
vehicle to which it applies to park overnight on a street in the area
designated in the permit and in a location within said area where the vehicle
may otherwise be legally parked. Such permit does not authorize the parking of
a vehicle in no parking zones, handicapped spaces, tow and loading zones,
adjacent to fire hydrants, blocking a driveway or in any other place where
parking is restricted for any purpose other than overnight parking. The permit
shall be effective only for the vehicle stated on the permit and only when said
vehicle is parked in the area stated on the permit. Permits shall be for a
period of time between 3 months and 1 year as requested by the applicant and
deemed necessary by the Finance Director.
   (E)   Transfer of ownership of vehicle; change of residence; termination of
necessity. Upon the transfer of the vehicle described in any permit or upon the
permittee’s change of place of residence or obtaining off-street parking
facilities for such vehicle rendering the permit unnecessary, the permittee
shall destroy the permit and report such destruction to the Finance Director.
   (F)   Renewal. Upon application for renewal at the expiration of any
overnight parking permit or within 7 days prior thereto, the Finance Director
shall cause to be made such investigation as he may deem proper to ascertain
whether a renewal of the permit should be granted. The Finance Director may
grant a renewal of the permit if, as a result of the investigation, he
determines that the need for the permit still exists and the permittee is
otherwise eligible pursuant to this section.
   (G)   Lost permit. If a permittee loses, surrenders or destroys a permit for
a permitted vehicle, he may obtain another permit for the same vehicle for the
remaining permit term or a permit for a substituted vehicle for the term upon
the payment of a permit replacement fee in the amount of $100 for 6 months or
$200 for 1 year.
   (H)   Display of permits. A sticker supplied by the Village evidencing the
issuance of an overnight parking permit shall be at all times displayed in the
5-inch square of the lower left-hand corner of the rear window of the vehicle.
All previously issued stickers shall be removed prior to display of newly
issued sticker. The sticker shall be plainly visible from the exterior.
   (I)   Vehicles for which permits shall not be issued; exemptions. No
overnight parking permit shall be issued for any vehicle other than a passenger
automobile, van or pickup truck whose primary purpose is to transport
passengers for non-commercial purposes. No permit shall be issued for any
automobile, truck, trailer, van or pickup truck whose primary purpose is
commercial in nature, passenger trailer, motor home, house car, camper, boat,
boat trailer, commercially licensed vehicle or vehicle other than a car, van or
pickup truck whose primary purpose is to transport passengers for non-
commercial purposes. In the case of a van or pickup truck, the applicant shall
sign a declaration, under penalty of perjury, stating that the primary use of
the vehicle is non-commercial transportation of passengers. Permits issued
under this section are subject to revocation if it is discovered that the
vehicle to which the permit is issued is not in compliance with the declaration
on file. Upon a written application to the Finance Director, or his or her
designee, and a showing of good cause that the application of this division
works an unreasonable hardship upon the owner or occupant of real property
within the Village, the Finance Director, or his or her designee, with or
without holding a hearing thereon, may grant an exemption from the provisions
of this section upon such terms and conditions as the Finance Director, or his
or her designee, shall determine in his or her sole discretion.
   (J)   Designated areas and prohibited areas. The Finance Director, or his or
her desginee, may approve an application for an overnight parking permit as
provided in this section for use on any street in the Village, except that no
overnight parking permit shall be issued for use on the following streets:
      (1)   1st Avenue (entire Village).
      (2)   5th Avenue (entire Village, except from Roosevelt Road to Filmore
Avenue).
      (3)   9th Avenue (entire Village).
      (4)   17th Avenue (from 1000 S. to Village limits).
      (5)   19th Avenue (from 100 S. to 1000 S).
      (6)   Chicago Avenue (entire Village).
      (7)   Lake Street (entire Village).
      (8)   St. Charles Road (entire Village).
      (9)   Washington Blvd. (entire Village).
      (10)   Madison Avenue (entire Village).
       (11)   Harrison Avenue (entire Village).
      (12)   Bataan Avenue (entire Village).
      (13)   Roosevelt Road (entire Village).
(Ord. CO-07-35, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. CO-2013-25, passed 4-16-2013; Am.
Ord. CO-2020-06, passed 3-3-2020)
§ 72.35 DROP-OFF ZONES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any public
parking area posted as a “Drop-Off Zone for Persons With Disabilities”, unless
that person is parked in such parking area for purposes of picking up or
dropping off one or more persons with disabilities from the property that
applied for and received authorization to post the Drop-Off Zone for Persons
With Disabilities signage.
   (B)   Upon request of a person with disabilities who has been issued a
Certificate of Registration pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-616 or any Village
institution that provides services to persons with disabilities and approval of
the corporate authorities of the Village by ordinance, a parking space in the
street adjacent to the residence of the persons with disabilities or the
Village institution shall be designated by the posting of official signage of
the Department of Public Works as reserved for Drop-Off Zone for Persons With
Disabilities. No person shall park a motor vehicle in the space so designated
unless it bears special registration plates issued pursuant to 625 ILCS 5/3-
616. If a permanently disabled resident or a Village institution desires a
drop-off zone for disabled persons, the application for such a zone shall
follow the below procedures of this section and criteria listed. Drop-off zones
for persons with disabilities shall meet the following criteria:
      (1)   The person or entity seeking the drop-off zone for persons with
disabilities must demonstrate the need for such a zone. Factors to be
considered in determining the need for such a drop-off zone shall include the
following: the number of persons with disabilities traveling to and from the
proposed drop-off zone location, the frequency of this activity, the
difficulties encountered without the proposed drop-off zone and the alternate
solutions available.
      (2)   The proposed drop-off zone for persons with disabilities shall not
have a substantial negative impact on existing parking and traffic conditions
in the area.
      (3)   The need which must be demonstrated under this section must not be
the need for parking for persons with disabilities, but rather the need for a
location to stop a vehicle which carries a person or persons with disabilities
only long enough to drop off or pick up such person or persons from a
designated place. The regular use of special motor vehicles or buses for the
transport of persons with disabilities to and from a designated place shall be
considered as evidence indicating the need for a drop-off zone for persons with
disabilities, rather than the need for parking for persons with disabilities.
      (4)   The size of a Village-approved drop-off zone will be determined
based on the size of the transport vehicle typically used (e.g., automobile,
van, bus).
   (C)   Any person who violates this section shall be fined as set forth in §
39.99 of this Code.
(Ord. CO-2022-18, passed 9-20-2022)
§ 72.36 PARKING OF ABANDONED OR INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful to park any inoperable or abandoned vehicle, as such
vehicles are defined in §
99.01 of this Code, on any street, highway, alley, or other public right-of-way
within the Village. The person in whose name an abandoned vehicle or inoperable
vehicle is or was last registered is the person presumed to have abandoned or
otherwise parked the vehicle. The presumption established under this section
may be rebutted by showing that at the time any citation issued, a report of
vehicle theft has been filed by the owner with respect to the vehicle.
(Ord. CO-08-13, passed 3-4-2008)
§ 72.37 PARKING IN ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION SPACE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to park, stop or stand any vehicle other than an
electric vehicle, as such vehicles are designated and defined in § 13.15 of the
zoning code, in a designated electric vehicle charging station space. Any
vehicle other than an electric vehicle parked, stopped or standing in a
charging station space is subject to fine and/or impoundment of the offending
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall park, stop or stand an electric vehicle, as such
vehicles are designated and defined in § 13.15 of the zoning code, in a
designated electric vehicle charging station space while not plugged in to the
charging station(s). Any electric vehicle parked, stopped or standing in a
charging station space and not plugged in to the charging station is subject to
fine and/or impoundment of the offending vehicle.
   (C)   The violation of any provision of this Code not pertaining to
prohibiting or restricting vehicular standing, stopping or parking shall be
punishable as an ordinance violation. Punishment shall be by a fine not to
exceed the fine prescribed in accordance with § 39.99 of this Code.
(Ord. CO-2023-37, passed 9-12-2023)
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES
Section
   
73.01   License required
   
73.02   Application fee
   
73.03   Issuance
   
73.04   Attachment of license plate
   
73.05   Inspection
   
73.06   Transfer of ownership
   
73.07   Serial number
   
73.08   Buying or selling bicycles
   
73.09   Rental agencies
   
73.10   Operation of bicycles and skateboards on sidewalks
§ 73.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person who resides in the Village shall ride a bicycle on any street or
upon any public way within the Village unless such bicycle has been licensed
and the license plate is attached thereto as prescribed herein.
(1997 Code, § 38.01) (Ord. 73-16, passed 7-26-1973)
§ 73.02 APPLICATION FEE.
   Application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a form provided by the
Village and shall be made to the Village Clerk. A one-time license fee of $1
shall be paid to the Village before a license is granted.
(1997 Code, § 38.02) (Ord. 73-16, passed 7-26-1973)
§ 73.03 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The Village Clerk, upon receiving the proper application and fee, upon
approval by the Chief of Police, is authorized to issue a license which shall
be attached to the bicycle. An identification card as prescribed by the Police
Department containing the name and address of the owner along with a complete
description of the bicycle may be carried by the owner and displayed when
requested by any police officer to verify ownership of the bicycle.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall not approve the issuance of a license for
any bicycle when he knows or has reasonable grounds to believe the applicant is
not the owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle.
   (C)   The Police Department shall keep a record of the number of each
bicycle registered, the name and address of the person to whom the license was
issued, and the color and serial number of the bicycle for which the license
was issued.
(1997 Code, § 38.03) (Ord. 73-16, passed 7-26-1973)
§ 73.04 ATTACHMENT OF LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   The Police Department, upon the issuance of a license which shall
contain the name “Maywood” and a number, shall cause the same to be mounted and
firmly attached to the left front axle of the bicycle for which the license is
issued.
   (B)   The license shall be permanently assigned to the bicycle, and no
person shall remove the license from the bicycle, except upon transfer of
ownership or in the event the bicycle is wrecked, junked or dismantled and is
no longer used upon the streets of the Village.
(1997 Code, § 38.04) (Ord. 73-16, passed 7-26-1973)
§ 73.05 INSPECTION.
   The Chief of Police may cause the inspection of each bicycle before
approving the licensing of same and may refuse to approve a license for any
bicycle which he determines is in unsafe mechanical condition.
(1997 Code, § 38.05) (Ord. 73-16, passed 7-26-1973)
§ 73.06 TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   Upon the sale of the bicycle the license should be removed and the Police
Department notified that the bicycle is no longer in the possession of the
former owner. Any bicycle registered by a new owner must have a new license.
(1997 Code, § 38.06) (Ord. 73-16, passed 7-26-1973)
§ 73.07 SERIAL NUMBER.
   It shall be unlawful to destroy, remove, alter, cover or deface the
manufacturer's serial number on any bicycle. It shall be unlawful for any
person to own or have custody of a bicycle on which the original serial number
has been destroyed, altered, removed, covered or defaced. In the event a
bicycle has been purchased which does not contain a manufacturer's serial
number, the Police Department shall stamp an original serial number on the
frame of the bicycle and this number shall be considered the original number.
(1997 Code, § 38.07) (Ord. 73-16, passed 7-26-1973)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 73.08 BUYING OR SELLING BICYCLES.
   Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging
bicycles in the Village shall maintain for 5 years a record containing the
name, color, type, and serial number of each bicycle bought, sold or exchanged
and shall contain the name and address of each person buying, selling or
exchanging a bicycle, which record shall be open to inspection by a
representative of the Police Department during reasonable business hours.
(1997 Code, § 38.08) (Ord. 73-16, passed 7-26-1973)
§ 73.09 RENTAL AGENCIES.
   A rental agency shall not rent or offer to rent any bicycle unless the
bicycle is licensed and the license plate is firmly attached as provided herein
and such bicycle is equipped with lamps and other equipment as required in this
chapter.
(1997 Code, § 38.09) (Ord. 73-16, passed 7-26-1973)
§ 73.10 OPERATION OF BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS ON SIDEWALKS.
   No person over 12 years of age shall ride a bicycle or skateboard on any
sidewalk in the Village’s downtown area between the intersection of Fifth
Avenue and Quincy Street, and the intersection of Fifth Avenue and Lake Street.
The Village Manager is authorized and directed to have appropriate signs posted
reflecting the restrictions contained in this section.
(Ord. 2017-29, passed 8-15-2017)
CHAPTER 74: RAILROADS
Section
   
74.01   Permit for laying tracks in streets
   
74.02   Tracks in streets
   
74.03   Pavements and sidewalks at crossings
   
74.04   Obstruction of street crossings
§ 74.01 PERMIT FOR LAYING TRACKS IN STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to lay any railroad tracks in or
upon any of the streets or other public places within the Village without first
procuring a permit therefor in writing from the Board of Trustees. Such permit
shall be issued in accordance with the terms of the respective ordinances under
which the tracks may be authorized to be laid and shall specify in full the
terms and conditions under which the same shall be constructed.
   (B)   Such permit shall be issued only upon the petition of the owners of
the land representing more than one-half of the frontage of the street, or so
much thereof as is sought to be used for railroad purposes, and when the street
or part thereof sought to be used shall be more than one mile in extent, no
petition of landowners shall be valid unless the same shall be signed by the
owners of the land representing more than one-half of the frontage of each mile
and of the fraction of a mile, if any, in excess of the whole miles, measuring
from the initial point named in such petition, of such street or of the part
thereof sought to be used for railroad purposes. For every such permit there
shall be paid to the Village the cost of issuing the same and the expense of
causing the construction, under the permit, to be inspected by such officer as
may be appointed by the Board of Trustees.
(1997 Code, § 37.01)
§ 74.02 TRACKS IN STREETS.
   The railways operating in the Village shall keep their respective tracks in
such a condition that such tracks shall not at any time be elevated above the
surface of the streets on which they are laid so that vehicles can easily and
freely at all times cross the tracks at all points in any direction without
obstruction. They shall also keep such portion of the street as they severally
may occupy for railway purposes paved in the same manner and with the same kind
of material as the adjacent portion of the street not used for railroad
purposes. Portions of streets used for railway purposes shall at all times be
maintained in such condition of repair that water cannot accumulate or stand
thereon or penetrate or seep through the pavement but will readily and quickly
drain to the gutters.
(1997 Code, § 37.02)
§ 74.03 PAVEMENTS AND SIDEWALKS AT CROSSINGS.
   All railway companies whose tracks cross any of the streets of the Village
at grade shall build and maintain pavements across their right-of-way for the
full width thereof at each street intersection crossed by their tracks and
right-of-way and shall also build and maintain cement sidewalks according to
the standard specifications of the Village for the accommodation and safety of
their patrons and the public. The pavements shall be made to conform in quality
to the pavement of the streets extending in either direction across the right-
of-way; but if the streets are not paved, the paving shall be constructed
according to specifications which shall be furnished by, and the work shall be
done to the satisfaction of, the officer of the Village having charge of
sidewalks.
(1997 Code, § 37.03)
§ 74.04 OBSTRUCTION OF STREET CROSSINGS.
   (A)   No person shall cause or allow any locomotive engine, car or train of
cars to stop on or obstruct any street crossing within the limits of the
Village for a longer period than 10 minutes at any one time; provided, however,
that in case a collision should take place at or on such crossing, reasonable
time shall be allowed to remove any obstruction that may be caused thereby.
   (B)   Should any street crossing within the Village remain occupied and
obstructed, in whole or in part, by any train of railroad cars, for or during
the period of 10 minutes, it shall be the duty of the railroad company, upon
whose line of road such obstruction may occur, their agents or employees, on or
before the expiration of 10 minutes, when from any cause the entire train
cannot be removed from the occupied and obstructed crossing, to cause such cars
as may be on or near the crossing to be uncoupled, and the obstructing cars to
be removed from the crossing and leave the street entirely clear, and when the
train is again coupled it shall be removed immediately from off such crossing.
(1997 Code, § 37.04)
CHAPTER 75: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   Turning restrictions
   
III.   One-way streets
   
IV.   U-turns
   
V.   Truck routes; weights
   
VI.   Traffic signs
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   It is hereby determined that the absolute maximum speed limit for a motor
vehicle on the following streets within the Village shall be as indicated:
STREET LOCATION SPEED LIMIT
STREET     LOCATION    SPEED LIMIT
1st Ave.   All         35 m.p.h.
           Between
5th Ave.   Division    30 m.p.h.
           St. and
           Erie St.
           Between
5th Ave.   Erie St.    25 m.p.h.
           and Quincy
           St.
           Between
           Quincy St.
5th Ave.   and         25 m.p.h.
           Roosevelt
           Rd.
           Between St.
           Charles Rd.
9th Ave.   and         30 m.p.h.
           Roosevelt
           Rd.
           Between
           Madison St.
17th Ave.  and the     25 m.p.h.
           south limit
           of the
           Village
Alley      From
between    Madison St. 15 m.p.h., and “no thoroughfare” signs shall also be
17th Ave.  to Warren   posted
and 18th   St.
Ave.
           Between 1st
Bataan Dr. Ave. and    30 m.p.h.
           13th Ave.
           Between
           17th Ave.
Bataan Dr. and the     30 m.p.h.
           west limit
           of the
           Village
           Between the
Chicago    east limit
Ave.       of the      30 m.p.h.
           Village and
           1st Ave.
           Between 1st
Chicago    Ave. and
Ave.       the west    25 m.p.h.
           limit of
           the Village
           Between 1st
Harrison   Ave. and
St.        the west    30 m.p.h.
           limit of
           the Village
Lake St.   All         30 m.p.h.
           Between 1st
Madison    Ave. and
St.        the east    30 m.p.h.
           limit of
           the Village
           Between 1st
Madison    Ave. and
St.        the west    25 m.p.h.
           limit of
           the Village
Roosevelt  All         30 m.p.h.
Rd.
           Between 4th
St.        Ave. and
Charles    the west    30 m.p.h.
Rd.        limit of
           the Village
Washington All         30 m.p.h.
Blvd.
 
(1997 Code, § 41.02) (Ord. 59-3, passed 2-5-1959; Am. Ord. 66-28, passed 10-13-
1966; Am. Ord. 74-8, passed 4-11-1974)
SCHEDULE II. TURNING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Right turns. When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person
driving a vehicle shall make a right turn from 25th Avenue on to Lexington
Street.
(1997 Code, § 41.33) (Ord. 79-15, passed 9-27-1979)
   (B)   Right turns on red signal. Right turns against steady red signals be
and the same are hereby prohibited for all vehicular traffic at the following
intersections:
 
Intersection                  Direction
1st Avenue and Chicago Avenue All 4 corners
1st Avenue and Madison Street All 4 corners
5th Avenue and Roosevelt Road Southbound traffic
 
(1997 Code, § 41.04) (Ord. 74-19, passed 7-25-1974)
   (C)   No left turns. The Illinois Department of Transportation is hereby
authorized to erect and maintain no-left turn signs for northbound traffic on
First Avenue at Main Street.
(Ord. C0-04-13, passed 4-5-2004)
SCHEDULE III. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   In accordance with § 41.07, the following are designated one-way streets:
STREET LOCATION
STREET                                  LOCATION
Eastbound:
Rice St.                                Between 8th Ave. and 9th Ave., between
                                        8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on weekdays
Rice St.                                From 1st Ave. to 2nd Ave.
Walton St.                              From 1st Ave. to 2nd Ave.
Northbound:
2nd Ave.                                From the Chicago and Great Western
                                        right-of-way to Oak St.
11th Ave.                               Between Lexington St. and Roosevelt Rd.
Southbound:
2nd Ave.                                Between Lake St. and Main St.
6th Ave.                                From Chicago Ave. to Lake St.
8th Ave.                                From Bataan Dr. to Lexington St.
10th Ave.                               Between Lexington St. and Roosevelt Rd.
12th Ave.                               From Lexington St. to Fillmore St.
15th Ave.                               From Van Buren to Harrison Sts.
Greenwood Ave.                          From Madison St. to approximately 1/
                                        4 block north of Legion St.
North-south alley between 4th Ave. and  From Washington Blvd. to Walnut St.
5th Ave.
North-south alley midway between 5th    From St. Charles Rd. to Oak St.
Ave. and 6th Ave.
St. Charles Rd. and Oak St.             Between 5th Ave. and 6th Ave. (alley)
Westbound:
East-west alley, north of Roosevelt Rd. Between 9th Ave. and 10th Ave.
Main St.                                Between 1st Ave. and 2nd Ave.
Maple Ave                               From 6th Ave. to 7th Ave., only on
                                        Sunday from 7:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m.
 
(1997 Code, Ch. 41, Sch. A) (Ord. 58-9, passed - -; Am. Ord. 60-7, passed - -;
Am. Ord. 61-5, passed - -; Am. Ord. 63-1, passed - -; Am. Ord. 65-16, passed -
-; Am. Ord. 66-5, passed - -; Am. Ord. 66-23, passed - -; Am. Ord. 66-35,
passed - -; Am. Ord. 67-13, passed - -; Am. Ord. 67-22, passed - -; Am. Ord.
73-5, passed - -; Am. Ord. 73-12, passed - -; Am. Ord. 90-3, passed - -; Am.
Ord. C0-04-34, passed 10-18-2004)
SCHEDULE IV. U-TURNS.
   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in
the opposite direction upon:
   (A)   Any street in a business district;
   (B)   Any street declared as a through street;
   (C)   6th Avenue between Green Street and St. Charles Road;
   (D)   4th Avenue between Green Street and Oak Street; or
   (E)   Any other street when such turn cannot be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic. (1997 Code, § 41.09) (Ord. 62-1, passed 1-25-
1962)
SCHEDULE V. TRUCK ROUTES; WEIGHTS.
   (A)   North and south through truck traffic on Fifth Avenue between
Roosevelt Road and Bataan Drive is prohibited.
   (B)   Truck traffic and the operation of trucks in the 1400, 1500, 1600 add
1700 blocks on South 4th Avenue is prohibited.
   (C)   The operation of trucks or other commercial vehicle other than
commercial passenger vehicles is prohibited on Washington Boulevard.
   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle with a gross weight in excess
of 8,000 pounds on South 5th Avenue between Bataan Drive and Roosevelt Road.
   (E)   The operation of trucks or other large commercial vehicles, except for
domestic or residential-related deliveries and other residential service-
related purposes (such as, garbage collection), is prohibited on 16th, 17th,
and 18th Avenues between the south right-of-way line of Railroad Avenue and the
north right-of-way line of St. Charles Street.
   (F)   The operation of trucks or other large commercial vehicles, except for
domestic or residential-related deliveries and other residential service-
related purposes (for example, garbage collection), is prohibited on Orchard
Avenue from Legion Street to Madison Street and on Legion Street from Greenwood
Avenue to 1st Avenue.
   (G)   There shall be no commercial trucks permitted on 9th Avenue from
Roosevelt Road to Lake Street at any time.
   (H)   There shall be no commercial trucks permitted on Greenwood Avenue
between Madison Street and Legion Street at any time.
(1997 Code, § 41.10) (Ord. 66-17, passed 6-9-1966; Am. Ord. 67-8, passed 3-9-
1967; Am. Ord. 72-6, passed 3-23-1972; Am. Ord. 74-9, passed 4-11-1974; Am.
Ord. C0-04-32, passed 10-4-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-34, passed 10-18-2004; Am. Ord.
C0-05-34, passed 9-20-2005)
SCHEDULE VI. TRAFFIC SIGNS.
   The corporate authorities hereby authorize the placement of the following
traffic signs, and hereby direct Village staff to place as many signs necessary
for standard traffic regulation:
STREET LOCATION SIGN
STREET     LOCATION      SIGN
5th Ave.   East and west “NO DRIVING IN DEDICATED ON-STREET PARKING LANES AND
           sides         PARKING SPACES”
9th Ave.   East and west “NO DRIVING IN DEDICATED ON-STREET PARKING LANES AND
           sides         PARKING SPACES”
           From
9th Ave.   Roosevelt Rd. “NO TRUCKS PERMITTED”
           to Lake St.
17th Ave.  East and west “NO DRIVING IN DEDICATED ON-STREET PARKING LANES AND
           sides         PARKING SPACES”
19th Ave.  East and west “NO DRIVING IN DEDICATED ON-STREET PARKING LANES AND
           sides         PARKING SPACES”
Greenwood  From Madison
Ave.       St. to Legion “NO TRUCKS PERMITTED”
           St.
All even
numbered                 “NO PARKING WEDNESDAY 6AM 10AM STREET SWEEPING VIOLATORS
avenues in              WILL BE TICKETED & TOWED AT OWNER’S EXPENSE”
the
Village
All odd
numbered                 “NO PARKING TUESDAY 6AM 10AM STREET SWEEPING VIOLATORS
avenues in              WILL BE TICKETED & TOWED AT OWNER’S EXPENSE”
the
Village
           On north
Harrison   side, just    “NO LITTERING VIOLATORS WILL BE FINED UP TO $500"
St.        west of 1st
           Ave.
           The eastbound
           and westbound
           entrances to
           the
           intersections
Oak St.    of 10th       "STOP"
           Avenue and
           Oak Street
           and 12th
           Avenue and
           Oak Street
Washington From 1st Ave. “NO DRIVING IN PARKING LANES PERMITTED”
St.        to 21st Ave.
           Eastbound
           between the
           east right-
           of-way line
School St. of 5th Avenue “ONE-WAY TRAFFIC”
           and the west
           right-of-way
           line of 4th
           Avenue
 
(Ord. CO-05-34, passed 9-20-2005; Am. Ord. CO-2012-01, passed 1-17-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2012-56, passed 6-5-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2023-09, passed 3-14-2023)
CHAPTER 76: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Loading zone
   
II.   Angle parking
   
III.   No parking zones
   
IV.   Limited parking
   
V.   Truck parking
   
VI.   Parking signs
   
VII.   Handicapped parking spots and drop-off zones for persons with
disabilities
SCHEDULE I. LOADING ZONE.
   A loading zone is established at 318 West Madison Street, which patient
loading zone shall be of a size and dimension as set forth in Exhibit "A"
attached to the ordinance codified in this schedule. The Department of Public
Works is hereby directed to post appropriate signs at the aforesaid location
indicating the existence of a loading zone.
(1997 Code, § 41.11) (Ord. 74-28, passed 12-19-1974)
SCHEDULE II. ANGLE PARKING.
   Angle parking of compact cars is authorized on the south side of School
Street from 5th Avenue to the alley west of 5th Avenue.
(1997 Code, § 41.13) (Ord. 71-13, passed 9-23-1971)
SCHEDULE III. NO PARKING ZONES.
   In accordance with §
72.25, the following are designated “No Parking Zones.”
   (A)   No parking at any time:
STREET SIDE LOCATION
STREET                        SIDE  LOCATION
1st Ave.                      Both  30 feet north and south from Chicago
                                    Ave.
2nd Ave.                      Both  30 feet north and south from Chicago
                                    Ave.
3rd Ave.                      Both  30 feet north and south from Chicago
                                    Ave.
4th Ave.                      Both  30 feet north and south from Chicago
                                    Ave.
                                    From Madison St. on the north to the
4th Ave.                      East  south edge of the existing driveway
                                    of the Delmar Co. on the south
4th Ave.                      West  From Lake St. to Erie St.
5th Ave.                      Both  30 feet north and south from Chicago
                                    Ave.
6th Ave.                      West  From Randolph St. to Maple St.
7th Ave.                      East  From Randolph St. to Maple St.
8th Ave.                      East  From Madison St. to School St.
10th Ave.                     West  Between Harrison St. and Van Buren
                                    St.
11th Ave.                     Both  From Roosevelt Rd., north to the
                                    alley
11th Ave.                     East  From Madison St. to North Maywood Dr.
11th Ave.                     East  From North Maywood Dr. to St. Charles
                                    Rd.
11th Ave.                     West  From Madison St., south to alley
                                    south of Madison St.
12th Ave.                     East  From North Maywood Dr. to St. Charles
                                    Rd.
13th Ave.                     East  From Madison St. to Warren St.
13th Ave.                     East  From North Maywood Dr. to St. Charles
                                    Rd.
13th Ave.                     East  From Van Buren St. to Harrison St.
13th Ave.                     West  From Madison St. to the first alley
                                    lying north thereof
14th Ave.                     East  From North Maywood Dr. to St. Charles
                                    Rd.
15th Ave.                     Both  From Washington Blvd. to the first
                                    alley south of Washington Blvd.
15th Ave.                     East  From Van Buren St. to Harrison St.
16th Ave.                     East  From Railroad St. to St. Charles Rd.
16th Ave.                     West  From St. Charles Rd. to the first
                                    alley south of St. Charles Rd.
16th Ave.                     West  From Washington Blvd. to the first
                                    alley south of Washington Blvd.
17th Ave.                     East  From Madison St. north 35 feet
17th Ave.                     West  From Bataan Dr. to Lexington St.
19th Ave.                     East  From alley south of St. Charles Rd.
                                    to Madison St.
20th Ave.                          From St. Charles Rd. to the first
                                    alley south of St. Charles Rd.
Chicago St.                        From 8th Ave. to 9th Ave.
Chicago St.                   Both  From 1st Ave. to 9th Ave.
Greenwood St.                 East  From Madison St. to Wilcox St.
Harrison St.                  Both  From 1st Ave. to the west Village
                                    limits
Lexington St.                 South From 17th Ave. to 18th Ave.
Madison St.                   North From west side of 20th Ave., 53 feet
                                    west of the west line of 20th Ave.
Madison St.                   North From east side of 20th Ave., 115 feet
                                    east of the east line of 20th Ave.
Maple St.                     South From 6th Ave. to 7th Ave.
North Maywood Dr.             Both  Between 9th Ave. and 17th Ave.
Oak St.                       North From 18th Ave. to 20th Ave.
Oak St.                       South From 6th Ave. to 9th Ave.
On all east-west streets from South Between 1st Ave. and 2nd Ave.
Madison St. to Roosevelt Rd.
Orchard St.                   West  From Madison to Wilcox St.
Railroad St.                  South From 15th Ave. to 18th Ave.
Randolph St.                  North From 18th Ave. to 20th Ave.
Randolph St.                  South From 12th Ave. to the alley line
                                    between 13th Ave. and 14th Ave.
                                    From the west right-of-way line of
St. Charles Road              North South 5th Ave. to the east right-of-
                                    way line of South 7th Ave.
School St.                    North From 8th Ave. to 9th Ave.
School St.                    South From 1st Ave. to 4th Ave.
                                    From Roosevelt to the alley north
South 3rd Ave.                Both  (parking on paved parkway adjoining
                                    street is permitted)
South 3rd Ave.                West  At the carriage walk in front of 902
                                    South 3rd Ave.
                                    From the southwest corner of
South 8th Ave.                West  Lexington St. southward a distance of
                                    128 feet
                                    From the southeast corner of
South 9th Ave.                East  Lexington Street southward a distance
                                    of 128 feet
South Maywood Dr.             Both  Between 11th Ave. and 17th Ave.
Van Buren St.                 Both  Between 9th Ave. and 13th Ave.
Van Buren St.                 North From 9th Ave. to 17th Ave.
Van Buren St.                 South Between 8th and 9th Ave. and between
                                    10th and 12th Ave.
Walnut St.                    South From 1st Ave. to 4th Ave.
Washington Blvd.              South From 9th Ave. to alley west of 21st
                                    Ave.
Warren St.                    North From 18th Ave. to 20th Ave.
Warren St.                    South From 1st Ave. to 4th Ave.
Wilcox St.                    Both  Between 5th Ave. and 9th Ave.
Wilcox St.                    North From Greenwood to 1st Ave.
 
   (B)   No parking between 6:30 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
daily except Saturdays and Sundays: Ninth Avenue, both sides, from Roosevelt
Road to Lake Street;
   (C)   No parking between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. except Saturdays, Sundays
and holidays:
 
STREET          SIDE LOCATION
9th Ave.        Both Between School St. and Green St. (including Saturdays)
17th Ave.       Both From S. Maywood Dr. to Harrison St.
Madison St.     Both From 16th Ave. to Village limits on the west
St. Charles Rd. Both From 18th Ave. to 20th Ave.
 
   (D)   No parking between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.:
 
STREET           SIDE  LOCATION
Des Plaines Ave.      Between Ohio St. and Lake St.
Rice St.         South Between 8th Ave. and 9th Ave.
 
   (E)   No parking between 3:30 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.:
 
STREET   SIDE LOCATION
5th Ave. Both From Erie St. North to the Village limits
9th Ave. Both Between School St. and Green St. (excluding Sundays)
9th Ave. Both From Roosevelt Rd. to Lake St.
 
   (F)   No parking between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. except Saturday, Sunday and
holidays:
 
STREET          SIDE  LOCATION
17th Ave.       Both  From South Maywood Dr. to Harrison St.
Lake St.        North Between 9th Ave. and the Des Plaines River
Madison St.     Both  From 16th Ave. to the Village limits to the west
St. Charles Rd. Both  From 18th Ave. to 20th Ave.
 
   (G)   No parking between 8:00 am. and 10:00 a.m. except Saturday, Sunday and
holidays: Lake Street, south side, between 9th Avenue and the Des Plaines
River.
(1997 Code, Ch. 41, Sch. B) (Ord. 58-8, passed - -; Am. Ord. 60-2, passed - -;
Am. Ord. 60-5, passed - -; Am. Ord. 63-2, passed - -; Am. Ord. 63-13, passed -
-; Am. Ord. 64-7, passed - -; Am. Ord. 65-13, passed - -; Am. Ord. 66-2, passed
- -; Am. Ord. 66-4, passed - -; Am. Ord. 66-15, passed - -; Am. Ord. 66-19,
passed - -; Am. Ord. 66-20, passed - -; Am. Ord. 67-12, passed - -; Am. Ord.
67-19, passed - -; Am. Ord. 67-21, passed - -; Am. Ord. 67-28, passed - -; Am.
Ord. 68-7, passed - -; Am. Ord. 69-15, passed - -; Am. Ord. 69-18, passed - -;
Am. Ord. 69-22, passed - -; Am. Ord. 70-25, passed - -; Am. Ord. 70-26, passed
- -; Am. Ord. 71-8, passed - -; Am. Ord. 72-4, passed - -; Am. Ord. 72-25,
passed - - ; Am. Ord. 73-4, passed - -; Am. Ord. 73-5, passed - -; Am. Ord. 73-
17, passed - -; Am. Ord. 73-28, passed - -; Am. Ord. 74-5, passed - -; Am. Ord.
74-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 74-10, passed - -; Am. Ord. 82-20, passed - -; Am.
Ord. 85-8, passed - -; Am. Ord. C0-04-34, passed 10-18-2004; Am. Ord. C0-05-34,
passed 9-20-2005; Am. Ord. CO-2021-26, passed 10-19-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2022-24,
passed 12-6-2022; Am. Ord. CO-2024-09, passed 3-5-2024)
SCHEDULE IV. LIMITED PARKING.
   In accordance with §
72.26, the following are designated limited parking zones:
   (A)   Two hour parking at any time:
STREET SIDE LOCATION
STREET          SIDE  LOCATION
5th Ave.        Both  Between Lake St. and Oak St.
5th Ave.        Both  Between Oak St. and Maple St.
12th Ave.       West  In the 100 block
16th Ave.       West  From North Maywood Dr. to Madison St.
Legion St.      North Between 4th Ave. and 5th Ave.
North 5th Ave.       In Parking Lot No. 2 located at 5th Ave. and Main St.
North 5th Ave.       In Parking Lot No. 2 located at 12-14 North 5th St.
St. Charles Rd. South Between 12th Ave. and 13th Ave.
 
   (B)   Two hour parking between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. except Saturday and
Sunday:
 
STREET      SIDE  LOCATION
2nd Ave.         From the Chicago and Great Western right-of-way to Oak St.
3rd Ave.    East  From the Chicago and Great Western right-of-way to Oak St.
Madison St. North From 21st Ave. west to the alley between 21st Ave. and 22nd
                  Ave., said alley being the west Village limit
School St.  North From 1st Ave. to 4th Ave.
Walnut St.  North From 1st Ave. to 4th Ave.
Warren St.  North From 1st Ave. to 4th Ave.
 
   (C)   Two hour parking between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except Sundays and
holidays:
 
STREET    SIDE          LOCATION
16th Ave. West          From Railroad St. to St. Charles Rd.
19th Ave. East and West Between the north right-of-way line of St. Charles Rd.
                        and the south right-of-way line of Railroad Ave.
Oak St.   South         From 4th Ave. to 5th Ave.
 
   (D)   30 minute parking between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. except Sundays and
holidays:
 
STREET           SIDE  LOCATION
10th Ave.        East  From Washington Blvd. to a point 80 feet south thereof
Randolph St.     North From 12th Ave. to the first alley line west of 13th Ave.
Washington Blvd. South From the alley west of 9th Ave. to 10th Ave.
 
   (E)   30 minute parking:
 
STREET        SIDE  LOCATION
2nd Ave.      East  Between Lake St. and Main St.
17th Ave.     West  From Harrison St. to Fire Station #2
Lexington St. Both  From 24th Ave. to 25th Ave.
Pine Ave.     North Between 4th Ave. and 5th Ave.
Randolph St.  North Between 13th Ave. on the west and the alley between 12th
                    Ave. and 13th Ave.
 
   (F)   15 minute parking:
 
STREET             SIDE  LOCATION                   TIME
                         In front of Village        From 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
                         Administration Building,   p.m., Monday through Friday
5th Ave.           East  115 S. 5th Ave. from South and on Saturday during
                         Maywood Dr. to Harrison    Village business hours
                         St.
Madison St.        South In the 1300 block          Between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
                                                    p.m. daily, except Sunday
Parkway                 Between Randolph St. and    
                         Maple St. on 6th Ave.
Rectory and Church      Near St. James Church      Related parking only
South Ninth Ave.   West  In the 500 block           Between 3:30 p.m. and 6:00
                                                    p.m. daily, except Sunday
 
   (G)   Resident parking only: Legion Street, north side, from Greenwood
Avenue to 1st Avenue.
   (H)   No parking for street sweeping purposes:
 
STREET                                  TIME RESTRICTION
All even numbered avenues in the        On Wednesdays from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00
Village                                 a.m.
All odd numbered avenues in the Village On Tuesdays from 6:00 a.m. to 10:00
                                        a.m.
 
   (I)   Parking restrictions for the 800 blocks of 4th Ave., 5th Ave., and 6th
Ave.:
      (1)   2-Hour Parking/Customer Parking Only signs on the north side of
Warren St. from the west line of 4th Ave. to the east line of the north-south
public alley that is west of the west line of 5th Ave.;
      (2)   2-Hour Parking/Customer Parking Only signs with residential-only
overnight parking on the south side of Warren St. from the west line of 4th
Ave. to the east line of the north-south public alley that is west of the west
line of 5th Ave.;
      (3)   2-Hour Parking/Customer Parking Only signs with residential-only
overnight parking on the north side of School St. from the west line of 5th
Ave. to the east line of the north-south public alley that is west of the west
line of 5th Ave.; and
      (4)   No Overnight Parking signs (11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.) on the east
side and west side of 6th Ave. between the south line of Warren St. and the
north line of School St.
(1997 Code, Ch. 41, Sch. C) (Ord. 58-9, passed - -; Am. Ord. 60-8, passed - -;
Am. Ord. 63-6, passed - -; Am. Ord. 63-14, passed - -; Am. Ord. 65-9, passed -
-; Am. Ord. 65-14, passed - -; Am. Ord. 66-4, passed - -; Am. Ord. 66-10,
passed - -; Am. Ord. 66-34, passed - -; Am. Ord. 66-36, passed - -; Am. Ord.
67-3, passed - -; Am. Ord. 67-4, passed - -; Am. Ord. 69-7, passed - -; Am.
Ord. 70-2, passed - -; Am. Ord. 70-5, passed - -; Am. Ord. 74-7, passed - -;
Am. Ord. 82-14, passed - -; Am. Ord. 85-20, passed - -; Am. Ord. 89-13, passed
- -; Am. Ord. CO-04-34, passed 10-18-2004; Am. Ord. CO-05-34, passed 9-20-2005;
Am. Ord. CO-2013-02, passed 1-15-2013; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-16-2018; Am.
Ord. CO-2021-24, passed 9-21-2021)
SCHEDULE V. TRUCK PARKING.
   Semi-truck, truck and commercial vehicle parking prohibitions:
 
STREET        LOCATION              RESTRICTED VEHICLE     TIME RESTRICTION
              Either side, from
5th Ave.      Quincy St. to Bataan  Trucks                  
              Dr.
              East and west sides
              from the south right- Vehicles, commercial   Temporary loading/
S. 5th Ave.   of-way line of Lake   trucks and semi-truck  unloading zone 10:00
              St. to the north      trailers               a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
              right-of-way line of
              Main St.
Bataan Dr.    From 1st Ave. to 21st Semi-truck trailers or Any time
              Ave.                  engines
Harrison St.  From 1st Ave. to 21st Semi-truck trailers or Any time
              Ave.                  engines
Railroad Ave. From 15th Ave. to     Semi-truck trailers of Any time
              21st Ave.             engines
              West from west curb
Roosevelt Rd. line of 10th Ave. for Trucks                  
              a distance of 200
              feet
 
(1997 Code, § 41.10) (Ord. 67-16, passed - - 1967; Am. Ord. 73-2, passed 2-22-
1973; Am. Ord. C0-05-34, passed 9-20-2005 ; Am. Ord. C0-06-36, passed 10-17-
2006 )
SCHEDULE VI. PARKING SIGNS.
   The corporate authorities hereby authorize the placement of the following
parking signs, and hereby direct Village staff to place as many signs necessary
for standard parking regulation:
STREET LOCATION SIGN
STREET          LOCATION       SIGN
Bataan Dr.      From 1st Ave.  “NO SEMI PARKING ANYTIME”
                to 21st Ave.
Harrison St.    From 1st Ave.  “NO SEMI PARKING ANYTIME”
                to 21st Ave.
Railroad Ave.   From 15th Ave. “NO SEMI PARKING ANYTIME”
                to 21st Ave.
                North side,
Van Buren St.   from 9th Ave.  “NO PARKING ANYTIME THIS SIDE OF STREET”
                to 17th Ave.
Village Parking 5th Ave. and   “2 Hour Parking Only”
Lot No. 1       Main St.
Village Parking 14 North 5th   “2 Hour Parking Only”
Lot No. 2       Ave.
Village Parking 5th Ave. and   “RESIDENTIAL OVERNIGHT PARKING WITH DISPLAYED
Lot No. 1       Main St.       VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD PERMIT ONLY - 8:00PM TO 6:
                               00AM”
Village Parking 12 to 14 North “RESIDENTIAL OVERNIGHT PARKING WITH DISPLAYED
Lot No. 2       5th Ave.       VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD PERMIT ONLY - 8:00PM TO 6:
                               00AM”
 
(Ord. C0-05-34, passed 9-20-2005; Am. Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-16-2018)
SCHEDULE VII. HANDICAPPED PARKING SPOTS AND DROP-OFF ZONES FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES.
   The corporate authorities hereby authorize the placement of handicapped
parking signs at the following locations and hereby direct the Village staff to
place signs necessary for the designation fo such locations:
 
STREET      SIDE LOCATION                       TYPE OF SIGNAGE
4th Avenue  East 1517 South 4th Avenue          handicapped parking signage
8th Avenue  East 702 South 8th Avenue           drop-off zone for person with
                                                disabilities signage
17th Avenue West 1008 South 17th Avenue         handicapped parking signage
                 Opposite side of public right-
17th Avenue East of-way from 1008 South 17th    handicapped parking signage
                 Avenue
21st Avenue East 15 South 21st Avenue           handicapped parking signage
 
(Ord. C0-2016-11, passed 7-26-2016; Am. Ord. CO-2017-17, passed 5-16-2017; Am.
Ord. CO-2017-28, passed 8-15-2017; Am. Ord. CO-2022-18, passed 9-20-2022)
CHAPTER 77: AUTOMATED TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
77.01   Purpose – establishment of automated red light camera program
   
77.02   Red light violation
   
77.03   Automated red light violation notice
   
77.04   Grounds for adjudication by mail or administrative hearing
   
77.05   Determination of liability
   
77.06   Notice of final determination
   
77.07   Supplementary enforcement
§ 77.01 PURPOSE – ESTABLISHMENT OF AUTOMATED RED LIGHT CAMERA PROGRAM.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the establishment of an
automated traffic law enforcement system. As used in this chapter, an AUTOMATED
TRAFFIC LAW ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM means a device with 1 or more motor vehicle
sensors working in conjunction with a red light signal to produce recorded
images of motor vehicles entering an intersection against a red signal
indication in violation of § 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or §§
71.16 and
71.17 of this Code.
   (B)   The system shall utilize an automated traffic control signal
monitoring device which records, through photographic means, the vehicle and
the vehicle registration plate of a vehicle operated in violation of § 11-306
of the Illinois Vehicle Code or §§
71.16 or
71.17 of this Code. The photographic record shall also display the time, date
and location of the violation.
   (C)   A program shall be established which creates, implements and utilizes
an automated traffic law enforcement system at various vehicle traffic
intersections identified by the Village, with the advice of the Police
Department.
   (D)   The Village shall adopt rules and regulations as may be necessary for
the proper enforcement and administration of this chapter.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 77.02 RED LIGHT VIOLATION.
   (A)   The registered owner of record of a vehicle is liable for a violation
of this section and a fine of $100 when the vehicle is used in violation of §
11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or §§
71.16 or
71.17 of this Code and that violation is recorded by an automated traffic
control signal monitoring device as determined by a technician who inspects the
recorded image created by the device. A photographic recording of a violation
obtained by an automated traffic control signal monitoring device that has been
inspected by a technician shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
chapter. It shall be a defense to a violation of this section that:
      (1)   The operator of the vehicle was issued a uniform traffic citation
for a violation of § 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or §§
71.16 or
71.17 of this Code; or
      (2)   The violation occurred at any time during which the vehicle or its
state registration plates were reported to a law enforcement agency as having
been stolen and the vehicle or its plates had not been recovered by the owner
at the time of the alleged violation; or
      (3)   The vehicle was leased to another, and, within 60 days after the
notice was mailed to the owner, the owner/lessor submitted to the Traffic
Compliance Administrator the correct name and address of the lessee of the
vehicle identified in the notice at the time of the violation, together with a
copy of the lease agreement and any additional information as may be required
by the Village. Where the lessor complies with the provisions of this section,
the lessee of the vehicle at the time of the violation shall be deemed to be
the owner of the vehicle for purposes of this chapter. The Traffic Compliance
Administrator, within 30 days of being notified by the lessor of the name and
address of the lessee, shall mail the lessee a notice which contains the
information required under §
77.03. For the purposes of this chapter, the term LEASED VEHICLE shall be
defined as a vehicle in which a motor vehicle dealership or manufacturer has,
pursuant to a written document, vested exclusive possession, use, control and
responsibility of the vehicle to the lessee during the periods the vehicle is
operated by or for the lessee.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply to any authorized
emergency vehicle or where the technician inspecting the recorded image
determines that the vehicle was lawfully participating in a funeral procession,
or that the vehicle entered into the intersection in order to yield the right-
of-way to an emergency vehicle.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the liability of
an operator of a vehicle for any violation of § 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code (625 ILCS 5/11-306) or §§
71.16 or
71.17 of this Code.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 77.03 AUTOMATED RED LIGHT VIOLATION NOTICE.
   (A)   For each violation of § 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or §§
71.16 or
71.17 recorded by an automated traffic control signal monitoring device, the
Village or its designee shall mail an automated red light violation notice via
U.S. mail, within 30 days after receiving information about the registered
owner of the vehicle from the Secretary of State, and in no event later than 90
days after the violation, to the registered owner of record of the vehicle used
in the commission of the violation. The notice shall include the name and
address of the registered owner of the vehicle; the vehicle registration
number, the vehicle make, if available and readily discernable; the offense
charged; the time, date and location of the alleged violation; the applicable
fine and date by which it must be paid; the monetary penalty which shall be
automatically assessed for late payment; information as to the availability of
an administrative hearing in which the notice may be contested on its merits
and the time and manner in which such hearing may be had; that the basis of the
notice is a photographic record obtained by a traffic control signal monitoring
device; a copy of the recorded image or images; a statement that the recorded
images constitute prima facie evidence of a violation; and a warning that
failure to pay the applicable fine or contest liability in a timely manner is
an admission of liability and may result in a suspension of the driving
privileges of the registered owner of the vehicle.
   (B)   The Village shall only be required to notify a lessee if the leasing
company/lessor provides the lessee's name, a copy of the lease, and any
additional information requested by the Village, within 60 days of the notice's
issuance, as set forth in §
39.41 of this Code. If the lessee information is not provided within 60 days,
the leasing company/lessor may be found liable.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 77.04 GROUNDS FOR ADJUDICATION BY MAIL OR ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   A person charged with violating § 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or §§
71.16 or
71.17 recorded by an automated traffic control signal monitoring device may
contest the charge through an adjudication by mail or at an administrative
hearing limited to 1 or more of the following grounds with appropriate evidence
to support:
   (A)   That the operator of the vehicle was issued a uniform traffic citation
for a violation of § 11-306 of the Illinois Vehicle Code or §§
71.16 or
71.17 of this Code; or
   (B)   That the violation occurred at any time during which the vehicle or
its state registration plates were reported to a law enforcement agency as
having been stolen and the vehicle or its plates had not been recovered by the
owner at the time of the alleged violation; or
   (C)   That the vehicle was leased to another, and, within 60 days after the
notice was mailed to the owner, the owner submitted to the Traffic Compliance
Administrator the correct name and address of the lessee of the vehicle
identified in the notice at the time of the violation, together with a copy of
the lease agreement and any additional information as may be required by the
Village; or
   (D)   That the vehicle was an authorized emergency vehicle, was a vehicle
lawfully participating in a funeral procession or passed through the
intersection on a red signal in order to yield the right-of-way to an emergency
vehicle; or
   (E)   That the facts alleged in the violation notice are inconsistent or do
not support a finding that a violation occurred; or
   (F)   That the respondent was not the registered owner or lessee of the
cited vehicle at the time of the violation.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 77.05 DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY.
   The determination of liability for a violation notice issued under this
chapter shall be made in accordance with §§
39.33, and
39.35 through
39.37 of this Code.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 77.06 NOTICE OF FINAL DETERMINATION.
   (A)   If any fine or penalty is owing and unpaid after a determination of
liability under this chapter has become final and the respondent has exhausted
or failed to exhaust judicial procedures for review, the Traffic Compliance
Administrator or his or her designee shall cause a notice of final
determination of liability to be sent to the respondent in accordance with §
39.33(F).
   (B)   Any fine and penalty, if applicable, remaining unpaid after the notice
of final determination of liability is sent shall constitute a debt due and
owing the Village which may be enforced in the manner set forth in §
39.16 of this Code. Failure of the respondent to pay such fine or penalty
within 14 days of the date of the notice may result in the immobilization of
the person's vehicle for failure to pay fines or penalties for 3 or more
standing, parking, compliance and automated traffic law violations or the
suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to pay fines or
penalties for 5 or more automated traffic law violations.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 77.07 SUPPLEMENTARY ENFORCEMENT.
   The liability created by §
77.02 shall be imposed in addition to any liability otherwise provided for by
any ordinance or statute governing the movement of traffic and the program
authorized by §
77.01 shall supplement enforcement of traffic regulations provided by other
chapters of the Village Code and the Illinois Motor Vehicle Code and shall not
replace or substitute for enforcement of these or any other law.
(Ord. 44, passed 10-21-2008)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
90.   FAIR HOUSING
   
91.   FIRE PREVENTION
   
92.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
   
93.   ANIMAL CONTROL
   
94.   STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS
   
95.   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
   
96.   SWIMMING POOLS
   
97.   VILLAGE PARKS
   
98.   TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS
   
99.   TOWING OF VEHICLES
   
100.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS
   
101.   STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
CHAPTER 90: FAIR HOUSING
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Short title
   
90.02   Purpose and declaration of policy
   
90.03   Construction
   
90.04   Definitions
   
90.05   Powers and duties of Community Relations Commission
   
90.06   Reserved
   
90.07   Reserved
   
90.08   Complaints; conciliation
   
90.09   Procedure for hearings before the Village Manager
   
90.10   Complaints against the Village
   
90.11   Procedures for hearing of complaints against the Village
   
90.12   Notice
   
90.13   Attorney for Village Manager
Regulations
   
90.25   Discriminatory terms
   
90.26   Refusal to negotiate
   
90.27   Withholding real estate
   
90.28   Advertisements, signs and notices
   
90.29   Refusal of offers
   
90.30   Discrimination in lending
   
90.31   Unlawful representations
   
90.32   Additional violations
   
90.33   Brokerage services
   
90.34   Exemptions
 
   
90.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Fair Housing Code.
(1997 Code, § 43.01) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9-1978; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-
5-2009)
§ 90.02 PURPOSE AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   It is declared to be the policy of Maywood and the purpose of this
chapter, in the exercise of its police and regulatory powers for the protection
of the public health, morals, safety and welfare and for the maintenance and
promotion of commerce, industry and good government in Maywood, to secure to
all persons living and/or working or desiring to live and/or work in Maywood a
fair and equal opportunity to view, purchase, lease, rent, finance or occupy
real estate in the Village without discrimination based on race, color,
religion, age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity, marital status, military discharge status, source of income,
housing status or parental status.
   (B)   It is the clear purpose and intent of this chapter to impose absolute
liability for the conduct described and that the burden of proving any
violation of this chapter be by the preponderance of the evidence.
(1997 Code, § 43.02) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9-1978; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-
5-2009)
§ 90.03 CONSTRUCTION.
   This chapter shall be construed according to the fair import of its terms
and shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policy stated in §
90.02 and the special purposes of the particular provision involved.
(1997 Code, § 43.03) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9-1978; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-
5-2009)
§ 90.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   CHARGES. Allegations contained in a complaint.
   COMMISSION. The Maywood Commission on Community Relations. See §
31.37.
   COMMISSION PANEL or PANEL. A panel, comprised of 3 or more members of the
Commission, designated by the Chairperson of the Commission to hear complaints
filed or made under §
90.08.
   COMPLAINT. Document filed by a party/person with the Village Manager.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of Sustainability and Innovation who shall act where
designated as the agent for the Commission or as designated or empowered by
this chapter.
   DISABILITY. With respect to a person:
      (1)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits 1 or
more of such person’s major life activities;
      (2)   A record of having such an impairment; or
      (3)   Being regarded as having such an impairment.
   DISCRIMINATE. To extend differential treatment based on the actual or
perceived status, practice or expression of a person’s race, color, religion,
age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender
identity, marital status, military discharge status, source of income, housing
status and parental status; or based on the actual or perceived association
with such a person.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion of a structure which is
occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by 1 or more
families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location of any such building or structure.
   FAMILY. Includes single individual.
   GENDER IDENTITY. The actual or perceived appearance, expression, identity or
behavior, of a person as being male or female, whether or not that appearance,
expression, identity or behavior is different from that traditionally
associated with the person’s designated sex at birth.
   HOUSING STATUS. The type of housing or dwelling in which an individual
resides, whether publicly or privately owned; an individual’s ownership status
with respect to the individual’s residence; or the status of having or not
having a fixed residence.
   LEASE. Includes lease, sublease, lease renewal, assignment, or rental and
includes any contract to do any of the foregoing.
   LENDING INSTITUTION. Any bank, insurance company, savings and loan
association or any other person in the business of lending money or
guaranteeing loans, any person in the business of obtaining, arranging or
negotiating loans or guarantees as agent or broker, and any person in the
business of buying or selling loans or instruments for the payment of money
which are secured by title to or a security interest in real estate.
   MARITAL STATUS. The status of being single, married, divorced, separated or
widowed.
   MILITARY DISCHARGE STATUS. The fact of having been discharged from the Armed
Forces of the United States, their Reserve components or any National Guard or
Naval Militia.
   NATIONAL ORIGIN. The place in which an individual or 1 of their ancestors
was born.
   OWNER. Any person who holds legal or equitable title to, or owns any
beneficial interest in, any real property or who holds legal or equitable title
to shares of, or holds any beneficial interest in, any real estate cooperative
which owns any real property.
   PANEL. See COMMISSION PANEL.
   PANIC PEDDLING. Inducing the sale of homes because of implicit or explicit
representation regarding the race, color, religion, age, sex, disability,
national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, material
status, military discharge status, source of income, housing status or paternal
status of residents or occupants of any block, neighborhood or area.
   PARENTAL STATUS. The status of living with 1 or more dependent minors or
disabled children.
   PERSON. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, limited
liability companies, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives,
mutual companies, unincorporated organizations, trusts, trustees, trustees in
bankruptcy, receivers, fiduciaries or organizations of any kind.
   PURCHASE. Includes any contract to purchase.
   REAL ESTATE AGENT. Any real estate broker, any real estate salesperson and
any other person who, as employee or agent or otherwise, engages in the sale,
rental, management or operation of any real property. This definition includes
“finders” who seek to locate and match buyers, sellers, lessors or lessees.
   REAL ESTATE BROKER. Any person licensed as a real estate broker in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes (or required
thereby to be so licensed).
   REAL ESTATE SALESPERSON. Any person licensed as a real estate salesperson in
accordance with the provisions of the Illinois Compiled Statutes (or required
thereby to be so licensed).
   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION. The purchase, sale, exchange, rental or lease of
any real property, or an option to do any of the foregoing.
   REAL PROPERTY. Any real estate, vacant land, building or structure within
the Village limits.
   REDLINING. Arbitrarily excluding certain areas in the lending of mortgage
funds.
   RELIGION. All aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as
belief, non-belief or the actual identification with or perceived
identification with a religion.
   SALE. Includes any contract to sell, exchange, or to convey, transfer or
assign legal or equitable title to or a beneficial interest in real property.
   SEXUAL ORIENTATION. The status or expression, whether actual or perceived,
of heterosexuality, homosexuality or bisexuality.
   SOURCE OF INCOME. Any lawful income, subsidy or benefit with which an
individual supports themselves and their dependents, including, but not limited
to, child support, maintenance and any federal, state or local public
assistance, medical assistance or rental assistance program, provided that:
      (1)   Nothing in this chapter prevents an owner or agent acting in good
faith from taking into consideration factors other than lawful sources of
income such as credit history, criminal history or references.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall require or prevent any person whose
property fails to meet federal housing quality standards in connection with the
federal Housing Choice Voucher (also known as Section 8) program (42 U.S.C.
1437f) to lease or rent a unit to a prospective tenant who is relying on such a
subsidy, payment assistance contribution or voucher for payment of part or all
of the rent for such unit.
      (3)   In addition, during such time as a landlord is waiting for an
inspection or other agency response relative to a Section 8 participant’s
application for rental of the landlord’s housing unit, this chapter shall not
prohibit such landlord from choosing to rent such unit to another applicant who
may or may not be a Section 8 participant.
   STEERING. Directing prospective purchasers or renters into different
dwelling units or areas because of race, color, religion, age, sex, disability,
national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status,
military discharge status, source of income, housing status or parental status
so as to promote the continuance of segregated housing or to discourage
integrated housing.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for
consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
   UNLAWFUL REAL ESTATE PRACTICE. Any act which is unlawful under this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 43.04) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9- 1978; Am. Ord. 83-17, passed 6-23-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-
2025)
§ 90.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMUNITY RELATIONS COMMISSION.
   In addition to powers and duties already conferred on the Commission by §
31.37 of the Maywood Village Code, the Commission shall have and exercise the
following additional duties and powers:
   (A)   To act to eliminate unlawful real estate practices;
   (B)   To act to assure to persons living, working or desiring to live in the
Village opportunity to purchase, lease or occupy real property in the Village
without discrimination because of the actual or perceived status, practice or
expression of that person’s race, color, religion, age, sex, disability,
national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status,
military discharge status, source of income, housing status or parental status;
or the actual or perceived association with such a person;
   (C)   To adopt, promulgate, amend and rescind rules and regulations to
effectuate the policies and provisions of this chapter;
   (D)   To receive, initiate, investigate and seek to adjust complaints
alleging unlawful real estate practices under the provisions of this chapter
and in accordance with rules and regulations adopted by the Commission and
approved by the Village President and Board of Trustees;
   (E)   To request, or to recommend that the Village President and Board of
Trustees instruct the Village Attorney to seek a temporary restraining order or
injunctive relief in any court of competent jurisdiction when the Commission
has reasonable cause to believe that an unlawful real estate practice has
occurred or will occur;
   (F)   To eliminate any unlawful real estate practice by conciliation,
conference and/or persuasion;
   (G)   To hold public hearings on complaints alleging unlawful real estate
practices under this chapter in the event that its efforts under division (F)
above are ineffective, or where it deems that such efforts will be ineffective;
   (H)   To make findings of fact and submit recommendations to the Village
President and Board of Trustees with respect to any violations or modifications
of this chapter;
   (I)   To publish its findings of fact and order in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and its rules and regulations;
   (J)   To issue such publications and results of investigations and research
as in its judgment will tend to promote good will and minimize or eliminate
discrimination because of the actual or perceived status, practice or
expression of a person’s race, color, religion, age, sex, disability, national
origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, military
discharge status, source of income, housing status or parental status; or the
actual or perceived association with such a person;
   (K)   To render from time to time, but not less than once a year, a written
report to the Village President and Board of Trustees of its activities and
recommendations with respect to fair real estate practices; and
   (L)   To have the power of subpoena to compel the submission of documents
and the presence of persons before the Commission. Such subpoena power may be
exercised by the Commission, its panels, its Chairperson or a hearing officer
appointed pursuant to this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 43.14) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9-1978; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-
5-2009)
§ 90.06 RESERVED.
§ 90.07 RESERVED.
§ 90.08 COMPLAINTS; CONCILIATION.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved in any manner of any violation of this chapter,
except a violation by the Village, may file with the office of the Village
Manager a verified written complaint setting forth his or her grievance within
120 days after the date of the alleged violation. The complaint shall be filed
on a form provided by the Village Manager. The complaint shall state:
      (1)   The name and address of the complainant;
      (2)   The name and address of the person against whom the complaint is
brought, if known to the complainant;
      (3)   The alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this
chapter;
      (4)   The names and addresses of all persons believed to have knowledge
concerning the alleged facts; and
      (5)   Any other information required under the rules established by the
office of the Village Manager.
   (B)   After the filing of any complaint, the Village Manager shall serve a
copy of the complaint on the party or parties charged in the complaint with the
alleged violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Upon receipt of a complaint, the office of the Village Manager shall
conduct a preliminary investigation. Within 30 days of receipt of the
complaint, the Village Manager shall complete the preliminary investigation. If
the Village Manager determines from such investigation that there is probable
cause to believe that an unlawful real estate practice prohibited by this
chapter has been committed, the Village Manager shall attempt an adjustment by
means of conference and conciliation. If the Village Manager determines that
there is no probable cause to believe that an unlawful real estate practice has
been committed, he or she shall make a written finding to that effect and shall
promptly send copies thereof to the complainant and to the person complained
against.
   (D)   Conference and conciliation is intended to resolve the parties’
differences and shall take place in private. The complainant and respondent may
be represented by attorneys if they desire. The conference shall be closed to
all other persons. However, in the discretion of the Village Manager, a
complainant or respondent may include an additional person such as an
interpreter or family member. No evidence shall be taken at a conciliation
conference. The sole purpose of the conference will be to attempt to reconcile
the parties.
   (E)   The Village Manager or his or her staff shall not disclose what
transpires during the course of an investigation, or what transpires during the
course of a conciliation conference, except as such disclosures are deemed
essential to an investigation or the conciliation or are made at a public
hearing held in accordance with §
90.09. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Village
Manager from disclosing dismissal notices or conciliation agreements and the
reasons for such dismissal or agreement. The identities of the parties shall
not be disclosed without their consent.
(1997 Code, § 43.16) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9-1978; Am. Ord. 83-17, passed 6-23-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 90.09 PROCEDURE FOR HEARINGS BEFORE THE VILLAGE MANAGER.
   TheVillage Manager may proceed to hold such hearing and make a determination
in such person's absence.
   (A)   In case of failure of conference and conciliation to attain compliance
with this chapter, the Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall proceed
to hear the complaint. The designee may include the Village’s administrative
hearing officer or other person qualified to conduct administrative or quasi
judicial hearings. The Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall serve
upon the person charged with having engaged in the unlawful real estate
practice, referred to as the respondent, a statement of the charges made in the
complaint and a notice of the time and place of the hearing. Such statement of
charges and notice shall be sent by certified mail (return receipt requested)
to the respondent at his or her last known address at least 10 days prior to
the date set for hearing. The respondent shall have the right, within 5 days
after the service on him or her of the statement of charges and notice of
hearing, to file an answer to the statement of charges. He or she shall also
have the right to be represented by counsel, to appear at the hearing in
person, to present evidence on his or her own behalf and to examine and cross-
examine witnesses.
   (B)   The Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall not be bound by the
strict rules of evidence and shall have the power to administer oaths, to take
sworn testimony and to subpoena witnesses, documents and records. The Village
Manager, or his or her designee, may adopt such rules of procedure for the
conduct of hearings as are deemed necessary.
   (C)   Within 5 days after the conclusion of any hearing, the Village
Manager, or his or her designee, shall render a written decision. If notice of
a hearing to a respondent is given pursuant to this chapter, and he or she
fails to attend such hearing, the Village Manager, or his or her designee, may
proceed to hold such hearing and make a determination in such person’s absence.
(1997 Code, § 43.17) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9-1978; Am. Ord. 83-17, passed 6-23-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 90.10 COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE VILLAGE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved in any manner of any violation of any provision
of this chapter by the Village may file with the Commission a verified written
complaint setting forth his or her grievance within 120 days after the date the
alleged violation occurred. The complaint shall be filed on a form authorized
by the Commission. The complaint shall state:
      (1)   The name and address of the complainant;
      (2)   The alleged facts surrounding the alleged violation of this chapter
by the Village; and
      (3)   The names and addresses of all persons believed to have knowledge
concerning the alleged facts and any other information required under the rules
established by the Commission.
   (B)   After the filing of any complaint pursuant to this section, the
Commission shall serve a copy of the complaint on the Village Manager of the
Village, and the Chairperson of the Commission shall designate a panel to make
a prompt investigation in connection therewith.
   (C)   If such panel shall determine that there is no probable cause to
believe that an unlawful real estate practice has been committed, then it shall
enter an order dismissing the complaint and shall promptly send copies thereof
to the complainant and to the Village.
   (D)   If the panel shall determine after such investigation that probable
cause does exist for the allegations of the complaint:
      (1)   The panel may set a time and date for a conciliation conference,
which conference, pursuant to § 2(c)(13) of the Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/2
(c)(13)), need not be open to the public; and
      (2)   At such meeting the panel, or any member thereof, may interview
officers, employees or representatives of the Village involved in the subject
matter of the complaint and may attempt to resolve the complaint by all proper
methods of conciliation and persuasion. Such conference may, if it is deemed
desirable under the purpose of this chapter, also include the complainant.
   (E)   If at any time such panel shall determine that such attempts at
conciliation would not be in furtherance of the objectives of this chapter, the
Commission shall thereupon proceed promptly to a full hearing on the complaint.
(1997 Code, § 43.19) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9-1978; Am. Ord. 83-17, passed 6-23-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 90.11 PROCEDURES FOR HEARING OF COMPLAINTS AGAINST THE VILLAGE.
   (A)   When a complaint under this chapter against the Village proceeds to a
hearing, the Chairperson of the Commission, with the advice and consent of the
Commission, shall:
      (1)   Designate at least 3 Commissioners, not including any Commissioner
who may have been directly involved in the investigation of the complaint, as
the hearing panel; or
      (2)   Appoint a hearing examiner who shall be a person who is qualified
to conduct administrative or quasi judicial hearings and who holds no other
appointive or elective public office or position in the Village government.
   (B)   If the Commissioner appoints a hearing panel, the Commissioner shall
also designate 1 member of the panel as the presiding member to act as Hearing
Commissioner.
   (C)   The Commission shall serve upon the Village Manager, referred to as
the respondent, a statement of the charges made in the complaint and a notice
of the time and place of the hearing. Such statement of charges and notice
shall be sent by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the respondent at
least 10 days prior to the date set for the hearing. The respondent shall have
the right, within 5 days after the service on it of the statement of charges
and notice of hearing, to file an answer to the statement of charges. The
respondent shall also have the right to be represented by counsel, to appear at
the hearing, to present evidence in its own behalf and to examine and cross-
examine witnesses.
   (D)   The hearing panel or hearing examiner shall not be bound by the strict
rules of evidence and shall have the power to administer oaths, to take sworn
testimony and to subpoena witnesses, documents and records. The Commission may
adopt such rules of procedure for the conduct of hearings as are deemed
necessary.
   (E)   Within 5 days after the conclusion of any hearing pursuant to this
section, the hearing panel or hearing examiner shall render a written decision
which shall be the decision of the Commission. No final action for the
imposition or recommendation of a civil penalty shall be taken except at a
meeting open to the public. If notice of a hearing to a respondent is given
pursuant to this chapter and the respondent fails to attend such hearing, the
hearing panel or hearing examiner may proceed to hold such hearing and make a
determination in the respondent’s absence.
(1997 Code, § 43.20) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9-1978; Am. Ord. 83-17, passed 6-23-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 90.12 NOTICE.
   A notice of the provisions of this chapter shall be posted and maintained in
a conspicuous public area in apartment buildings and in the place of business
of every real estate broker salesperson and apartment manager or rental agent
doing business within the Village.
(1997 Code, § 43.22) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9-1978; Am. Ord. 83-17, passed 6-23-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 90.13 ATTORNEY FOR VILLAGE MANAGER.
   When the Village Manager investigates a complaint or holds a hearing
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Village Attorney or a member of
his or her staff shall be the attorney for the Village Manager.
(1997 Code, § 43.23) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9-1978; Am. Ord. 83-17, passed 6-23-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
REGULATIONS
§ 90.25 DISCRIMINATORY TERMS.
   It shall be an unlawful real estate practice for any real estate broker,
salesperson, agent, owner or other person to discriminate against any person in
the price, terms, conditions or privileges of any real estate transaction,
including the decision to engage or renew any real estate transaction, or in
the provision of services or facilities in connection with any real estate
transaction.
(1997 Code, § 43.05) (Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.26 REFUSAL TO NEGOTIATE.
   It shall be an unlawful real estate practice for any real estate broker,
salesperson, agent, owner or other person to refuse to negotiate for, enter
into, perform or otherwise make unavailable or deny any sale or rental of any
real property because of the actual or perceived status, practice or expression
of that person’s race, color, religion, age, sex, disability, national origin,
ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, military
discharge status, source of income, housing status or parental status; or the
actual or perceived association with such a person.
(1997 Code, § 43.06) (Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.27 WITHHOLDING REAL ESTATE.
   It shall be an unlawful real estate practice for any real estate broker,
salesperson, agent, owner or other person to represent to any person that any
real property is not available for inspection, purchase, sale, lease or
occupancy when in fact it is so available or otherwise to withhold real
property from any person because of the actual or perceived status, practice or
expression of that person’s race, color, religion, age, sex, disability,
national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status,
military discharge status, source of income, housing status or parental status;
or the actual or perceived association with such a person.
(1997 Code, § 43.07) (Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.28 ADVERTISEMENTS, SIGNS AND NOTICES.
   It shall be an unlawful real estate practice for any real estate broker,
salesperson, agent, owner or other person to make, print, publish or circulate
a statement, advertisement or notice, cause to be made, printed, published or
circulated any statement, advertisement or notice or to post or erect on any
real property any statement, advertisement or notice indicating any preference,
limitation or discrimination or any intent to sell or lease any real property
in a manner that is unlawful pursuant to any of the requirements of this
chapter.
(1997 Code, § 43.08) (Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.29 REFUSAL OF OFFERS.
   It shall be an unlawful real estate practice for any real estate agent or
other person to refuse to receive or to fail to transmit a bona fide offer for
the purchase, sale, exchange or lease of any real property because of the
actual or perceived status, practice or expression of that person’s race,
color, religion, age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity, marital status, military discharge status, source
of income, housing status or parental status; or the actual or perceived
association with such a person making the offer.
(1997 Code, § 43.09) (Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.30 DISCRIMINATION IN LENDING.
   It shall be an unlawful real estate practice for any lending institution:
   (A)   To refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform any agreement to
lend or guarantee the loan of funds or in making, agreeing to make, arranging
or negotiating any loan or guarantee of funds, for the purpose of financing the
purchase or sale, construction, lease, rehabilitation, improvement, renovation
or repair of any real property, or to offer or agree to terms, conditions or
privileges, including the interest rate, amount or duration of any loan or
guarantee of funds, that discriminate between persons because of the actual or
perceived status, practice or expression of a person’s race, color, religion,
age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender
identity, marital status, military discharge status, source of income, housing
status or parental status; or the actual or perceived association with such a
person or any party to such agreement or of any member of the family of any
such party;
   (B)   To refuse to negotiate for, enter into or perform any agreement to
lend or guarantee the loan of such funds in any block, neighborhood or area
because of any prospective change in the composition of the residents of the
area in terms of race, color, religion, age, sex, disability, national origin,
ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, military
discharge status, source of income, housing status or parental status; or the
actual or perceived association with such a person;
   (C)   To arbitrarily reject mortgage loans for residential properties
because of the geographic area or location of such property;
   (D)   To in any other manner exclude certain areas or neighborhoods from
mortgages through the practice known as “redlining”; and
   (E)   Nothing in this section should be deemed to interfere with actions
which would occur within the ordinary course of business.
(1997 Code, § 43.10) (Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.31 UNLAWFUL REPRESENTATIONS.
   It shall be an unlawful real estate practice for any person, for the purpose
of inducing any other person to enter into a real estate transaction with such
person, his or her principal or his or her agent:
   (A)   To represent that a change will occur or may occur with respect to
race, color, religion, age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity, marital status, military discharge status, source
of income, housing status or parental status in the composition of the owners
or occupants in any block, neighborhood or area in which the real property
(which is the subject of the real estate transaction) is located;
   (B)   To represent that a change with respect to the race, color, religion,
age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender
identity, marital status, military discharge status, source of income, housing
status or parental status in the composition of the owners or occupants in any
block, neighborhood or area will result in the lowering of property values, in
an increase in criminal or anti-social behavior or in a decline in the quality
of schools, in such blocks, neighborhood or area;
   (C)   To directly or indirectly induce or attempt to induce the sale,
purchase or rental of any property or to prevent or attempt to prevent the
sale, purchase or rental of any real property by implicit or explicit written
or oral representations regarding the race, color, religion, age, sex,
disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity,
marital status, military discharge status, source of income, housing status or
parental status of the residents or occupants of any block, neighborhood or
area; or
   (D)   To utilize any means, direct or indirect, explicit or implicit, of
panic peddling either with the intent to induce or attempt to induce or which
has the effect of inducing or attempting to induce the sale, purchase or rental
of any real property because of any change or prospective change in any block,
neighborhood or area because of race, color, religion, age, sex, disability,
national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status,
military discharge status, source of income, housing status or parental status.
(1997 Code, § 43.11) (Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.32 ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be an unlawful real estate practice for any real estate broker,
salesperson, agent, owner or any other person:
   (A)   To aid, abet, incite or coerce a person to commit an unlawful real
estate practice;
   (B)   To deceive, exploit or cheat any person in a real property transaction
in the Village, or to make any distinction, discrimination or restriction
against any person as to occupancy of any real property;
   (C)   To deliberately and knowingly refuse examination of copies of any
listing of real property in the Village to any person because of the actual or
perceived status, practice or expression of a person’s race, color, religion,
age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender
identity, marital status, military discharge status, source of income, housing
status or parental status, or the actual or perceived association with such a
person;
   (D)   To enter into a listing agreement which prohibits the inspection,
sale, lease or occupancy of real property to any person because of the actual
or perceived status, practice or expression of a person’s race, color,
religion, age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation,
gender identity, marital status, military discharge status, source of income,
housing status or parental status, or the actual or perceived association with
such a person;
   (E)   To knowingly and willfully interfere with the performance of a duty or
the exercise of a power by the Commission or one of its members or
representatives;
   (F)   To require as a condition precedent to the leasing of any dwelling
that the person or persons desiring to lease such dwelling shall have at the
time such application is made for the leasing or renting of such dwelling no
children under the age of 14 years residing in their families;
   (G)   To insert in any lease or agreement for the letting or renting of any
dwelling, a condition terminating the lease if there are or shall be any
children under the age of 14 years in the family of any person holding or to
hold any interest in such lease and occupying such dwelling;
   (H)   To steer prospective purchasers or renters into different dwelling
units or areas because of the actual or perceived status, practice or
expression of a person’s race, color, religion, age, sex, disability, national
origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, military
discharge status, source of income, housing status or parental status, or the
actual or perceived association with such a person or to influence or attempt
to influence by any words, acts or failure to act, any prospective purchaser,
occupant or tenant in connection with the sale or rental of real property so as
to promote or tend to promote the continuance or maintenance of segregated
housing or so as to retard, obstruct or discourage integrated housing on or in
any street, block, neighborhood or community;
   (I)   To discriminate against any prospective purchaser, occupant or tenant
by any influence, suggestion, act or failure to act or accord any differential
treatment among such prospective purchasers, occupants or tenants, in
connection with the sale or rental of real property or in the furnishing of
information, services or facilities relative thereto, because of the actual or
perceived status, practice or expression of a person’s race, color, religion,
age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual orientation, gender
identity, marital status, military discharge status, source of income, housing
status or parental status, or the actual or perceived association with such a
person.
(1997 Code, § 43.12) (Am. Ord. CO-97-01, passed 9-11-1997; Am. Ord. CO-09-10,
passed 5-5-2009)
Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.33 BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple listing service, real estate broker’s
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against a person
in the terms and conditions of such access, membership or participation on
account of the actual or perceived status, practice or expression of a person’s
race, color, religion, age, sex, disability, national origin, ancestry, sexual
orientation, gender identity, marital status, military discharge status, source
of income, housing status or parental status, or the actual or perceived
association with such a person.
(Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 90.34 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit:
   (A)   A religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in
conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting
the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other
than a commercial purpose, to persons of the same religion, or from giving
preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on
account of race, color or national origin;
   (B)   The rental, lease or occupancy of a room in an owner occupied single-
family dwelling having not more than 2 roomers living independently exclusive
of salaried household employees living on such premises;
   (C)   A private club, the membership of which is not open to the public,
which as incident to its primary purpose(s), provided lodging which it owns or
operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodgings to its members and their guests or from giving
preference to its members;
   (D)   The operation of housing units designed and offered predominately for
the use and occupancy by persons 55 years of age or older;
   (E)   The operation of housing units designed and offered predominately for
use and occupancy by persons with disabilities;
   (F)   Any charitable or educational organization from limiting, to persons
of the same sex, the rental of living accommodations and facilities primarily
for single room occupancy;
   (G)   An initial condominium declaration limiting ownership, rental or
occupancy of a condominium unit to a person 55 years of age or older, provided
that the person or immediate family of a person owning, renting or lawfully
occupying such unit prior to the recording of the initial declaration shall not
be deemed to be in violation of such age restriction as long as the person
continues to own or reside in such housing accommodation;
   (H)   The application of any local, state or federal restrictions regarding
the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling;
   (I)   Restrictions on the rental or sale of a dwelling to any person found
guilty of illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance; and
   (J)   Restrictions on the rental or sale of a dwelling to any person found
guilty of:
      (1)   Child pornography;
      (2)   Criminal sexual assault;
      (3)   Aggravated criminal sexual assault;
      (4)   Criminal sexual abuse; or
      (5)   Aggravated criminal sexual abuse as set forth in the Illinois
Compiled Statutes (720 ILCS 5/11-1.20, 5-11-1.30, 5/11-1.50, 5/11-1.60 and 5/
11-20.1, or any successor statute thereto). A finding of guilt for any offense
of federal law or the law of another state that is substantially equivalent to
any offense listed in this chapter shall constitute a finding of guilt for
purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Enforcement and imposition of civil penalties by the Village Manager
or his or her designee.
      (1)   If, upon presentation of all the evidence in a hearing pursuant to
§
90.09, the Village Manager or his or her designee finds that the person charged
in the complaint has not engaged in or is not engaging in any unlawful real
estate practice or any other violation of this chapter, he or she shall state
his or her findings of fact and dismiss the complaint. If, upon the
preponderance of the evidence, the Village Manager or his or her designee finds
that the respondent has engaged in or is engaging in an unlawful real estate
practice or other violation of this chapter, the Village Manager or his or her
designee shall state his or her findings of fact and impose a civil penalty,
not to exceed $1,000 upon the person or persons found to have violated the
provisions of this chapter and issue such orders to eliminate the
discrimination and to prevent recurrent violations as deemed appropriate.
      (2)   The Village Manager or his or her designee may, upon a finding of
discrimination, request that the Village Board direct the Village Attorney to
petition or institute proceedings with the Illinois Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation for the purpose of causing the departments to revoke,
suspend or refuse to renew the license granted by such department to any real
estate broker or salesperson found to have violated any provision of this
chapter.
      (3)   The Village Manager, or his or her designee, may, in the case of
any unlawful real estate practice or violation of this chapter by any person in
the course of performing under a contract or subcontract with the state or any
political subdivision or agency thereof, or with the United States of America
or any agency or instrumentality thereof, request the Village Board to petition
or institute proceedings against such contracting agency for the purpose of
seeking to have such contract or any portion thereof terminated, either
absolutely or on condition of compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   The Village Manager, or his or her designee, may, in the event the
respondent fails to comply with any order issued by the Village Manager, or his
or her designee, pursuant to this chapter, request the Village Board to direct
the Village Attorney to bring suit for an injunction to enjoin any violation of
this chapter.
   (B)   Enforcement and civil penalties imposed by Commission. If, upon
presentation of all the evidence, the hearing examiner or a majority of the
members of the hearing panel holding the hearing finds that the Village has not
engaged in or is not engaging in any unlawful real estate practice or any other
violation of this chapter, the hearing panel or hearing examiner shall state
its findings of fact and dismiss the complaint. If, upon the preponderance of
all the evidence, the hearing examiner or a majority of the hearing panel finds
that the Village has engaged in or is engaging in an unlawful real estate
practice or other violation of this chapter, the hearing panel or hearing
examiner shall be empowered to state its findings of fact, conclusions and
reasoning and impose such civil penalties not exceeding $1,000 and issue such
orders to eliminate the discrimination and to prevent recurrent violations as
deemed appropriate, consistent with the terms of this chapter and the rules and
regulations of the Commission. The decision of the hearing panel or hearing
examiner shall be the decision of the Commission. All fines collected from the
Village as a result of decisions of the Commission shall be used by the
Commission for efforts at educating and promoting fair housing and related
issues within the Village through publications, seminars for Village staff and/
or residents, Town Hall meetings and the like.
(1997 Code, § 43.21) (Ord. 78-3, passed 2-9-1978; Am. Ord. 83-17, passed 6-23-
1983; Am. Ord. C0-00-33, passed 12-4-2000; Am. Ord. CO-09-10, passed 5-5-2009)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
   
91.01   Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code
   
91.02   Bureau of Fire Prevention
   
91.03   Fire lanes
   
91.04   Appeals
   
91.05   Gasoline service stations
   
91.06   Automatic sprinkler systems
   
91.07   Fire alarm supervision
   
91.08   Reimbursement of extraordinary expenses
   
91.09   Underground storage tank removal upon conveyance
§ 91.01 FIRE PREVENTION CODE AND LIFE SAFETY CODE.
   (A)   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code. The 2003
International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council, and the
NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2000 edition, as published by the National Fire
Protection Association, shall be and hereby are adopted by reference as the
Fire Prevention Code and Life Safety Code of the Village of Maywood, and,
except as modified in this chapter, each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of the foregoing Codes are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof by reference as if fully set forth in this
code. At least one copy of the 2003 International Fire Code and Life Safety
Code, 2000 edition, shall be kept on file in the office of the Building
Director, Village Clerk’s office, and the Maywood Public Library for public
inspection.
   (B)   Amendments to the 2003 International Fire Code. The 2003 International
Fire Code, adopted by reference pursuant to this section, is hereby amended as
it applies within the Village of Maywood as follows:
      (1)   Section 101.1 shall read:
      These regulations shall be known as the Fire Prevention Code of the
Village of Maywood, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." To the extent that
there is any conflict between the 2003 International Fire Code and the
provisions of Chapter 91 of the Maywood Village Code, the most restrictive
provisions of Chapter 91 of the Maywood Village Code and the 2003 International
Fire Code shall govern and control.
      (2)   Section 102.3 shall be deleted.
      (3)   Section 102.4 shall read:
      Application of Building Code: The design and construction of new
structures to provide egress facilities, fire protection, and built-in fire
protection equipment shall be controlled by the building code listed in Chapter
45 and the Life Safety Code, 2000 edition; and any alterations, additions or
changes in structures required by this Code which are within the scope of the
building code listed in Chapter 45 shall be made in accordance therewith.
      (4)   Section 603.5 (Heating Appliances) is amended by adding a new
subsection 603.5.3, to read as follows:
   603.5.3 Barbeque Pits and Similar Commercial Cooking Appliances. Barbeque
pits and other similar commercial cooking appliances that produce grease-laden
vapors and that are vented to the exterior by chimney shall have fire-
suppression systems.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
separate meaning.
      CHIEF. The Chief of the Village Fire Department.
      CORPORATION COUNSEL. The attorney or prosecutor for the Village.
      DIRECTOR. The Fire Prevention Officer(s).
      MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Maywood.
      PERSON. Means and includes, but not limited to, natural person,
corporations, firms, partnerships, other entities and associations, legal and/
or equitable owners, occupiers, tenants, managers, landlords, persons in actual
control of structures, persons responsible for structures or the work thereon,
persons having in fact or having the right to possession, control, care, charge
or custody of the building as a whole or any unit thereof, agents, assigns,
heirs and successors.
   (D)   Plan and occupancy approval. All plans, specifications, blueprints,
drawings to scale, and certificates of occupancy for new construction,
additions, substantial rehabilitation, and substantial remodeling of all
structures except single family dwellings shall be submitted, in writing, in
triplicate, for his written approval to the Chief and shall state or show the
name of the person proposing the construction, addition, rehabilitation or
remodeling, the parcel or parcels affected, the immediate geographical
surroundings, property lines, adjacent streets and highways, if any, designated
by name and the complete installation as proposed, including tanks and their
capacity, pumps, buildings, prime and emergency power sources and all
equipment.
   (E)   Penalty. 
      (1)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses or
fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Code, or this chapter, or
any order or directive made thereunder, or who build in violation of any
detailed statement, specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder,
or who builds without a permit issued thereunder, or who builds in violation of
any certificate or permit issued thereunder, or who shall fail to comply with
such an order as affirmed or modified by the Fire Prevention Officer(s) or by
the Chief of the Fire Department whose decision in cases of conflict shall
control, shall, for each and every such violation and noncompliance, be, upon
conviction, guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished by a fine not exceeding
$500 and costs of prosecution.
      (2)   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses or
fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Code or this chapter, or any
order or directive made thereunder, in addition to the imposition of a fine or
other penalty shall, upon a second or other subsequent conviction, be subject
to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months. Imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months may be sought as a possible penalty upon the election of the
prosecuting officer; provided, however, that imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 6 months can only be imposed when such is specifically stated as a
possible penalty on whatever complaint, charge, notice, warrant or process is
issued to the person accused.
      (3)   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is
defined by difference clauses or sections of this Code, the prosecuting officer
may elect under which clause or section to proceed, but not more than 1
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense; provided,
that the revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery
or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced.
      (4)   Each day prohibited conditions exist, or are permitted to exist,
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
      (5)   The application of any penalty herein shall not be held to prevent
the enforced removal of prohibited conditions and shall not otherwise limit or
deny any rights or remedies the Village has as provided by law.
   (F)   Presumption of liability. The owner, manager and/or occupant of any
premises upon which a violation of this Code or this chapter exists shall be
deemed prima facie responsible for the violation so evidenced and subject to
the penalties provided therefor.
(1997 Code, § 26.01) (Ord. CO-07-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. C0-05-13,
passed 4-18-2005; Am. Ord. C0-06-02, passed 2-7-2006; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 91.02 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.
   (A)   A Bureau of Fire Prevention in the Fire Department of the Village is
established which shall be operated under the supervision of the Chief of the
Fire Department.
   (B)   The officer or officers assigned to the Bureau of Fire Prevention, to
be known as the Fire Prevention Officer(s), shall be a member or members of the
Fire Department designated by the Chief of the Fire Department with approval of
the Village Manager. The Fire Prevention Officer(s) and the Bureau of Fire
Prevention shall perform such duties as required by the ordinances and codes of
the Village and as directed by the Chief or his duly appointed Fire Inspector
(s). The Chief, with the approval of the Village Manger, may remove the
designated Fire Prevention Officer(s) and designate a replacement or
replacements.
   (C)   The Building Director, with Village Manager approval, shall designate
such technical inspectors as deemed necessary from the Building and Code
Enforcement Department to assist the Fire Prevention Officer(s) and technical
inspectors in the performance of their duty.
   (D)   The Fire Chief may designate from time to time personnel of the Fire
Department to assist the
Fire Prevention Officer(s) and technical inspectors in the performance of their
duty.
   (E)   The Fire Chief shall ensure prompt and efficient submission of reports
concerning building and related permits by the Fire Prevention Bureau to the
Building and Code Enforcement Department. In the instance of such permits, the
Community Development Department shall be the responsible agency. The Building
Director shall ensure prompt and efficient submission of reports concerning
fire prevention, by duly appointed Building and Code Enforcement Department
technical inspectors, to the Fire Prevention Bureau. In the instance of such
reports, the Fire Prevention Bureau shall be the responsible agency.
   (F)   Wherever the words Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention are used in
the Fire Prevention Code they shall mean the Fire Prevention Officer(s) or Fire
Inspector.
   (G)   The Fire Prevention Officer(s) and inspectors of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention, for the purpose of enforcing compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, and such other Village Code provisions and ordinances dealing with
fire prevention or protection, shall have the power to inspect, issue
citations, serve process and arrest for violation, and shall have all other
powers incidental to the foregoing.
(1997 Code, § 26.02) (Ord. CO-07-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 91.03 FIRE LANES.
   The fire lanes referred to in Section F-311.1 of this Code are those fire
lanes which have been designated by agreement between the Bureau of Fire
Prevention and the building owner.
(1997 Code, § 26.03) (Ord. CO-07-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 91.04 APPEALS.
   Any person shall have the right to appeal decisions regarding the issuance
of permits or code interpretations made by Fire Prevention Officers. All such
appeals shall be filed within 30 days of a written decision by the Fire
Prevention Officer and shall be directed to the Chief of the Fire Department.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall either affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the Fire Prevention Officer. Decisions made by the Chief of the
Fire Department shall be final.
(1997 Code, § 26.04) (Ord. CO-07-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 91.05 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS.
   (A)   Location restrictions. No service station as defined in § 111.30 shall
be constructed, erected or maintained within 700 feet of any other gasoline
service station which 700 feet shall be measured from the property boundary
lines of each and all parcels affected. No new gasoline service station shall
hereafter be constructed within 200 feet of any school, hospital, church,
theater, institution or any such other public meeting or gathering place or
place of assembly, which 200 feet shall be measured from the property boundary
lines of each and all parcels affected.
   (B)   Bulk sales prohibited. No gasoline service station shall dispense any
fuel except into the fuel tank of any motor vehicle and only when such fuel
tank is connected with the carburization system of such motor vehicle, provided
that individual sales of up to 5 gallons, in properly safe containers, are
permitted.
   (C)   Nonretail service stations. No person, whose primary business is other
than the sale of gasoline to the fuel tanks of motor vehicles, shall maintain
or operate any container or containers, tank or tanks, pump or pumps, including
but not limited to a person engaged in the business of filling the fuel tanks
of motor vehicles for another person, lessee, owner or agent of such person,
without complying with the provisions of this section.
(1997 Code, § 26.05) (Ord. CO-07-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 91.06 AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
   All existing and newly constructed health care facilities shall be
sprinklered.
(1997 Code, § 26.06) (Ord. CO-07-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 91.07 FIRE ALARM SUPERVISION.
   All fire alarms or fire alarm systems required by this Code shall be
equipped with an approved supervisory device, connected, wired or otherwise
capable of transmitting signals to the Village Fire Department Alarm Board or
Boards so as to cause automatic activation of an alarm or signal on the Village
Fire Department Alarm Board or Boards, simultaneous with the activations, by
whatever means, of the required fire alarm or fire alarm system.
(1997 Code, § 26.07) (Ord. CO-07-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 91.08 REIMBURSEMENT OF EXTRAORDINARY EXPENSES.
   (A)   The party or parties for whose benefit the expense was incurred shall
be responsible, in those instances where the benefitting party or parties do
not directly assume financial responsibility for any extraordinary fire-related
expenses incurred, for reimbursing the Village Fire Department for all
extraordinary expenses incurred in responding to a fire-related emergency
inside or outside of the Village.
   (B)   The Village Fire Chief or his designee is authorized to prepare and
transmit to the party or parties for whose benefit the expense was incurred an
itemized bill for all such extraordinary expenses incurred by the Village Fire
Department.
   (C)   An extraordinary expense shall be defined as an expense incurred by
the Village Fire Department over and above those expenses usually incurred in
responding to a fire-related emergency inside or outside of the Village,
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Emergency wrecking expenses incurred in an attempt to prevent the
spread of a fire;
      (2)   Emergency bulldozing expenses;
      (3)   Emergency towing expenses; and
      (4)   Emergency heavy-duty crane expenses.
(1997 Code, § 26.08) (Ord. CO-07-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 91.09 UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANK REMOVAL UPON CONVEYANCE.
   All underground storage tanks no longer in use shall be removed by an owner,
at the owner's sole expense, prior to any conveyance of the property. Any
environmental remediation related to the unused tanks other than removal of the
tanks may be a matter of contract between the owner and the party to whom the
property is being conveyed.
(Ord. C0-05-13, passed 4-18-2005)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Board of Health
   
92.02   Health Department
   
92.03   Toilet facilities, publicly used premises
   
92.04   Smoking regulations
Nuisances
   
92.20   Public nuisances prohibited
   
92.21   Public nuisances defined
   
92.22   Abatement of public nuisances
   
92.23   Cost of abatement
   
92.24   High grass and weeds; trees, bushes
   
92.25   Pest extermination
   
92.26   Reserved
   
92.27   Dutch elm disease and emerald ash borer
   
92.28   Garbage and refuse
   
92.29   Hazardous, abandoned, and inoperable vehicles
   
92.30   Noise
   
92.31   Hazardous substance facilities
   
92.32   Dirt yard areas
Cross-reference:
   Chronic public nuisances, see §
150.036
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 BOARD OF HEALTH.
   (A)   Establishment; members. There is established a Board of Health in and
for the Village, which shall be known as the Maywood Board of Health and which
shall be composed of the Building Director, who shall be its chairperson, and 6
other members to be selected from among
the residents of the Village, to be appointed by
the President and Board of Trustees at the same time and in the same manner as
the other officers of the Village are appointed. The members shall hold office
1/3 for 1 year, 1/3 for 2 years and 1/3 for 3 years from January 1 following
their appointment, as designated by the Village President, and annually
thereafter the Village President and the Board of Trustees shall, before
January 1 of each year, appoint as before 2 members to take the place of the
retiring members, who shall hold office for 3 years and until their successors
are appointed.
   (B)   Secretary. The Board of Health shall appoint a Secretary from among
its own members whose duty it shall be to keep a written record of all meetings
of the Board and of all rules, regulations and orders thereof, which record
shall be a public record and shall be kept on file in the office of the
Building Director and shall be open at all reasonable hours to public
inspection.
   (C)   Functions. The Board of Health shall act as an advisory body
reflecting community objectives and desires in the field of public health and
shall make appropriate studies and investigations for the purpose of presenting
recommendations to the Board of Trustees.
   (D)   Meetings. Upon appointment or reappointment of members of the Board of
Health, it shall be the duty of the Chairperson to call a meeting for the
purpose of electing a Secretary and transacting such other business as may be
necessary or expedient. The Board of Health shall hold such meetings as may be
deemed advisable upon call of the Chairperson or upon written request of any 2
members filed with the Secretary. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to send
to each member of the Board a written notice of any meeting at least 2 days in
advance of the date thereof, but notice may be waived by written waivers or
consent signed by all members of the Board. Such waivers or consents shall be
made a part of the minutes of any such special meeting. Notice of any such
meeting shall specify the objects to be considered at such meeting.
(1997 Code, § 11.01) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 92.02 HEALTH DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Establishment. There is established an executive department of the
Village which shall be known as the Health Department and shall embrace the
Building Director and such assistants as the Board of Trustees may, by
ordinance, provide.
   (B)   Authority. The Building Director, as Health Officer, shall have and
exercise a general supervision over the sanitary condition of the Village. All
orders and directions emanating from the Health Department shall be issued in
the name of the Building Director.
   (C)   Assistant special police officers. The Building Director shall have
such assistants as may be designated by the Board of Trustees. In order to
facilitate the performance of their duties, the Building Director and their
assistants are vested with all the powers conferred on special police officers
of the Village by the Illinois Revised Statutes and ordinances of this Village
and are hereby appointed special police officers of the Village.
   (D)   Powers and duties. The Building Director shall be the head of the
Health Department and shall have the general management and supervision of all
matters pertaining to said Department. They shall have the following powers and
perform the following duties:
      (1)   To enforce all the laws of the state, the rules, regulations and
orders of the Illinois Department of Public Health and the ordinances of the
municipality in relation to matters pertaining to the preservation of public
health within the municipality;
      (2)   Execute and enforce all ordinances of the municipality relating to
the health standards maintained in every place of business in the municipality
where services of a personal nature are furnished to the public or where foods,
food products, milk, milk products and beverages of every nature and
description are either handled, sold, given away, stored, manufactured or
processed;
      (3)   Investigate the existence of any contagious or preventable disease
within the municipality and report the same to the State Department of Public
Health and to act without delay in carrying out such measures for controlling
the progress of the same;
      (4)   Make all necessary sanitary and health investigations and
inspections and to cause all nuisances, whether public or private, affecting
the health of persons in private employment and the public generally to be
abated with reasonable promptness;
      (5)   Request the Police Department and such other state or municipal
authorities for such assistance as may be deemed necessary in the performance
of the duties of this office, and to cause the arrest and prosecution of
offenders violating any of the ordinances of the municipality relating to
public or private nuisances, public health and sanitation.
   (E)   Records. It shall be the duty of the Building Director to cause to be
kept a record of all transactions of the Department of Health and such
statistical information as may be necessary for the efficient working of the
Department.
   (F)   Statement of required appropriations. The Building Director, at the
request of the Director of Finance, shall furnish to the Director of Finance a
detailed statement of the appropriations required by the Department of Health
during the ensuing fiscal year.
   (G)   Annual report. The Building Director shall, annually, on or before
January 1, send to the Board of Trustees of the Village a full and
comprehensive statement of all matters pertaining to the Health Department,
including a statement of all cash receipts and disbursements during such fiscal
year.
(1997 Code, § 11.02) (Ord. 56-6, passed 3-1- 1956; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 92.03 TOILET FACILITIES, PUBLICLY USED PREMISES.
   (A)   At least one toilet facility with lavatory, easily accessible to the
public, shall be provided for customers of any restaurant regardless of seating
capacity. Separate toilet facilities with lavatories for each sex shall be
provided for customers of any restaurant designed to seat 25 or more customers
at one time. Such facilities must comply with the Plumbing Code of the Village.
An adequate supply of soap, sanitary towels and toilet paper shall be available
for use at all times.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate any business
or establishment to which the public is invited for the purpose of
entertainment or recreation unless there are provided on the premises separate
toilet facilities with lavatories for the use of male and female patrons. Such
facilities shall be easily accessible to the patrons and shall comply with the
Plumbing Code of the Village. An adequate supply of soap, sanitary towels and
toilet paper shall be available for use at all times.
(1997 Code, § 11.04) (Ord. 78-7, passed 4-13-1978)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.04 SMOKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   For the purposes of regulating clean indoor air and smoking in the
Village, the provisions of the Smoke Free Illinois Act, 410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.,
as amended, and the regulations of the Illinois Department of Public Health, as
amended, along with any applicable regulations under federal law, shall be
controlling.
   (B)   Violations:
      (1)   A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who
violates the Smoke Free Illinois Act shall be fined pursuant to this section.
Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation.
      (2)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under
the Smoke Free Illinois Act shall be fined in an amount that is not less than
$100 and not more than $250. A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls
a public place or place of employment that violates the Smoke Free Illinois Act
shall be fined not less than $250 for the first violation, not less than $500
for the second violation within 1 year after the first violation, and not less
than $2,500 for each additional violation within 1 year after the first
violation.
      (3)   A fine imposed under this section shall be allocated as follows:
         (a)   One-half of the fine shall be distributed to the Illinois
Department of Public Health; and
         (b)   One-half of the fine shall be distributed to the Village.
(Ord. C0-08-02, passed 1-15-2008)
NUISANCES
§ 92.20 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to
exist any public nuisance within the Village or within the police jurisdiction
of the Village.
(1997 Code, § 12.01)
§ 92.21 PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
   (A)   General. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or
use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to:
      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public; or
      (2)   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property; or
      (3)   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
      (4)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway or other
public way.
   (B)   Public nuisances affecting health. The following acts, omissions,
places, conditions and things are specifically declared to be public health
nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances coming
within the definition of division (A) of this section:
      (1)   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink
sold or offered for sale to the public;
      (2)   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death;
      (3)   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash,
rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, abandoned vehicles or
machinery, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-
carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed or which create a fire hazard;
      (4)   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply;
      (5)   Garbage cans which are not fly-tight or rodent-tight;
      (6)   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases,
fly ash or industrial dust within the Village limits in such quantities as to
endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or any act in
violation of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act, (415 ILCS 5);
      (7)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, industrial wastes or other substances; or any act in
violation of the Environmental Protection Act;
      (8)   Any use of property, substances or things within the Village
emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious, or
disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical
senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the
health of any appreciable number of persons within the Village;
      (9)   All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public
use;
      (10)   Any barn, stable or shed used for keeping animals;
      (11)   Any obstruction in or across any watercourse, drainage ditch or
ravine;
      (12)   The deposit of garbage, rubbish, or any offensive substance on any
street, sidewalk or public place, or on any private property, except as may be
permitted by ordinance;
      (13)   Any noxious weeds on private property, as defined by 505 ILCS 100/
2;
      (14)   Failing to comply with a mask mandate imposed by Maywood Executive
Order, Illinois Declaration of A State of Emergency or Executive Order, or
Federal Government Regulation during its pendency.
   (C)   Public nuisances offending morals and decency. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are specifically declared to be public
nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration shall not
be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and decency
coming within the definition of division (A) of this section:
      (1)   All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, gambling
houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling, except the state
authorized lottery and any activity when lawfully conducted in accordance with
the provisions of
Chapter 125 of this Code and the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.;
      (2)   All gambling devices and slot machines, except devices lawfully
licensed and operated as authorized by
Chapter 125 of this Code and pursuant to the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et
seq.;
      (3)   All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages
are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without
a permit or license as provided for by this Code;
      (4)   Any place or premises within the Village where ordinances or state
laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are
openly, continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated;
      (5)   Any person who controls any building and knowingly grants, permits
or makes the building available for use for the purpose of unlawfully
manufacturing or delivering a controlled substance.
   (D)   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public
nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be
construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming
within the provisions of division (A) of this section:
      (1)   All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the
provisions of the ordinances of the Village relating to materials and manner of
construction of buildings and structures;
      (2)   All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport
to be or may be mistaken as official traffic control devices placed or
maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing;
      (3)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk;
      (4)   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than 8
feet above the surface thereof or less than 10 feet above the surface of a
public street;
      (5)   All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of
the State of Illinois and ordinances of the Village;
      (6)   All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as
to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human use;
      (7)   All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung
less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground;
      (8)   All loud and discordant noises or vibrations of any kind;
      (9)   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and
all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of
the Village or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are
kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof
has been accomplished;
      (10)   All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused
basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk;
      (11)   All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and
other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for
opening from the inside by pushing only with the strength of a small child;
      (12)   Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public
street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes
large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the
streets or sidewalks;
      (13)   Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall, fence,
sidewalk, street or other private or public property without permission of the
owner thereof;
      (14)   Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe condition, or
which overhangs any roadway, or which overhangs any sidewalk less than 8 feet
above the sidewalk surface;
      (15)   Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire
hazard or will impair the extinguishing of any fire;
      (16)   Any nuisance so defined by the Illinois Revised Statutes, or under
the common law.
(1997 Code, § 12.02) (Ord. CO-03-15, passed 7-7-2003; Am. Ord. CO-2013-37,
passed 6-4-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2021-02, passed 2-16-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2021-12,
passed 7-13-2021)
§ 92.22 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   An abatement action under this chapter is a remedy cumulative to other
remedies at law and equity. Injunctive relief may be sought to prevent or
restrain violations of this chapter. An abatement action in no way preempts,
supersedes or bars civil or criminal prosecution for violation of this chapter
or any other applicable building, property maintenance, fire prevention, health
or public safety regulation. The commencement of a nuisance abatement action is
not a condition precedent to the initiation of civil or criminal prosecution or
any other remedy. Failure to adhere to the procedure prescribed in this section
shall not bar relief or remedy if such failure causes no prejudice and merely
constitutes harmless error.
   (B)   The following shall be the procedure for the abatement of nuisances
within the jurisdiction of the Village:
      (1)   Notice. Notice shall be given to the owner of the nuisance or of
the property on which the nuisance exists. For purposes of this chapter, the
person to whom the last general tax bill on the property was sent shall be
presumed to be the owner. Personal service, or notice by regular mail and
posting of notice on the front entrance to the structure or similar location
shall be deemed sufficient, legal notice to the owner and all other responsible
parties. If there is no structure on the property, a sign may be posted
anywhere on the premises.
      (2)   Contents of notice. The notice shall state the location and nature
of the nuisance. It shall apprise the owner that if the nuisance is not abated
within a specified number of days, the Village shall, at the expense of such
owner, have such nuisance abated. Five days shall be such specified number
indicated in the notice, unless otherwise stated in this Code, or the public
health and safety require a shorter abatement period. The obligations of the
owner are continuing obligations which are effective for 1 year from the date
of the notice, which date shall be the last date the notice was mailed or the
date the notice was posted, whichever comes last.
      (3)   Abatement. If upon the giving of notice, the owner fails to abate
said nuisance within the time and in the manner specified in the notice, the
Village may cause the nuisance to be abated, as it deems appropriate. The cost
of the abatement shall be assessed against the owner of the land upon which the
nuisance is located. The amount of such costs shall be paid by such owner to
the Village.
      (4)   Summary abatement. If the nuisance is of such threat to the
welfare, safety and comfort of the community that it must be abated
immediately, the Village Manager is hereby authorized to take whatever steps
are necessary to effect the abatement of same regardless of the requirements
herein.
(1997 Code, § 12.03) (Am. Ord. CO-2015-15, passed 7-26-2016; Am. Ord. CO-2023-
34, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 92.23 COST OF ABATEMENT.
   In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the Village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if proper notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the
owner, such cost shall constitute a lien against the real estate in accordance
with the provisions of state law, this chapter, and any other applicable
provisions of this Code. The Village may authorize the preparation and filing
of liens against title to real estate and memoranda of judgment against
individuals and corporate entities as well as the preparation and filing of
releases related thereto to preserve its rights to collect fines, penalties and
other costs imposed by the Village for violations of state law, this chapter
and any other applicable provisions of this Code. Village liens and memoranda
of judgment shall be filed with the Office of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds
or such other appropriate state, federal or county agency. The owner, occupant
or person causing, permitting or maintaining the nuisance or violating state
law or any provision of the Code shall be obligated to pay to the Village the
amount of any fines, penalties or any lien amounts or memorandum of judgment
imposed under this chapter or the Code, and all expenses and costs incurred by
the Village with respect to abating a public nuisance, subject to adjustment by
the Village Manager, or his or her designee, or the Village Prosecutor. In
order to obtain a release of a Village lien or memorandum of judgment, the
following additional payments to the Village are required:
   (A)    $50 for the preparation, handling and filing costs of the Village
lien or memoranda of judgment, or the actual costs, if greater; and
   (B)   $50 for the preparation, handling and filing costs of the release of
Village lien or release of memorandum of judgment or the actual costs, if
greater.
(1997 Code, § 12.04) (Am. Ord. CO-2012-30, passed 8-21-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2016-
15, passed 7-26-2016)
§ 92.24 HIGH GRASS AND WEEDS; TREES AND BUSHES.
   (A)   Nuisance. It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for
any person who owns or controls any real estate to permit nuisance greenery
upon the property, including but not limited to allowing grass or weeds to grow
on such premises or on the parkways contiguous to such premises to a height of
6 inches or more, or to permit trees or bushes on the property to be untrimmed
or otherwise neglected.
   (B)   Notice prior to abatement. The Village shall give to the owner of the
property where such public nuisance is found a written notice of the existence
of such nuisance and requiring the removal of such nuisance through cutting,
trimming or other removal activities within 10 days following such notice. The
notice shall also notify the owner of the property that unless such nuisance is
removed or compliance otherwise achieved within such 10-day period, the Village
will proceed with the removal of such nuisance, and assess the cost thereof
against the property owner. Service of such notice shall be by personal service
or by certified mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the
general taxes for the last preceding year on the property.
   (C)   Post-abatement notice; lien. 
      (1)   Should the Village abate the nuisance through removal, the cost of
such removal shall be a lien upon the property affected, superior to all other
liens and encumbrances, except tax liens; provided that notice prior to
abatement has been given as herein described, and the owner fails to pay the
cost and expense incurred following receipt of a post-abatement notice stating
the substance of this section, identifying the property by common description,
and describing the cutting, trimming or other removal activity. Service of such
post-abatement notice shall be by personal service or by certified mail to the
person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last
preceding year on the property. A notice of lien shall be filed within 1 year
after an unreimbursed removal cost and expense is incurred the Village. Notices
of lien may be filed by the Village, or person performing the removal by
authority of the Village, in his or its own name, and shall be filed in the
office of the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County. The notice of lien shall
consist of a sworn statement setting out:
         (a)   A description of the property sufficient for identification
thereof;
         (b)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the cutting, trimming or removal, including the related
administrative costs and activities;
         (c)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
Village.
      (2)   However, the lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose
rights in and to such property have arisen subsequent to the removal and prior
to the filing of such notice, and the lien shall not be valid as to any
mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such
property arise prior to the filing of such notice.
   (D)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost and expenses, including
those costs provided for in §
92.23, by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of
lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in
whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in
the case of filing notice of lien.
   (E)   Minimum penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of division
(A) of this section shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of
this Code. Any person who receives more than 2 violations within the same
calendar year for the same property shall receive a ticket from the Village for
the minimum citation amount required by law.
(1997 Code, § 12.05) (Ord. 79-10, passed 7-31- 1979; Am. Ord. C0-08-36, passed
8-19-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2012-30, passed 8-
21-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2016-15, passed 7-26-2016)
§ 92.25 PEST EXTERMINATION.
   (A)   Nuisance. The owner, occupant or lessee of any property in the Village
shall maintain his or her property free of pests, as defined in 65 ILCS 5/11-
20-8. A failure to maintain a property free of pests shall be a public
nuisance.
   (B)   Notice prior to abatement. The Village shall give to the owner of the
property where such public nuisance is found a written notice of the existence
of such nuisance and requiring the removal of such nuisance through pest
control activities within 10 days following such notice. The notice shall also
notify the owner of the property that unless such nuisance is removed or
compliance otherwise achieved within such 10-day period, the Village will
proceed with the removal of such nuisance, and assess the cost thereof against
the property owner. Service of such notice shall be by personal service or by
certified mail to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the genera!
taxes for the last preceding year on the property.
   (C)   Post-abatement notice; lien. 
      (1)   Should the Village abate the nuisance through removal, the cost of
such removal shall be a lien upon the property affected, superior to all other
liens and encumbrances, except tax liens; provided that notice prior to
abatement has been given as herein described, and the owner fails to pay the
cost and expense incurred following receipt of a post-abatement notice stating
the substance of this section, identifying the property by common description,
and describing the removal activity. Service of such post-abatement notice
shall be by personal service or by certified mail to the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year on the
property. A notice of lien shall be filed within 1 year after an unreimbursed
removal cost and expense is incurred the Village. Notices of lien may be filed
by the Village, or person performing the removal by authority of the Village,
in his or its own name, and shall be filed in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Cook County. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement
setting out:
         (a)   A description of the property sufficient for identification
thereof;
         (b)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the removal, including the related administrative costs and
activities;
         (c)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
Village.
      (2)   However, the lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose
rights in and to such property have arisen subsequent to the removal and prior
to the filing of such notice, and the lien shall not be valid as to any
mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such
property arise prior to the filing of such notice.
   (D)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost and expenses, including
those costs provided for in §
92.23, by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of
lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in
whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in
the case of filing notice of lien.
(Ord. 42, passed 10-7-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-
2012-30, passed 8-21-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2016-15, passed 7-26- 2016)
§ 92.26 RESERVED.
§ 92.27 DUTCH ELM DISEASE AND EMERALD ASH BORER.
   (A)   Nuisance.
      (1)   Dutch Elm disease. 
         (a)   Trees of all species and varieties of Ulmus (elm) and zelkova
affected with the fungus Ceratostomella ulmi, as determined by laboratory
analysis, are declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be removed and burned
within 10 days following notification of the discovery of such infection. It
shall be unlawful for any person being the owner of property whereon such a
tree is situated to possess or keep such a tree after the expiration of 10 days
following notification of the discovery of said infection.
         (b)   Trees or parts thereof of Ulmus (elm) or zelkova in a dead or
dying condition that may serve as a breeding place for the European Elm Bark
beetle, Scolytus Multistriatus, are declared to be a public nuisance, and it
shall be unlawful for the person owning property whereon the same is situated
to possess or keep the same.
      (2)   Emerald ash borer. Trees of all species and varieties of Fraxinus
(ash) infected with the Agrilus planipennis Fairmaire (Emeral Ash Borer) beetle
are declared to be a public nuisance and shall be removed and burned within 10
days following notification of the discovery of such infection. It shall be
unlawful for any person being the owner of property whereon such a tree is
situated to possess or keep such a tree after the expiration of 10 days
following notification of the discovery of the infection.
   (B)   Enforcement. The Director of Public Works is charged with the
enforcement of this section. When the Director or his representative is unable
to effect voluntary entry onto private property for the purpose of inspecting
the trees thereon, he shall seek the necessary authorization to make or cause
entry to be made onto the property.
   (C)   Notice prior to abatement. The Village shall give to the owner of the
property where such public nuisance is found a written notice of the existence
of such nuisance and requiring the removal and burning of such nuisance within
10 days following such notice, such removal and burning to be done under the
direction and supervision of the Director of Public Works or his
representative. The notice shall also notify the owner of the property that
unless such nuisance is removed and burned within such 10-day period, the
Village will proceed with the removal and burning of such nuisance, and assess
the cost thereof against the property owner. Service of such notice shall be by
personal service or by certified mail to the person to whom was sent the tax
bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year on the property.
   (D)   Duty of owner to remove diseased tree or breeding place. Upon receipt
of notice it shall become the duty of the owner of the property to cause such
tree or breeding place to be removed and burned under the supervision of the
Director of Public Works or his representative. In lieu thereof the person
charged with such removal and burning may request in writing that the same be
done by the Director of Public Works or his representative. If the Village
shall remove and burn any tree or breeding place, all expenses incurred in
connection therewith shall be assessed against and paid by such property owner.
   (E)   Post-abatement notice; lien. 
      (1)   Should the Village abate the nuisance through removal, the cost of
such removal shall be a lien upon the property affected, superior to all other
liens and encumbrances, except tax liens; provided that notice prior to
abatement has been given as herein described, and the owner fails to pay the
cost and expense incurred following receipt of a post-abatement notice stating
the substance of this section, identifying the property by common description,
and describing the removal activity. Service of such post-abatement notice
shall be by personal service or by certified mail to the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year on the
property. A notice of lien shall be filed within 1 year after an unreimbursed
removal cost and expense is incurred the Village. Notices of lien may be filed
by the Village, or person performing the removal by authority of the Village,
in his or its own name, and shall be filed in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Cook County. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement
setting out:
         (a)   A description of the property sufficient for identification
thereof;
         (b)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the removai, including the related administrative costs and
activities;
         (c)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
Village.
      (2)   However, the lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose
rights in and to such property have arisen subsequent to the removal and prior
to the filing of such notice, and the lien shall not be valid as to any
mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such
property arise prior to the filing of such notice.
   (F)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost and expenses, including
those costs provided for in §
92.23, by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of
lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in
whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in
the case of filing notice of lien.
   (G)   Trees partly on private property and partly on public property. Dutch
elm diseased trees and Emerald Ash Borer infected trees, the trunks of which,
in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, are partly on Village property
and partly on private property shall be removed by the Village. The cost of
such tree removal shall be shared equally by the Village and the record owner
of the private property. In the event that the owner of the private property,
upon notice from the Village fails to pay one-half of said cost within 30 days
following the removal and receipt of a post-abatement notice stating the
substance of this section, identifying the property by common description, and
describing the removal activity, then the Village shall pay the entire cost of
the tree removal and shall have the right to collect from the owner one-half of
the cost by lien or suit for judgment. The cost shall be a lien upon the real
estate, provided that notice is given to the owner prior to the tree removal,
the owner fails to pay the cost and expense incurred following receipt of a
post-abatement notice, and a notice of lien is recorded in the Recorder's
office within 1 year after the expense is incurred. For purposes of this
section the Village property line shall be deemed to be 33 feet from the center
line of each street except in those instances where a street may be more than
66 feet in width, in which case the Director of Public Works and the Village
Manager shall determine the location of the property line.
   (H)   Village to remove its own trees. Infected trees on Village owned
property and on public streets and highways within the corporate limits shall
be removed at the expense of the Village.
(1997 Code, § 12.08) (Ord. 69-6, passed 5-22- 1969; Am. Ord. C0-08-36, passed
8-19-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2012-30, passed 8-21-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2016-15, passed
7-26-2016)
§ 92.28 GARBAGE AND REFUSE.
   (A)   Requirements.
      (1)   The owner, occupant or lessee of any premises in the Village shall
remove from his property or otherwise dispose of all garbage, ashes, rubbish,
debris and refuse and shall keep the property free and clear of any
accumulation of same.
      (2)   Pending disposal of garbage from any premises, the garbage shall be
deposited in watertight containers with close fitting covers. Pending disposal
from any property, cans, bottles, metalware and similar inorganic household
rubbish shall be deposited in rigid containers. All garbage and refuse shall be
so stored as not to invite insects or rodents or be unsightly or a nuisance.
      (3)   No person shall dump, deposit or place any garbage, rubbish, trash
or refuse upon any street or public place or upon any public or private real
property not owned by that person without the consent of the owner or person in
possession of the real property, except at any dump site which may be
authorized by the Board of Trustees. Any person found to be in violation of
this division (A)(3) shall be subject to a fine of $750 for each such
violation.
      (4)   No person shall bury any garbage within the Village.
   (B)   Nuisance. Garbage, ashes, rubbish, debris and refuse existing on
property and not in compliance with the above requirements is a public
nuisance.
   (C)   Notice prior to abatement. The Village shall give to the owner of the
property where such public nuisance is found a written notice of the existence
of such nuisance and requiring the removal of such nuisance within 10 days
following such notice. The notice shall also notify the owner of the property
that unless such nuisance is removed or compliance otherwise achieved within
such 10-day period, the Village will proceed with the removal of such nuisance,
and assess the cost thereof against the property owner. Service of such notice
shall be by personal service or by certified mail to the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year on the
property.
   (D)   Post-abatement notice; lien. 
      (1)   Should the Village abate the nuisance through removal, the cost of
such removal shall be a lien upon the property affected, superior to all other
liens and encumbrances, except tax liens; provided that notice prior to
abatement has been given as herein described, and the owner fails to pay the
cost and expense incurred following receipt of a post-abatement notice stating
the substance of this section, identifying the property by common description,
and describing the removal activity. Service of such post-abatement notice
shall be by personal service or by certified mail to the person to whom was
sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last preceding year on the
property. A notice of lien shall be filed within 1 year after an unreimbursed
removal cost and expense is incurred the Village. Notices of lien may be filed
by the Village, or person performing the removal by authority of the Village,
in his or its own name, and shall be filed in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Cook County. The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement
setting out:
         (a)   A description of the property sufficient for identification
thereof;
         (b)   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred
or payable for the removal, including the related administrative costs and
activities;
         (c)   The date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
Village.
      (2)   However, the lien shall not be valid as to any purchaser whose
rights in and to such property have arisen subsequent to the removal and prior
to the filing of such notice, and the lien shall not be valid as to any
mortgagee, judgment creditor or other lien or whose rights in and to such
property arise prior to the filing of such notice.
   (E)   Release of lien. Upon payment of the cost and expenses, including
those costs provided for in §
92.23, by the owner of or persons interested in such property after notice of
lien has been filed, the lien shall be released by the Village or person in
whose name the lien has been filed and the release may be filed of record as in
the case of filing notice of lien.
1997 Code, § 12.09) (Am. Ord. CO-2016-15, passed 7-26-2016; Am. Ord. CO-2023-
14, passed 4-18-2023)
Cross-reference:
   Dumping of garbage upon real property; impoundment of motor vehicle, see §
99.27
§ 92.29 HAZARDOUS, ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   Hazardous vehicles, abandoned vehicles and inoperable vehicles as defined in
§ 99.01 are declared to be public nuisances for purposes of §
93.20 and shall be subject to removal by the Village in accordance with the
provisions of
Ch. 99.
(1997 Code, § 12.10) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985)
§ 92.30 NOISE.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ‘A’ BAND LEVEL. The total sound level of all noise as measured with a
sound level meter rising the “A” weighting network. The unit of measurement is
the dB(A).
      DECIBEL. A unit of measurement of the intensity (loudness) of sound.
Sound level meters which are employed to measure the intensity of sound are
calibrated in DECIBELS.
      OCTAVE BAND SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The sound pressure level for the sound
being measured contained within the specified octave band. The reference
pressure is 20 micronewtons per square meter.
      SOUND-LEVEL METER. An instrument including a microphone, an amplifier, an
output meter and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of noise and
sound levels in an specified manner.
   (B)   Nuisance noise prohibited. It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any
person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive,
unnecessary or unusually loud noise, or any noise which either annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
others within the Village.
   (C)   Nuisance noise standards. The following acts, among others, are
declared to be excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud nuisance noises, or
noises which constitute a nuisance by annoying, disturbing, injuring or
endangering the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the
Village, in violation of this section, but the enumeration shall not be deemed
to be exclusive, namely:
      (1)   Horns, signaling devices, and the like. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, motorbus or other vehicle on
any street or public place of the Village, except as a danger warning; the
creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or
harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and
unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device, except one
operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device
operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when
traffic is for any reason held up.
      (2)   Radios, phonographs, and the like. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and
comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than
is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room,
vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is
located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
      (3)   Amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to
be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument,
phonograph, loud-speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the
purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to
any building or structure.
      (4)   Yelling, shouting, and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling or singing on the public streets at any time or place so as to annoy
or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any
dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
      (5)   Animals, birds, and the like. The keeping of any animal or bird
which by causing noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in
the vicinity.
      (6)   Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or
steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the
time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request
of proper Village authorities.
      (7)   Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
      (8)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
      (9)   Loading and unloading; opening boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the
opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers.
      (10)   Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection, including
excavating, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on week days, except in case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a
permit from the Building Director which permit may be granted for a period not
to exceed 3 days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be
renewed for periods of 3 days or less while the emergency continues. The
Building Director should determine that the public health and safety will not
be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building
or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would
result to any person in interest, they may grant permission for such work to be
done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made
at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the
work.
      (11)   Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any
excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which
disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided, that conspicuous
signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school,
hospital or court street. This paragraph does not apply to authorized emergency
vehicles. It shall also be unlawful for any person to disturb any congregation
or assembly met for religious worship by making a noise or by rude and indecent
behavior or profane discourse within the place of worship, or so near the same
as to disturb the order and solemnity of the meeting.
      (12)   Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers
and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
      (13)   Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show
or sale. This division shall not apply to performances or shows that are part
of a Village, school or other public or community event sanctioned by the
Village, including festivals, music concerts, parades and street and other
fairs.
      (14)   Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns. The
transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material,
over and along streets and other public places upon vehicles or in any other
manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet
of such streets or other public places.
      (15)   Pile drivers, hammers, and the like. The operation between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic
hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which
is attended by loud or unusual noise.
      (16)   Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan
or any internal combustion engine or air conditioner, the operation of which
causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the
noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine or air conditioner is
equipped with a muffling device sufficient to deaden such noise.
      (17)   Mobile food dispenser vehicles.
         (a)   The use by mobile food dispenser vehicles or their operators of
noise-making advertising devices, including, but not limited to amplifiers,
bells, recordings, horns, whistles, rattles, gongs, piano or other musical
instruments.
         (b)   Mobile food dispenser vehicles shall not be operated on public
or private property within 2 blocks of the lot line of any primary or secondary
school within 2 hours after such school is closed.
         (c)   Mobile food dispenser vehicles shall not be operated in the
Village between 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on any day between August 25 and June
30 when a public elementary or public secondary school operated in a school
district encompassing any part of the Village is open, provided that the school
is attended by students residing within the Village.
         (d)   Mobile food dispenser vehicles while operating in any
residential area shall move a minimum distance of 1 block every 10 minutes.
   (D)   Exceptions. The following shall not be cause for a violation or
offense under this section.
      (1)   The operation of sirens or other warning devices by ambulances,
fire trucks or other emergency vehicles when responding to or attending to an
emergency situation, or by Village or other governmental entity for the purpose
of alerting or otherwise warning the public of imminent danger;
      (2)   Noise emitted by vehicles or other machinery operated by or on
behalf of the Village or another governmental entity for the purposes of
operating emergency generators, snow plowing, mosquito abatement or for
emergencies or general maintenance;
      (3)   Noise generated as part of a Village, school or other public or
community event sanctioned by the Village, including festivals, music concerts,
parades and street or other fairs;
      (4)   Noise emitted or generated in the operation of a mass transit
system or by aircraft; and
      (5)   Noise emitted by church bells, chimes and carillons.
      (6)   Sounds generated from block parties, live entertainment events or
private party events provided a block party permit or a live entertainment
license has been obtained from the Village and no conditions of the permit
policy have been violated. A violation of the permit policy by a holder of a
block party permit or a live entertainment license shall be deemed a violation
of this section. If there is no violation of the permit or license, events for
which such a block party permit or live entertainment license has been issued
shall only be deemed a nuisance when a contemporaneous citizen complaint has
been received and both:
         (a)   A documented measurement is made in compliance with division (E)
of this section showing that the generated noise exceeds the allowed limits in
division (E); and
         (b)   A determination is made by the issuing officer that the noise
generated by the block party or live entertainment event is so egregious that
it disrespects the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of nearby
residents, businesses and/or the general public to a level which amounts to a
violation of §
111.36(C) of this Code.
   (E)   Limitations for property line noise sources: measurement of noise.
      (1)   The measurement of sound or noise may be made with a sound level
meter and octave band analyzer meeting the standards prescribed by the American
National Standards Institute, Inc. A calibration check shall be made of the
system at the time of any noise measurement. The sound measurement shall be
made at the property line of the property on which such noise is generated or
perceived, or as near thereto as practicable, at approximately 5 feet above
ground. In the case of an elevated or directional noise or sound source,
compliance with the noise limits shall be maintained at any elevation at the
property line.
      (2)   Limits of noise levels. It shall be unlawful and a nuisance to
cause or allow the emission of sound from any noise source located on property
within the Village to any receiving residentially zoned property (see Table I
below) or receiving commercially zoned property (see Table II below) which
exceeds any allowable octave band sound pressure level specified in the tables
set forth below, when measured at any point within such receiving residentially
or commercially-zoned property, provided, however, that no measurement of sound
pressure levels shall be made less than 25 feet from such noise source.
Table I Limits Received on Residentially Zoned Property
                   Maximum Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels
Octave Band Center (dB) of Sound Emitted to any Receiving Residentially
Frequency (Hertz)  Zoned Land from
                   Manufacturing Commercially Zoned Residentially Zoned
                   District      Property           Property
                   Maximum Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels
Octave Band Center (dB) of Sound Emitted to any Receiving Residentially
Frequency (Hertz)  Zoned Land from
                   Manufacturing Commercially Zoned Residentially Zoned
                   District      Property           Property
31.5               75            72                 72
63                 74            71                 71
125                69            65                 65
250                64            57                 57
500                58            51                 51
1000               52            45                 45
 
 
                   Maximum Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels
Octave Band Center (dB) of Sound Emitted to any Receiving Residentially
Frequency (Hertz)  Zoned Land from
                   Manufacturing Commercially Zoned Residentially Zoned
                   District      Property           Property
4000               43            34                 34
8000               40            32                 32
 
Table II Limits Received on Commercially Zoned Property
                   Maximum Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels (dB) of
                   Sound Emitted to any Receiving Commercially Zoned Property
Octave Band Center from
Frequency (Hertz)  Property within a Property within a   Property within a
                   Manufacturing     Commercial District Residential District
                   District
                   Maximum Allowable Octave Band Sound Pressure Levels (dB) of
                   Sound Emitted to any Receiving Commercially Zoned Property
Octave Band Center from
Frequency (Hertz)  Property within a Property within a   Property within a
                   Manufacturing     Commercial District Residential District
                   District
31.5               75                72                  72
63                 74                71                  71
125                69                65                  65
250                64                57                  57
500                58                51                  51
1000               52                45                  45
2000               47                39                  39
4000               43                34                  34
8000               40                32                  32
 
   (F)   Limitations for motor vehicle noise standards. It shall be unlawful
and a nuisance to operate a motor vehicle within the village limits which
creates a noise or sound which exceeds the following noise limits:
      (1)   Trucks and buses over 8,000 pounds:
         (a)   87 dB(A) measured at 50 feet
         (b)   93 dB(A) measured at 25 feet;
      (2)   Under 8,000 pounds:
         (a)   80 dB(A) measured at 50 feet
         (b)   86 dB(A) measured at 25 feet;
      (3)   Passenger cars:
         (a)   78 dB(A) measured at 50 feet
         (b)   84 dB(A) measured at 25 feet;
      (4)   Motorcycles, motorbikes, snowmobiles, other vehicles:
         (a)   87 dB(A) measured at 50 feet
         (b)   93 dB(A) measured at 25 feet.
   (G)   Penalties. Any person violating the terms and conditions of this
section shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000
for a first violation within the past 12 months, not less than $250 nor more
than $1,500 for a second violation within the past 12 months and not less than
$1,000 nor more than $3,000 for a third or subsequent violation within the past
12 months, with each and every day that the violation is allowed to remain in
effect being deemed a complete and separate offense. In addition, the
appropriate authorities of the Village may take such other action as they deem
proper to enforce the terms and conditions of this section, including, without
limitation, an action in equity to compel compliance with its terms. Any person
violating the terms of this section shall be subject, in addition to the
foregoing penalties, to the payment of court costs and reasonable attorneys’
fees.
(1997 Code, § 12.11) (Ord. 84-3, passed 1-26- 1984; Am. Ord. —, passed - -2000;
Am. Ord. C0-03-19, passed 7-21-2003; Am. Ord. C0-07- 36, passed 10-10-2007; Am.
Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2012-34, passed 8-21-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2012-44, passed 11-5-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am.
Ord. CO-2023-39, passed 9-12-2023)
§ 92.31 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance,
consistent with §
93.21, for any person to operate a hazardous substance facility within the
Village; provided, however, that the treatment of hazardous substances by a
publicly- owned hazardous substance facility or by a public utility or railroad
operating under the authority of the Interstate Commerce Commission or the
Illinois Commerce Commission shall not be prohibited.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
separate meaning.
      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE FACILITY. Any building, structure, installation or
land where the treatment, storage, transfer, hauling, or processing of
hazardous substances occurs.
      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any element, compound, mixture, solution, substance,
waste product, waste, or combination of wastes, which, because of its quantity,
concentration or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or
significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious,
irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported, or disposed of or otherwise managed, and which
has been identified as hazardous, either by characteristics or listing,
pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovering Act of 1976, § 3001 (Pub.
L. 94-580, being 42 U.S.C. 6921), and/or Illinois Pollution Control Board
regulations. For the purposes of this section, the definition of HAZARDOUS
SUBSTANCE shall also encompass, but not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   Any substance designated pursuant to § 311(b)(2)(A) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act (Pub. L. 92-500, being 33 U.S. C. 1321), as
amended;
         (b)   Any element, compound, mixture, solution or substance designated
pursuant to § 102 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
Liability Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-510, being 42 U.S.C. 9601 et seq.), as
amended;
         (c)   Any toxic pollutant listed under § 307(a) of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act (Pub. L. 92-500, being U.S.C. 1317), as amended;
         (d)   Any hazardous air pollutant listed under § 112 of the Clean Air
Act (Pub. L. 95-95, being U.S.C. 7412), as amended;
         (e)   Any imminently hazardous chemical substance or mixture with
respect to which the administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
has taken action pursuant to § 7 of the Toxic Substance Control Act (Pub. L.
94-469, being U.S.C. 2606), as amended, excluding petroleum, crude oil or any
fraction thereof which is not otherwise specified, listed, or designated as a
hazardous substance under § 7, subsections (1) through (6), and natural gas or
synthetic gas usable for fuel, or mixtures of natural gases in synthetic gas.
      PERSON. Any individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation,
partnership or association, including corporate officers and directors.
      TREAT or TREATMENT. The extraction, extrusion or distillation of any
hazardous substance from any kind of liquid, gas or solid, including any
method, technique or process, including neutralization, designed to change the
physical, chemical, or biological character or composition of any hazardous
substance.
   (C)   Costs or penalties. Any costs or penalties imposed as a result of the
violation of the provisions of this section shall be consistent with the
provisions of §§ 93.22 and 93.23 and in addition to those imposed as a result
of judgments stemming from any appropriate civil actions or proceedings
initiated by the Village.
(1997 Code, § 12.12) (Ord. 88-12, passed 12-29-1988)
§ 92.32 DIRT YARD AREAS.
   (A)   In order to prevent the continued presence of unsightly open but
unplanted yard areas which are hospitable habitats for noxious weeds, the
unhealthful blowing of dirt and dust, and the accumulation of debris that
accompany such open but unplanted areas, it shall be unlawful and a nuisance
for any person whoowns, leases, occupies or controls any premises to permit an
open, unpaved yard area to be maintained without an adequate and substantial
covering of yard grass, ground cover or other landscaping for a period of more
than 60 days between April and October each year.
   (B)   What constitutes "adequate and substantial covering" under this
section shall be decided on a case-by-case basis, using the standard of what a
reasonable person would consider to be an "adequate and substantial covering"
under the circumstances. Plants commonly thought of as weeds, including noxious
weeds as defined in §
92.26 shall not constitute an "adequate and substantial covering" pursuant to
this section.
   (C)   What constitutes "other landscaping" under this section shall include
planters, decorative rocks, wood chips and the like, and areas constituting
what a reasonable person would consider to be a garden.
(Ord. C0-05-15, passed 5-2-2005)
CHAPTER 93: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Short title
   
93.02   Purpose
   
93.03   Definitions
   
93.04   Administration
   
93.05   Rabies case procedure
   
93.06   Animal bite procedure
   
93.07   Stray animals
   
93.08   Animal permit procedures
   
93.09   Animals prohibited
Regulations
   
93.20   Animal nuisances
   
93.21   Care of animals
   
93.22   Vehicles striking animals
   
93.23   Required vaccination
   
93.24   Removal of excreta
   
93.25   Cruelty to animals
   
93.26   Dogs in parks
   
93.27   Number of dogs permitted
   
93.28   Vicious dogs
   
93.29   Dangerous dogs
   
93.30   Pit Bulls; additional restrictions
   
93.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Animal Control Ordinance.
(1997 Code, § 13.01) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975)
§ 93.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote a harmonious relationship
between man and animal through the establishment of defined procedures when man
and animal interact.
   (B)   The defined procedures will include these situations or conditions:
      (1)   Protection of animals from abuse, neglect, and rabies;
      (2)   Provide security of residents from annoyance, intimidation, injury,
and rabies by animals;
      (3)   Establish the Village’s method of response to pet ownership;
      (4)   Develop a program designed to encourage responsible pet ownership;
      (5)   Assist the Village’s Animal Control Program through the payment of
fees.
(1997 Code, § 13.02) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975)
§ 93.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any living creature, domestic or wild, but does not include man.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. A person employed by the Village to enforce this
chapter.
   ANIMAL NUISANCE. An animal which:
      (1)   Runs uncontrolled;
      (2)   Molests persons or vehicles by chasing, barking, or biting;
      (3)   Attacks other animals;
      (4)   Damages property other than the owners;
      (5)   Barks, whines, howls or makes other noises excessively; or
      (6)   Creates noxious or offensive odors.
   DANGEROUS DOG. Any individual dog which when either unmuzzled, unleashed, or
unattended by its owner, or a member of its owner’s family, in a vicious or
terrorizing manner, approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack
upon streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds or places.
   DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal that has attacked a person at any
time without provocation, or any animal that bites or otherwise injures a
person 3 or more times when the animal was not under proper control.
   ENCLOSURE. A solid or chain link fence that is at least 6 feet in height, or
other sturdy structure, such as a metal crate, forming or causing an enclosure
suitable to prevent the entry of young children and suitable to confine a dog
in conjunction with other measures which may be taken by the owner or keeper,
such as tethering of a dog within the enclosure. Such enclosure shall be
securely constructed and self-locking and designed with secure sides, top (if
the structure is less than 6 feet in height), and bottom, and shall be designed
to prevent the animal from escaping from the enclosure. The interior of the
residence at which the dog resides may constitute an enclosure, provided that
the dog cannot exit the residence by itself.
   FOUND TO BE A VICIOUS DOG.
      (1)   That the Building Director or their designee, an Animal Control
Officer, or a law enforcement officer has conducted an investigation and made a
finding, in writing, that the dog is a vicious dog as defined herein and, based
on that finding, the Building Director, or their designee, an Animal Control
Officer has declared in writing that the dog is a vicious dog; and the owner of
the dog having been so notified in writing has not appealed the finding of the
Building Director, or their designee, an Animal Control Officer, to the Village
Manager, or their designee within 7 days of receipt of such notice; or
      (2)   That the circuit court has found the dog to be a vicious dog as
defined herein and has entered an order based on that finding.
   HAS BEEN BITTEN. Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person
or animal seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced, and further
includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
   IMPOUNDED. Taken into the custody by the Animal Control Officer.
   OWNER.
      (1)   A person who has a right of property in an animal;
      (2)   A person who keeps an animal;
      (3)   A person who has an animal in his care or custody; or
      (4)   A person who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any
premises occupied by him.
   PIT BULL. Any Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier
breed of dog, or any mixed breed of dog which contains as an element of its
breeding the breed of Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire
Terrier as to be identifiable as  partially of the breed of Staffordshire Bull
Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier by a qualified veterinarian duly
licensed as such by the State of Illinois.
   PROPER CONTROL. On the enclosed premises of its owner or on a leash and
under the control of a responsible person.
   VICIOUS DOG.
      (1)   Any individual dog that when unprovoked inflicts bites or attacks a
human being or other animal either on public or private property.
      (2)   Any individual dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition
to attack without provocation, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the
safety of human beings or domestic animals.
      (3)   Any individual dog that has a trait or characteristic and a
generally known reputation for viciousness, dangerousness, or unprovoked
attacks upon human beings or other animals, unless handled in a particular
manner or with special equipment.
      (4)   Any individual dog which attacks a human being or domestic animal
without provocation.
      (5)   Any individual dog which has been found to be a “dangerous dog”
upon 3 separate occasions. The 3 separate occasions of a finding of “dangerous
dog” must be subsequent to the adoption of the ordinance amending this section
which is set forth in this section.
      (6)   No dog shall be deemed VICIOUS if it bites, attacks, or menaces a
trespasser or the property of its owner or harms or menaces anyone who has
tormented or abused it or is a professionally trained dog for law enforcement
or guard duties. If a dog is found to be a vicious dog, the dog shall be
required to be kept in an enclosure as defined in this section.
(1997 Code, § 13.03) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975; Am. Ord. C0-06-11, passed 5-
2-2006; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-
2021)
§ 93.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Village Manager shall be responsible for the administration of
this chapter. These duties may be delegated to only one specific individual,
the Animal Control Officer, who shall enforce this chapter. Additional
personnel may be delegated powers to enforce this chapter by the Animal Control
Officer.
   (B)   Official powers of the Animal Control Officer shall be as follows:
      (1)   The Animal Control Officer shall be clothed with full police powers
for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. All other municipal police officers
shall cooperate with the Animal Control Officer in carrying out the provisions
of this chapter;
      (2)   For the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and
making inspections hereunder, the Animal Control Officer or his authorized
representative, or any officer of the law may enter upon private premises to
apprehend a straying dog or other animal, a dangerous dog or other animal, or a
dog or other animal thought to be infected with rabies. If, after request
therefor, the owner of such dog or other animal shall refuse to deliver the dog
or other animal to the officer, the owner shall be in violation of this
chapter;
      (3)   Anyone enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall not be held
responsible for any accident or property damages which may occur while in the
pursuit of any dog or other animal.
(1997 Code, § 13.04) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975)
§ 93.05 RABIES CASE PROCEDURE.
   Whenever a case of rabies has occurred in the community, the Cook County
Animal Control Administrator shall be notified immediately via a phone call.
The Administrator then shall act to prevent the spread of rabies.
(1997 Code, § 13.05) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975)
§ 93.06 ANIMAL BITING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The official procedure for bite cases shall be as follows.
      (1)   When the Animal Control Officer receives information that a person
has been bitten by an animal, the animal owner shall be instructed to have the
animal examined by his veterinarian within 24 hours.
      (2)   If the animal bite occurred off the animal owner’s property or when
the animal was left without proper control, a citation shall be written against
the animal owner.
      (3)   The Animal Control Officer shall fill out the Maywood Animal Bite
Report in full, and he shall send this report within 24 hours to the local
Public Health Department or to the Cook County Department of Animal Control.
      (4)   All animals that bite must be impounded for 10 days, following the
first examination.
      (5)   Impoundment at home or at a facility under the observation of a
licensed veterinarian shall be dependent upon a current rabies vaccination and
the ability of the animal owner to confine the biting animal.
      (6)   When an owner of a biting animal has no personal veterinarian, the
Animal Control Officer shall have the animal impounded for 10 days. The Village
shall provide a service for the impoundment of biting animals.
      (7)   All animals impounded shall have a record. The record shall include
the animal owner’s name, address and telephone number if available; species or
breed, color, sex, and license or tag number if available; and the time and
date impounded.
      (8)   The veterinarian examining the biting animal shall fill out and
then send within 24 hours the Cook County Rabies Observation Notice to the Cook
County Department Of Animal Control.
      (9)   Following the examination of the biting animal at the end of the
10-day confinement period the veterinarian shall complete the Cook County
Rabies Release Report and he shall send this report within 24 hours to the Cook
County Department of Animal Control.
   (B)   The animal owner is responsible for all costs relating to the
examination and impoundment of the biting animal.
   (C)   Any person having personal knowledge of an animal biting a person and
that the animal has not been properly examined shall report this fact to the
Animal Control Officer.
   (D)   It is unlawful for the owner of a biting animal to euthanize, sell,
give away, or otherwise dispose of such animal until it is released by the Cook
County Animal Control Administrator or his authorized representative.
(1997 Code, § 13.06) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.07 STRAY ANIMALS.
   (A)   When the Animal Control Officer observes or is informed that animals
are roaming freely and not under supervision of its owner, he shall apprehend
the animal.
   (B)   The Village shall provide a service for its residents for the purpose
of caring for stray and straying animals.
   (C)   When owners of animals impounded are known, notice shall be given by
telephone or by mail to the last known address. Animals with known owners shall
be held not less than 7 days.
   (D)   An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay a fee of $35 plus
$15 a day for each day the animal is impounded.
   (E)   Any animal whose owner is not identifiable must be held not less than
72 hours and then shall be placed for adoption, humanely euthanized or
otherwise disposed of in accordance with the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
   (F)   Known owners of animals at large shall be issued a notice of the
ordinance violation.
   (G)   In addition to or in lieu of impounding an animal found at large, the
Animal Control Officer or his representative may issue to the known owner of
such animal a notice of ordinance violation. The owner may pay a stipulated
penalty of $50 to the Village within 3 days in full satisfaction of the
violation charge.
(1997 Code, § 13.07) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975; Am. Ord. C0-00-21, passed
11-20-2000; Am. Ord. 43, passed 10-21-2008)
§ 93.08 ANIMAL PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any person owning an animal over 4 months of age must obtain a permit
for the animal within 10 days of ownership or of residency. This provision does
not apply to caged birds or caged amphibious animals kept as pets.
   (B)   Written application for permit shall be made to the Village which
shall include: name, address, and telephone number of applicant, description of
animal, the fee, and a valid rabies inoculation certificate for dogs and cats
issued by a veterinarian licensed in the State of Illinois.
   (C)   The schedule of animal permit fees are as follows:
      (1)   Animals other than dogs and cats, $10;
      (2)   Neutered dogs and cats, $10;
      (3)   Non-neutered dogs and cats, $10.
   (D)   A permit shall be required for eye seeing dogs or community owned
police dogs. No fee shall be required.
   (E)   Non-residents keeping animals no longer than 30 days will not be
required to make application for a permit, provided they meet the permit or
license requirements of their resident community.
   (F)   No person may obtain a permit for an animal prohibited in the Village
pursuant to § 93.09.
   (G)   Each permit issued is for the specific pet listed on the application
form. No transfer of permits is permitted. A duplicate permit may be obtained
upon payment of a $5 replacement fee.
   (H)   Identification tags must be worn by all dogs and cats.
(1997 Code, § 13.08) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975; Am. Ord. 75-11, passed 8-28-
1975; Am. Ord. C0-00-21, passed 11-20-2000; Am. Ord. C0-05-49, passed 12-6-
2005)
§ 93.09 ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or allow to be kept within the
Village any farm animals, such as sheep, cattle, goats, horses, ducks, geese,
chickens, roosters or other poultry, swine (including pot-bellied pigs), or
similar animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or allow to be
kept within the Village any naturally wild animals, including boa constrictors,
poisonous snakes or other poisonous reptiles. Fish, birds other than poultry
and non-poisonous reptiles, and zoological parks, performing animal
exhibitions, educational institutions, veterinary hospitals or animal shelters
are excepted from this provision. Dogs and cats are allowed subject to the
permitting and other requirements of this chapter and the code.
(Ord. C0-05-49, passed 12-6-2005)
REGULATIONS
§ 93.20 ANIMAL NUISANCES.
   (A)   No owner shall permit an animal:
      (1)   To be at large, or be a nuisance as defined in § 93.03;
      (2)   To suffer or permit such dog to disturb the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood by barking, making other loud or unusual noises, or by running
through or across cultivated gardens or fields;
      (3)   To defecate or urinate upon any public place, or upon any premises
not owned or controlled by the person owning or keeping the dog; provided,
however, that shall any such defecation be completely and promptly removed by
the owner or keeper of said dog, the terms of this section shall not be found
applicable;
      (4)   To use property under such person’s ownership or control in a
manner to allow defecation to accumulate so as to constitute a nuisance in
fact;
      (5)   To go or be upon any school premises, public swimming pool or
public park or playground within the Village or upon a path or sidewalk
extending through or within any school premises, public park or playground
within the Village, even though on a leash;
      (6)   To bring or cause to be brought into any shop, store, or retail
place of business wherein the public is invited to do business with the
management thereof, during such hours as the public is invited, or to bring or
cause to be brought into any public building at any time, any dog unless said
dog is under control and is brought for the purposes of conducting business or
inquiry wherein the physical presence of the dog is required.
   (B)   The provisions of subsections (A)(5) and (6) shall not apply to blind
persons lead by guide dogs.
(1997 Code, § 13.09) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975)
§ 93.21 CARE OF ANIMALS.
   Each owner shall provide for his animals:
   (A)   Sufficient quantity of good and wholesome food and water;
   (B)   Proper protection and shelter from the weather;
   (C)   Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering;
   (D)   Humane care and treatment.
(1997 Code, § 13.10) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975)
§ 93.22 VEHICLES STRIKING ANIMALS.
   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and
shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal’s owner, in the
event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once
report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency or the local
humane society.
(1997 Code, § 13.11) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975)
§ 93.23 REQUIRED VACCINATION.
   All owners of dogs and cats over 4 months of age shall have such animals
inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian at such intervals as
required by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(1997 Code, § 13.12) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975)
§ 93.24 REMOVAL OF EXCRETA.
   Every animal owner shall be responsible for removal and sanitary disposal of
any excreta deposited by his animal. When accompanying the animal outside his
premises, he shall have on his person suitable means for the removal of such
excreta.
(1997 Code, § 13.13) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975)
§ 93.25 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, overload, overwork,
or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dog fight, cock
fight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans.
   (B)   No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
   (C)   No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile or bird as a
prize for, or as an inducement to enter any contest, game or other competition,
or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement or offer such animal or bird
as an incentive to enter into any business agreement whereby the offer was for
the purpose of attracting trade.
   (D)   No person may sell, offer for sale, barter or give away as a pet or a
novelty any rabbit or any baby chick, duckling or other fowl which has been
dyed, colored or otherwise treated to impart an artificial color thereto. Baby
chicks or ducklings shall not be sold, offered for sale, bartered, or given
away as pets or novelties.
   (E)   No person may knowingly poison or cause to be poisoned any domestic
animal. It shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property
common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substance.
   (F)   No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any wild or
vicious animal for display or for exhibition purposes. This section shall not
be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, or
circuses.
   (G)   No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet. A
temporary permit shall be obtained for the keeping, care and protection of an
animal too young to survive without the presence of the adults native to the
area and that has been deemed to be homeless.
   (H)   No person shall kill or wound, attempt to kill or wound, or take the
eggs or young of any game or song bird.
(1997 Code, § 13.14) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975)
§ 93.26 DOGS IN PARKS.
   No person shall cause or permit any dog owned or kept by him to come upon
any public park or playground.
(1997 Code, § 13.15) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975; Am. Ord. 76-1, passed 1-22-
1976)
§ 93.27 NUMBER OF DOGS PERMITTED.
   No more than 2 dogs over the age of 4 months may be owned, harbored, or
reside at any 1 individual dwelling unit in the Village. This provision shall
not apply to kennel operators who are licensed by the Village.
(1997 Code, § 13.16) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975; Am. Ord. 81-8, passed 6-11-
1981; Am. Ord. C0-06-11, passed 5-2-2006)
§ 93.28 VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any dog which
has been found to be a vicious dog unless such dog is at all times kept in an
enclosure. The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the
enclosure are:
      (1)   If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary
care for the dog; or
      (2)   To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction,
provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a
tensile strength of 300 pounds and not exceeding 3 feet in length and shall be
under the direct control and supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog.
   (B)   Any dog which has been found by an Animal Control Officer or a court
to be a vicious dog and which is not confined to an enclosure shall be
impounded by the Animal Control Officer, or the law enforcement authority
having jurisdiction in such area and shall be turned over to a licensed
veterinarian to be humanely dispatched.
   (C)   If the owner of a dog, which has been determined to be vicious and
subsequently found not to be confined to an approved enclosure, does not appeal
the Village’s impoundment of the animal for purposes of destroying the animal
to the Circuit Court of Cook County within 7 working days of impoundment, the
dog may be humanely destroyed. A dog found to be a vicious dog, subsequent to
impoundment shall not be released to the owner until an Animal Control Officer
approves the enclosure as defined in this chapter.
   (D)   If the owner of the dog has not appealed the impoundment order to the
Circuit Court in the county in which the animal was impounded within 7 working
days, the dog may be humanely dispatched. A dog found to be a vicious dog shall
not be released to the owner until the Animal Control Officer approves the
enclosure as defined in this section.
   (E)   No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away the dog.
(Ord. C0-98-17, passed 9-24-1998)
Penalty, see § 93.99
§ 93.29 DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance by
permitting any dangerous dog or other animal to leave the premises of its owner
when not under control by leash or other recognized control methods.
   (B)   Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs for the
physically handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police-owned dogs are exempt from
this chapter; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs while the dog is
performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under this chapter,
each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies in accordance with §
93.23. It shall be the duty of the owner of such exempted dog to notify the
Animal Control Officer of any change of address. In the case of a sentry or
guard dog, the owner shall keep the Animal Control Officer advised of the
location where such dog shall be stationed. The Animal Control Officer shall
provide the Police and Fire Departments with a categorized list of such
exempted dogs and shall promptly notify such Departments of any address changes
reported to him.
(Ord. C0-98-17, passed 9-24-1998)
§ 93.30 PIT BULLS; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS.
   Ownership of Pit Bulls, as such dogs are defined in this chapter, shall, in
addition to any other requirements imposed by this chapter or state law, be
subject to the following requirements:
   (A)   No owner shall permit a Pit Bull outside of its enclosure unless it
is:
      (1)   Securely muzzled;
      (2)   On a nonretractable leash or chain with a tensile strength of 300
pounds and not exceeding 3 feet in length; and
      (3)   Is under the direct control and supervision of the owner, or a
family member, 16 years of age or older.
   (B)   The owner of a Pit Bull shall display Village-approved signage on all
entrances to the property. Such sign shall state "Beware of Dog", "Pit Bull
Dog", or "Dangerous Dog" and shall be displayed in a conspicuous manner. Such
sign shall have lettering that is clearly legible and at least 2 inches in
height, and shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the fence enclosing
the yard of the residence or gate thereto, or, where a Pit Bull is also kept
within the residence, at any entrance doors to the building or residence where
the Pit Bull resides.
   (C)   Prior to obtaining a Village permit for a Pit Bull, an owner shall be
required to install an exterior enclosure, as defined in this chapter, and to
keep the Pit Bull within the enclosure at all times the animal is on the
owner's property but not within the owner's residence.
   (D)   All gates on fences at residences and enclosures where a Pit Bull is
kept or resides shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching
mechanisms designed to securely close and lock the gate.
   (E)   No Village permit shall be issued for ownership of a Pit Bull over 4
months of age without proof that the Pit Bull has been spayed or neutered.
   (F)   In addition to permitting requirements set forth elsewhere in this
chapter, no Village permit shall be issued for ownership of a Pit Bull without
the submission of proof by the owner that:
      (1)   The Pit Bull has received obedience training from a certified,
licensed trainer in the past calendar year and has passed the obedience test
related to said training; and
      (2)   The owner has a current homeowners or renter's insurance policy
covering the address where the Pit Bull is kept or resides.
   (G)   No Village permit shall be issued for ownership of a Pit Bull to a
tenant without a signed consent from the landlord indicating that the Pit Bull
is allowed to reside on the premises. The tenant shall have to comply with the
enclosure provision and each of the other provisions set forth in this chapter.
   (H)   No Village permit shall be issued for ownership of a Pit Bull for a
residence that is within 1,500 feet of a school, public park, playground, day
care facility, or other similar facility. This division shall not apply to Pit
Bulls who resided at such a residence prior to the effective date of this
amendatory ordinance of 2006 and for whom valid Village permits evidencing such
residency had previously been obtained.
(Ord. C0-06-11, passed 5-2-2006) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating or aiding in or abetting the violation of any
provision of this chapter or counterfeiting or forging any certificate, permit,
or tag, or making any misrepresentation in regard to any matter prescribed by
this chapter, or resisting, obstructing, or impeding the Animal Control Officer
or any authorized officer in enforcing this chapter, or refusing to produce for
inoculation any dog or cat in his possession not confined at all times to an
enclosed area, or who removes a tag from a dog or cat for purposes of
destroying or concealing its identity, is guilty of a petty offense for a first
or second offense and shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $1,000,
and for a third and subsequent offense, is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor as
defined in the Illinois Criminal Code.
   (C)   If any violation be continuing, each day’s violation shall be deemed a
separate violation.
   (D)   If any person is found guilty of being cruel to animals, all permits
issued to said person to own animals shall be immediately revoked and no new
permit shall be issued for minimum of one year and shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000.
   (E)   If an animal without provocation attacks or injures any person who is
peaceably conducting himself in any place where he may lawfully be, the owner
of the animal is liable in damages to such person for the full amount of the
injury sustained and shall, in addition thereto, be in violation of this
chapter for failure to control the animal and shall be subject to penalties as
provided under this chapter.
   (F)   When the existence of a dangerous or vicious animal is established,
the owner of such animal shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to
penalty imposed herein and in addition the court may enter a decree restraining
the owner from maintaining such a dangerous or vicious animal and the court may
decree such animal be humanely dispatched.
   (G)   Any person found to be in violation of §
93.30 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000.
Upon a person being found guilty of a third violation of §
93.30 within a calendar year, all permits issued to said person to own animals
shall be immediately revoked and no new permit shall be issued for a minimum of
1 year. Where a Pit Bull is subsequently found to be on the premises occupied
by an owner whose permits have been revoked pursuant to this division, said Pit
Bull shall be impounded and may be placed for adoption, humanely euthanized, or
otherwise disposed of in accordance with Illinois law.
(1997 Code, § 13.17) (Ord. 75-4, passed 6-26-1975; Am. Ord. C0-00-21, passed
11-20-2000; Am. Ord. C0-06-11, passed 5-2-2006)
CHAPTER 94: STREETS, ALLEYS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
94.01   Construction or repair
   
94.02   Injury to new pavement
   
94.03   Abutting owners to keep sidewalks in repair
   
94.04   Report of defects or obstructions
   
94.05   Obstructions
   
94.06   Barricades
   
94.07   Private use
   
94.08   Injuring streets
   
94.09   Deposits on sidewalks
   
94.10   Deposits in streets and gutters
   
94.11   Poles and wires
   
94.12   Playing games in streets
   
94.13   Openings and stairways in streets
   
94.14   Removal of snow and ice
   
94.15   Depositing snow on streets
   
94.16   Newsstands
   
94.17   Driveways
   
94.18   Vaults under street
   
94.19   Excavations
   
94.20   House numbers
   
94.21   Trees in streets
   
94.22   Restoration bond required for work to be performed on or affecting
public improvements
   
94.23   Block parties
   
94.24   Honorary facility/street signs
§ 94.01 CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR.
   (A)   Permit. It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any
public street, sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the same,
without first having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits
shall be made to the Building Director and shall state the location of the
intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person who is to do
the actual construction work.
   (B)   Bond. Each applicant for a permit to construct, repair or lay any
pavement on any street, alley or other public way shall file a bond with surety
conditioned to indemnify the Village for any loss or damage resulting from the
work undertaken or the manner of doing the same.
   (C)   Specifications. All street pavements and sidewalks shall be made in
conformity with specifications laid down or approved from time to time by the
Board of Trustees.
(1997 Code, § 9.01) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021) Penalty, see
 § 10.99
§ 94.02 INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon or
injure any newly laid street or sidewalk pavement while the same is guarded by
a warning sign or barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft or newly laid
pavement.
(1997 Code, § 9.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.03 ABUTTING OWNERS TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR.
   All public streets, alleys and sidewalk pavements shall be kept in good
repair. All sidewalks shall be kept in good repair by the abutting owners at
their own expense. In the event the Village shall sustain damages because of
the failure of the abutting owner to keep the sidewalks in good repair, such
owner shall be liable to the Village to the extent of such damages.
(1997 Code, § 9.03)
§ 94.04 REPORT OF DEFECTS OR OBSTRUCTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of every Village officer or employee becoming cognizant
of any defect in any alley, street or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, to
report the same to the Director of Public Works as soon as possible.
(1997 Code, § 9.04)
§ 94.05 OBSTRUCTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any
obstruction in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may
be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the Board of Trustees.
(1997 Code, § 9.05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.06 BARRICADES.
   (A)   Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street, sidewalk or
other public place or making any excavation in any such place shall maintain
suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the
work. Such barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime.
   (B)   Any defects in any pavement shall be barricaded to prevent any injury,
and any person properly maintaining any opening or excavation in any such place
shall guard such opening or excavation while the same remains open by proper
barricades and lights.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere with any barricade or
light lawfully placed to protect or mark any new pavement or excavation or
opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(1997 Code, § 9.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.07 PRIVATE USE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street, sidewalk or other
public place as space for the display or sale of goods or merchandise or for
peddling merchandise, or to write or mark any signs or advertisements on any
such place, or to use any such place for any private purpose unless authorized
to do so by the Board of Trustees.
(1997 Code, § 9.07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.08 INJURING STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to injure any sidewalk, street or alley or any
appurtenances thereto.
(1997 Code, § 9.08)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.09 DEPOSITS ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any material
which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any
glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or
property.
   (B)   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks
preparatory to delivery; provided, that the usable width of the walk is not
thereby reduced to less than 4 feet; provided, that no such article shall
remain on such walk for more than one-half hour.
(1997 Code, § 9.09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.10 DEPOSITS IN STREETS AND GUTTERS.
   It shall be unlawful to deposit in any public street or gutter any material
which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material or
sweepings, whether or not it is produced on the abutting premises, or any glass
or other articles which might cause injury to persons or property.
(1997 Code, § 9.10) (Ord. 55-14, passed 9-22-1955)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.11 POLES AND WIRES.
   It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any poles or wires on or over any
public street, alley or other public way without having first secured
permission from the Board of Trustees.
(1997 Code, § 9.11)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.12 PLAYING GAMES IN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley or sidewalk
where such games cause unnecessary noise or interference with traffic or
pedestrians.
(1997 Code, § 9.12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.13 OPENINGS AND STAIRWAYS IN STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway
in any public sidewalk or street or alley without a permit from the Board of
Trustees. All such lawfully maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable,
strong cover or a railing to the approval of the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   No such opening shall be maintained unless there is deposited or filed
with the Director of Finance a bond in the sum of $5,000 conditioned to
indemnify the Village for any loss, damage or liability which may result from
or be caused by such opening or from the use thereof.
(1997 Code, § 9.13)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.14 REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
   (A)   Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person having charge of
any building or lot of ground in the Village abutting upon any public way or
public place shall remove the snow and ice from the sidewalk abutting such
building or lot of ground.
   (B)   If the sidewalk is of greater width than 5 feet, it shall not be
necessary for such person to remove snow and ice from the same for a space
wider than 5 feet. In case the snow and ice on the sidewalk shall be frozen so
hard that they cannot be removed without injury to the pavement, the person
having charge of any building or lot of ground as aforesaid shall, within the
time specified, cause the sidewalk abutting on the premises to be strewn with
ashes, sand, sawdust or some similar suitable material, and, as soon thereafter
as the weather shall permit, thoroughly clean the sidewalk.
   (C)   The snow which falls or accumulates during the day, except on Sundays,
before 4:00 p.m. shall be removed within 3 hours after the same has fallen or
accumulated. The snow which falls or accumulates on Sunday or after 4:00 p.m.
and during the night on the other days shall be removed before 10:00 a.m. of
the day following.
(1997 Code, § 9.14)
§ 94.15 DEPOSITING SNOW ON STREETS.
   No person shall place snow on any street, alley, sidewalk, public way or
public grounds of the Village. (1997 Code, § 9.15) (Ord. —, passed 1-24-1952)
§ 94.16 NEWSSTANDS.
   (A)   Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, locate,
construct or maintain any newspaper stand on any public way or other public
place without obtaining a permit therefor from the Director of Finance. An
application for a permit for a newspaper stand shall be made to the Director of
Finance upon such form which shall be provided by him and shall be signed by
the applicant. The permit to erect, locate, construct or maintain a newspaper
stand shall state thereon the name and address of the permittee and the
location for each permit granted.
   (B)   Revocation. Any permit for the erection, location, construction or
maintenance of a newspaper stand on any public way or other public place may be
revoked by the Board of Trustees in their discretion.
   (C)   Construction and limitation on use. Newspaper stands shall be
constructed in accordance with the general design therefor to be approved by
the Director of Public Works and the Building Director and shall be maintained
upon the public streets under the direction and supervision of the Director of
Public Works and the Building Director. Nothing shall be exhibited, offered or
sold from newspaper stands except newspapers and magazines.
(1997 Code, § 9.16) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.17 DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   Permit.
      (1)   No person shall construct a driveway for vehicles or animals across
any sidewalk in the Village without having obtained a permit therefor.
Applications for such permits shall be made to the Building Director and shall
be accompanied by the fee required.
      (2)   No permit for the construction of a driveway for commercial use, or
the habitual use of any other than the owner or occupant of the premises
served, shall be issued except upon the order of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Permit fees. The fee for all permits to construct a driveway for
vehicles or animals across any sidewalk in the Village shall be $25 for private
driveways and $1 per foot for commercial and industrial driveways to be
measured from the curb including the flare.
   (C)   Construction. No driveway shall be so constructed or graded as to
leave a step, sharp depression or other obstruction in the sidewalk. The grade
shall be as nearly as possible the same as that of the adjoining sidewalk. It
shall be unlawful to have the surface finish of any driveway, where the same
crosses the sidewalk, constructed of such materials as to render it slippery
and hazardous for pedestrians, or to have the grade of such portion vary from
the grade of the sidewalk or be other than level.
   (D)   Aprons. A 2-foot concrete apron, 6 inches thick shall extend the full
width of the driveway on the property owner’s side of the sidewalk, wherever
such a driveway crosses a paved sidewalk, except where such apron is not
required because the driveway is constructed of concrete.
   (E)   Materials. Driveways shall be constructed of concrete or asphalt in
accordance with specifications established by the Village. Concrete driveways
and all sidewalks across any driveway shall be 6 inches in thickness. Driveways
shall be paved the entire distance between the curb and sidewalk.
   (F)   Maintenance. It shall be the duty of every person maintaining a
driveway to keep the same in good repair where it crosses the sidewalk and free
from obstruction and openings.
(1997 Code, § 9.17) (Am. Ord. C0-00-22, passed 11-20-2000; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.18 VAULTS UNDER STREET.
   (A)   Permit. It shall be unlawful to use any vault, space, room or
structure under any street or sidewalk in the Village without having first
secured a permit therefor as is herein required. Such permits shall be issued
by the Building Director on order of the Board of Trustees. Applications for a
permit to use or maintain a vault, space, room or structure under any street or
sidewalk in the Village shall be made in writing to the Building Director and
shall state thereon specifically the size of the space intended to be used or
maintained and the purpose for which it is to be used. Each application shall
contain an agreement by the applicant to abide by all the regulations contained
in this section.
   (B)   Bond. Each applicant for a permit to use or maintain a vault, space,
room or structure under any street or sidewalk in the Village shall file with
the application a bond in the sum of $5,000; with a surety to save the Village
harmless from any liability resulting from or caused by any accidents from such
vault, room or structure. In addition, each such applicant shall also file a
certificate evidencing that the applicant has in force a general liability
insurance policy in an amount not less than $100,000, which shall name the
Village as an additional insured and shall insure the Village from any
liability resulting from or caused by any accidents from the vault, room or
structure. Each applicant will also be required to sign an agreement which
states that the applicant shall hold the Village harmless from any liability
the Village might incur resulting from or caused by any accidents from the
vault, room or structure.
   (C)   Transfer. Whenever any premises abutting on any vault, space, room or
structure under any street or sidewalk in the Village for which a permit has
been issued, shall be conveyed, or whenever the interest, lease or right of
occupancy of the person holding the permit shall be transferred or conveyed,
the grantee or transferee must make application for a transfer of the permit to
him and must furnish a bond as is required in this section. A fee of $40 shall
be required for such transfer, and upon the payment of the fee and the full
compliance with the contents hereof a new permit shall be issued.
   (D)   Annual fee. The annual fee to be paid for such permits shall be $50
for each 5,000 cubic feet or fraction thereof included in the vault, room or
structure used or maintained under the permit.
   (E)   Protection of openings. All openings through the sidewalk or street
into any vault, room or structure shall be kept covered and guarded. If the
opening is a manhole or trap door, an adequate, strong, metal cover must be
provided and such cover must be equipped with a rough surface. Such cover shall
be flush with the sidewalk pavement.
   (F)   Storage of explosives or inflammable liquids; cesspools. No vault,
space, room or structure under any street or sidewalk in the Village shall be
used for the storage of explosives or of inflammable liquids nor shall a
cesspool be located therein.
   (G)   Construction. Vaults, rooms, spaces or structures shall be firmly
constructed so as to support the sidewalk over them, with the maximum load
which the sidewalk will carry, with a margin of safety of 50% over this maximum
load or weight. A minimum load of 250 pounds per square foot shall be provided
for. The Building Director shall inspect all such rooms, spaces, vaults or
structures to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this section.
(1997 Code, § 9.18) (Am. Ord. C0-00-22, passed 11-20-2000; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.19 EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Permit; compliance with regulations. It shall be unlawful for any
person to make any excavation in any street, alley, parkway or other public
place in the Village or to tunnel under any street, alley or parkway or other
public place in the Village without first having obtained a permit as is herein
required, or without complying with the provisions of this chapter or in
violation of or at variance from the terms of any such permit.
   (B)   Application for permit.
      (1)   Applications for permits to excavate or tunnel in or under streets,
alleys, parkways or other public places in the Village shall be made to the
Building Director and shall contain thereon the location of the intended
excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose thereof, and the person
doing the actual excavation work, and the name of the person for whom or for
which the work is being done.
      (2)   Such application shall also contain an agreement signed by the
person doing the work to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Issuance. No permit to excavate or tunnel in or under the streets,
alleys, parkways and other public places of the Village shall be issued unless
issuance of the permit has been approved by both the Building Director and the
Director of Public Works.
   (D)   Exemptions, Village work. The provisions of this section relative to
securing permits shall not apply to officers or employees of the Village
engaged in doing work for the Village, nor to persons or corporations doing
work for the Village under contract.
   (E)   Bond, insurance, hold harmless. The applicant for such permit shall
file with the Building Director the following:
      (1)   A bond in the sum of $5,000 conditioned to indemnify the Village
for any loss, liability or damage that may result or accrue from or because of
the making, existence or manner of guarding or constructing any such tunnel or
excavation. Such bond shall have as surety a corporation licensed to do
business in the state as a surety company;
      (2)   A certificate of insurance evidencing that the applicant is covered
by a general liability insurance policy, which names the Village as an
additional insured and insures the Village against any loss, liability or
damage that may result or accrue from or because of the making, existence or
manner of guarding or constructing any tunnel or excavation;
      (3)   An agreement signed by the applicant which states that the
applicant agrees to hold the Village harmless from any liability which the
Village might incur as a result or because of the making, existence or manner
of guarding or constructing any tunnel or excavation;
      (4)   An agreement signed by the applicant which provides that the
applicant agrees to replace from pole to pole any electric cables used in the
Village’s street lighting system which may be damaged by the applicant and that
the applicant agrees to replace any water mains or other Village property which
may be damaged by the applicant in a manner satisfactory to the Village.
   (F)   Fee. No permit to excavate or tunnel in or under the streets, alleys,
parkways or other public places in the Village shall be issued unless and until
the applicant therefor has paid to the Village a nonrefundable fee in the sum
of $250.
   (G)   Manner of excavating.
      (1)   In making any excavation or tunnel proper bracing shall be
maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining ground, and in excavations the
excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface, any portion which extends
beyond the opening at the surface.
      (2)   No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the
making of such excavations or tunnels, and notice shall be given to the persons
maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the Village department or
officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or
affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes,
cables or conduits shall be disturbed. In the event that pipes, cables or
conduits are damaged, the permittee shall repair or replace the damaged pipe,
cable or conduit to the satisfaction of the persons who own or maintain the
pipe, cable or conduit. In the event that cables for the Village's street
lighting system are damaged, the permittee must replace the damaged cable pole
to pole. Proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or
shrub wherever possible.
   (H)   Obstructing street. Not more than one-half the width of any street
shall be made unavailable for travel in connection with any excavation or
tunnel. If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work a temporary sidewalk shall
be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users.
   (I)   Time limit. Each application for a permit shall state the length of
time it is estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work until the
restoration of the surface of the ground, or until the refill is made ready for
the pavement to be put on by the Village, if the Village restores such surface
pavement. It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with this time limitation
unless the permission for an extension of time is granted by the Director of
Public Works.
   (J)   Restoration of surface.
      (1)   Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public
street, alley or other public place in the Village shall restore the surface
thereof to its original condition if there is no pavement there. Refills shall
be of suitable materials placed under the supervision of the Director of Public
Works and properly tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation
shall be left in the ground.
      (2)   If the excavation or opening has necessitated an opening in a
pavement, the refill shall be properly made so that the surface pavement can be
relaid by the Village in the same manner, thickness and character as the
surrounding pavement. Notice shall be given to the Director of Finance when
such opening is prepared for pavement, and the pavement shall be laid by the
Village either by contract or by Village employees. The surface relaid may
extend for one foot in every direction beyond the original opening.
   (K)   Inspections. The Building Director shall from time to time inspect all
excavations or tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley, parkway
or other public place in the Village to see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be given to them at least 24 hours
before the work of refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences.
(1997 Code, § 9.19) (Ord. 80-20, passed 9-25- 1980; Am. Ord. C0-00-22, passed
11-20-2000; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-
17-2021)
§ 94.20 HOUSE NUMBERS.
   (A)   Plat of numbers; assignment. The plat of house and lot numbers on file
with the Director of Sustainability and Innovation of the Village and
identified by the Director of Sustainability and Innovation as “Lot and House
Number Plat of the Village of Maywood” is adopted as the official designation
of lot and house numbers in the Village. The Director of Sustainability and
Innovation shall have charge of the plat and shall assign to each building
erected its proper number as shown thereon.
   (B)   Placement of numbers. It is the duty of the owner, agent or occupant
of every building to number the same as provided by the plat provided for in
this section. Each of the figures of every number shall be not less than 2- 1/
2 inches in length so marked as to be easily and distinctly read. The numbers
shall be placed in a conspicuous place on or at the side of or above the front
door of the buildings to which the same are attached.
   (C)   Refusal to number building. Any agent, owner or occupant of any
building erected in the Village, who shall for 30 days neglect or refuse to
number any building owned or occupied by them in conformity with the plat
referred to shall be subject to a penalty of $100 and a similar penalty for
every 30 days thereafter that they shall neglect or refuse to number the
building.
(1997 Code, § 9.20) (Am. Ord. C0-00-22, passed 11-20-2000; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 94.21 TREES IN STREETS.
   (A)   Planting. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant any tree or
bush in any public street or parkway or other public place without having first
secured a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the
Director of Public Works. All trees and shrubs to be planted shall be placed
subject to the directions and approval of the Director of Public Works.
   (B)   Removing and cutting down. It shall be unlawful for any person to
remove or cut down any tree or shrub in any street, parkway or other public
place without a permit from the Director of Public Works.
   (C)   Injuring. It shall be unlawful for any person to injure any tree or
shrub planted in any street, parkway or other public place.
   (D)   Attaching signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any
sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any street, parkway or
other public place.
   (E)   Trees or shrubs overhanging street.
      (1)   Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other
public place in the Village in such a way as to impede or interfere with
traffic or travel on such public place shall be trimmed by the owner of the
premises on which such tree or shrub grows, so that the obstruction shall
cease.
      (2)   Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or
across any public street, sidewalk or place shall be removed by the owner of
the premises on which such tree grows or stands.
      (3)   The Director of Public Works may trim or remove or cause to be
trimmed or removed any tree or shrub so that the obstruction or danger to
traffic or passage shall cease.
   (F)   Poles and wires.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any wire or rope to
any tree or shrub in any public street, parkway or other public place without
the permission of the Director of Public Works.
      (2)   Any person given the right to maintain poles and wires in the
streets, alleys or other public places in the Village shall, in the absence of
a provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles
free from and away from any trees or shrubs in such places so far as may be
possible and shall keep all such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to
the supervision of the Director of Public Works so that no injury shall be done
either to the poles or wires or the shrubs and trees by their contact.
   (G)   Gas pipes. Any person maintaining any gas pipe in the Village shall,
in the absence of a provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep
such pipes free from leaks so that no injury shall be done to any trees or
shrubs.
(1997 Code, § 9.21)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 94.22 RESTORATION BOND REQUIRED FOR WORK TO BE PERFORMED ON OR AFFECTING
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Anyone who has entered into a contract with anyone or any entity to
conduct any construction, repair or other services or work on or affecting
Village property and public improvements, or anyone who is engaged in
construction, repair or other services on or affecting Village property and
public improvements, including, but not limited to, sewers, sidewalks, public
parkways, streets, alleys and other public rights-of-way shall provide an
executed restoration bond to the Village Community Development Department. The
Building Director shall determine what work constitutes work “on or affecting
Village property and public improvements” under this section. The bond shall be
for the amount of $10,000, such bond to be executed by a surety company
acceptable to the Village Building Director or the Director’s designee. The
executed restoration bond shall be submitted to the Community Development
Department and approved and executed by the Building Director or the Director’s
designee before anyone may commence any construction, repair or other services
or work on or affecting Village property and public improvements. The bond
shall serve as security for the restoration, maintenance and repair to its
original or improved condition of all public property affected by the
construction, repair or other work and services performed on or affecting
Village property and public improvements. The full face amount of the bond is
subject to forfeiture by the Village for a period of 1 year after completion of
any such work, if after completion of the work, the responsible party has not
restored, maintained or repaired Village property or public improvements to its
original condition.
   (B)   Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon a
finding of violation, be subject to a fine of not less than $100 and nor more
than $500 per violation per day for each offense.
(Ord. C0-98-21, passed 12-10-1998; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am.
Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 94.23 BLOCK PARTIES.
   (A)   Block party defined. A BLOCK PARTY is a public event in which members
of a single neighborhood congregate for mutual enjoyment. The block party must
be open to all residents of the street where the event is being proposed. It
does not include private parties, such as a birthday party or reception where
invitations do not include all members of the neighborhood affected by the
block party event or where the majority of invitees are from areas outside of
the subject neighborhood.
   (B)   Permit application and fee. Any applicant seeking to obtain a permit
for a block party shall file a written application with the Village Clerk on
forms provided by the Village Clerk’s Office not less than 14 days before the
date for which the block party is proposed, The Clerk shall promptly transmit
the application to the Police, Fire and Public Works Department Directors for
review and approval. Once the Departments have reviewed, the application shall
be forwarded to the Village Manager for final approval. The application for a
permit shall be accompanied by a deposit of $100. The deposit consists of a
nonrefundable processing fee of $50 and a deposit of $50 returnable to the
applicant provided that the block party site is cleaned up of debris and the
Village barricades are returned to the Village in good condition.
   (C)   Approval of permit. 
      (1)   Subject to conditions necessary for the health, safety and welfare
of the community, the Village Manager shall give final approval if, after
receipt of a completed application approved by all applicable Department
Directors (police, fire and public works), the Village Manager finds that:
         (a)   The block party will not substantially or unnecessarily
interfere with traffic in the area contiguous to the activity, or that, if the
activity will substantially interfere with such traffic, that there are
available at the time of the proposed activity sufficient Village resources to
mitigate the disruption;
         (b)   There are available at the time of the block party a sufficient
number of peace officers and traffic control aides to police and protect lawful
participants in the activity and non-participants from traffic related hazards
in light of the other demands for police protection at the time of the proposed
block party;
         (c)   The block party will not be conducted for any purpose or in any
manner made unlawful elsewhere in this Code or by any other local, state or
federal law;
         (d)   The block party will not interfere with the use of the requested
area by another party to whom a valid permit has been issued for the same area,
or does not conflict with another application, or with a previously scheduled
use;
         (e)   Signatures have been secured on a Village provided petition form
by not less than 66% for streets with homes on both sides, and 75% for streets
with homes on one side; of the residences in the block where the party is
planned to be held, concurring with the date, time, place and regulations of
the event. Only a single signature per household shall be counted in
determining concurrence percentage;
         (f)   There will be no live music at the block party event; any use of
amplified music must not constitute a violation of the Village’s noise control
regulations;
         (g)   The block party will not unreasonably interfere with or restrict
the delivery of Village or emergency services or business or residential
activity within the proposed event area, on the proposed event area, or other
areas of the Village. No stage which poses an impediment to emergency vehicle
access shall be erected in the street;
         (h)   The block party will not unreasonably conflict in time or
location with other permitted and/or prescheduled activities in the proposed
event area or proposed event route;
         (i)   The applicant has not violated the ordinances of the Village
with respect to block parties within the past 24 month period;
         (j)   The application has the concurrence of all of the applicable
Village Department heads and Village Manager.
      (2)   Should the Village Manager find that any of the foregoing standards
have not been met, the block party application shall be denied. Should the
Village Manager determine, after approval that an applicant or event is no
longer in compliance with the foregoing, the block party may be revoked
pursuant to division (G) of this section.
   (D)   Limitations. No block may hold more than 2 block parties per calendar
year. Block parties cannot be held on consecutive days. There can be no more
than 6 block parties scheduled throughout the Village on any given day.
   (E)   Rules governing block parties. The Village Manager shall implement and
enforce a set of Rules that govern holding block parties within the Village.
These rules shall be approved by the Village Board from time to time. After
approval by the Village Board, the rules, and each amendment thereto, shall be
incorporated by reference in to this section. A copy of the rules can be
obtained from the Village Clerk’s office.
   (F)   Barricades. The Village shall provide barricades for all block parties
to block the streets. Only Village provided barricades shall be used to block
the streets. The Village will drop the barricades off the day prior to the
block party and shall pick them up the day following the block party. The
barricades shall be returned to the Village in good condition. Failure to
return the barricades or return the barricades in good condition will result in
a loss of the $50 deposit.
   (G)   Clean-up of block party site. An applicant must remove debris, trash
or garbage resulting from the conduct of the event from public property and
private property within the vicinity of the event within 24 hours after the end
of the event; provided, however, that the applicant shall remove and lawfully
dispose of any injurious substance or material immediately after the deposit
thereof. Such cleanup shall also include the removal of trash, litter, garbage
and debris from Village trash receptacles and proper disposition of such trash,
litter, garbage and debris. Failure to comply will result in a loss of the $50
deposit.
   (H)   Revocation.
      (1) The Village Manager may, after issuance, revoke a block party permit
in writing for failure to comply with the provisions of this section,
conditions placed on the face of the permit, applicable codes or ordinances of
the Village, or State or Federal statutes. Revocation is a final decision.
      (2)   If, in the judgment of the Village Manager or the Police Chief, the
block party creates or will create a public nuisance or the rules of conduct
set forth in this section are not followed or the conditions upon which
approval was given are not being complied with or are no longer true, the
Village Manager may, upon the issuance of a written order stating the reason
for such conclusion and without notice or hearing, immediately revoke the
permit and require the use of public property to immediately cease. No person
shall continue to use public property contrary to such order.
      (H)   Penalties for violation. A violation of this section is punishable
by fine of not more than $1,000 per incident.
(Ord. CO-2012-46, passed 11-5-2012)
§ 94.24 HONORARY FACILITY/STREET SIGNS.
   (A)   Designations. Honorary facility / street sign designations are to be
made according to a Village of Maywood Honorary Designation of A Public
Facility or Right-Of-Way Application and Procedure (Honorary Facility / Street
Sign Designation Policy) adopted by the Village Board, as amended.
   (B)   Approval authority. The Village of Maywood Board of Trustees shall
have final approval authority for applications or proposals for honorary
facility / street sign designations.
   (C)   Record of designations. All current honorary facility / street sign
designations shall be recorded in Table II (Naming of Streets) of the Table of
Special Ordinances in the Village Code.
(Ord. CO-2022-26, passed 12-6-2022)
CHAPTER 95: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
95.01   Food service sanitation ordinance adopted
   
95.02   State food regulations adopted
   
95.03   Retail food establishment sanitation regulations
   
95.04   Home kitchen operation
§ 95.01 FOOD SERVICE SANITATION ORDINANCE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The definitions; the inspection of food service establishments; the
issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to operate food service
establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or
drink; and the enforcement of this chapter shall be regulated in accordance
with the unabridged form of the 1976 Edition of the Food and Drug
Administration “Food Service Sanitation Ordinance,” 3 certified copies of which
shall be on file in the office of the Village Clerk and there kept available
for public use, inspection and examination; provided, that the words
“municipality of” in unabridged form shall be understood to refer to the
Village.
   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalty provided for violation of this Code. In addition such
person may be enjoined from continuing such violation.
(1997 Code, § 14.01) (Ord. 71-14, passed 10-14-1971)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.02 STATE FOOD REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The Village adopts by reference the provisions of 410 ILCS 650 et seq. to
the extent it may be authorized by law to adopt such regulations, except that
any provisions of 410 ILCS 650 et seq. relating to or imposing a penalty are
not adopted. Any person violating any provision of 410 ILCS 650 et seq. herein
adopted shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of this Code.
(1997 Code, § 14.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.03 RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT SANITATION REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Rules and regulations adopted. The issuance, suspension and revocation
of permits, licenses, or certificates to operate retail food establishments;
the prohibiting of sale of unsound or mislabeled food or drink; the enforcement
of this section shall be regulated in accordance with division (E) of this
section concerning the compliance procedures; the inspection of food service
establishments shall be regulated in accordance with the 1991 and all
subsequent editions of or amendments to the Illinois Department of Public
Health's publication currently titled, “Food Service Sanitation Rules and
Regulations,” on file with the Secretary of State; the inspection of retail
food stores shall be regulated in accordance with the 1989 and all subsequent
editions of or amendments to the Illinois Department of Public Health’s
publication currently titled, “Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules and
Regulations,” that are on file with the Secretary of State.
   (B)   Copies of regulations. Three copies of each of the Illinois Department
of Public Health’s publication currently titled, “Food Service Sanitation Rules
and Regulations,” and “Retail Food Store Sanitation Rules and Regulations,”
shall be on file at the Village Clerk’s office.
   (C)   Effect. This section shall be in full force and effect immediately
after its adoption and publication as provided by law; and at all times, all
ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with the ordinance set forth in
this section are repealed.
   (D)   Severability. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of
this section is declared unconstitutional or the application thereof is held
invalid, the validity of the remainder of this section and the application of
such provisions to other person’s circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
   (E)   Compliance procedures; general. No person shall operate a food
establishment who does not have a valid permit, license, or certificate issued
to them by the Village. Only a person who complies with the requirements of
this section shall be entitled to receive or retain such a permit, license or
certificate. Permits, licenses, or certificates are not transferable. A valid
permit, license or certificate shall be posted in every food establishment.
   (F)   Issuance of permit, license, or certificate.
      (1)   Any persons desiring to operate a food establishment shall make
written application for a permit, license, or certificate on forms provided by
the Village. Such application shall include:
         (a)   Name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the
proposed food establishment; and
         (b)   Signature of each applicant.
      (2)   Prior to approval of an application for a permit, license, or
certificate, the Village and the Cook County Department of Public Health shall
inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with the
requirements of this section.
      (3)   The Village shall issue a permit, license, or certificate to the
applicant if its inspection reveals that the proposed food establishment
complies with the requirements of this section.
   (G)   Suspension of permit, license, or certificate.
      (1)   The Village may, without a warning, notice or hearing suspend any
permit, license or certificate to operate a food establishment if the holder of
the permit, license or certificate does not comply with requirements of this
section, or if the operation of the food establishment otherwise constitutes a
substantial hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of
the notice required by division (H) of this section. When a permit, license, or
certificate is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a
permit, license, or certificate is suspended, the holder of the permit,
license, or certificate shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing within 20
days of receipt of a request for hearing.
      (2)   Whenever a permit, license or certificate is suspended, the holder
of the permit, license or certificate or the person in charge shall be notified
in writing that the permit, license or certificate is, upon service of the
notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for hearing will be
provided if a written request for hearing is filed with the Village by the
holder of the permit, license or certificate within 10 days. If no written
request for hearing is filed within 10 days, the suspension is sustained. The
Village may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer
exist.
   (H)   Revocation of permit, license, or certificate.
      (1)   The Village may, after providing opportunity for hearing, revoke
the permit, license or certificate for serious or repeated violations of any of
the requirements of this chapter or for interference with the Village or the
Cook County Department of Public Health in the performance of duty.
      (2)   Prior to revocation, the Village shall notify, in writing, the
holder of the permit, license or certificate, or the persons in charge, of the
specific reason(s) for which the permit, license or certificate is to be
revoked and that the permit, license or certificate shall be revoked at the end
of 10 days following service of such notice unless a written request for
hearing is filed with the Village by the holder of the permit, license or
certificate within such 10-day period. If no request for hearing is filed
within the 10-day period, the revocation of the permit, license or certificate
becomes final.
   (I)   Service of notices. A notice provided for in this section is properly
served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit, license or
certificate, or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the
holder of the permit, license or certificate. A copy of the notice shall be
filed in the records of the Village.
   (J)   Hearings. The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted
by the Village at a time and place designed by it. Any oral testimony given at
a hearing shall be reported verbatim, and the presiding officer shall make
provisions for sufficient copies of the transcript. The Village shall make a
final finding based upon the complete hearing record and shall sustain, modify
or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of
the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit, license or
certificate by the Village.
   (K)   Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a permit,
license or certificate has become final, the holder of the revoked permit,
license or certificate may make written applications for a new permit, license
or certificate.
   (L)   Inspection frequency and cost. An inspection of a food establishment
shall be performed at least once every 6 months. The cost of such inspections
shall be $130 per inspection, $260 per year for 2 inspections. Additional
inspections of the food establishments shall be performed as often as necessary
for the enforcement of this section and will be charged at the above per
inspection rate.
   (M)   Access. Duly authorized representatives of the Village or the Cook
County Department of Public Health, after proper identification, shall be
permitted to enter any food establishment at any reasonable time for the
purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this section. The
representatives shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment
to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies purchased, received or
used.
   (N)   Report of inspections. Whenever an inspection of a food establishment
or commissary is made, the findings shall be recorded on the inspection report
form on file with the Village. The inspection report form shall summarize the
requirements of this section and shall set forth a weighted point value for
each requirement. Inspectional remarks should be written to reference, by item
number, the item violated and should state the correction to be made. The
rating score of the establishment shall be the total of the weighted point
values for all violations, subtracted from 100. A copy of the completed
inspection report form shall be furnished to the person in charge of the
establishment at the conclusion of the inspection. The completed inspection
report form is a public document that shall be made available for public
disclosure to any person who requests it according to law.
   (O)   Correction of violations.
      (1)   The completed inspection report form shall specify a reasonable
period of time for the correction of the violation found; and correction of the
violations shall be accomplished within the period specified, in accordance
with the following provisions:
         (a)   If an imminent health hazard exists, such as complete lack of
refrigeration or sewage backup into the establishment, the establishment shall
immediately cease food operations. Operations shall not be resumed until
authorized by the Cook County Department of Public Health;
         (b)   All violations of 4 or 5 point weighted items shall be corrected
as soon as possible, but in any event, within 10 days following inspection. A
followup inspection shall be conducted to confirm correction at the discretion
of the Cook County Department of Public Health;
         (c)   All 1 or 2 point weighted items shall be corrected as soon as
possible, but in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection;
         (d)   When the rating score of the establishment is less than 60, the
establishment shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations
within 48 hours. One or more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time
intervals to assure correction;
         (e)   In case of temporary food establishments, all violations shall
be corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected within 24 hours,
the establishment shall immediately cease food operations until authorized to
resume by the Cook County Department of Public Health.
      (2)   The inspection report shall state the failure to comply with any
time limits for correction may result in cessation of food operations. An
opportunity for hearing on the inspection findings or the time limits or both
will be provided if a written request is filed with the Village within 10 days
following cessation of operations. If a request for hearing is received, a
hearing shall be held within 20 days of receipt of the request.
      (3)   Whenever a food establishment is required under the provisions of
this section to cease operations, it shall not resume operations until it is
shown on reinspection that conditions responsible for the order to cease
operations no longer exist. Opportunity for reinspection shall be offered
within a reasonable time.
   (P)   Inspection report form. On file in the Village offices.
   (Q)   Examination and condemnation of food. Food may be examined or sampled
by the Cook County Department of Public Health as often as necessary for
enforcement of this section. The Cook County Department of Public Health may,
upon written notice to the owner or persons in charge, specify with
particularity the reasons therefore, place a hold order on any food which it
believes is in violation of §§ 750.100, 750.110, 760.100, 760.110, of the
Illinois Department of Public Health's publications currently titled, “Food
Service Sanitation Rules and Regulations,” or “Retail Food Store Sanitation
Rules and Regulations,” respectively, or any other section of this section. The
Cook County Department of Public Health shall tag, label or otherwise identify
any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be
used, served or moved from the establishment. The Cook County Department of
Public Health shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in
the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public
health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished.
The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within 10
days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. If a
request for hearing is received, the hearing shall be held within 20 days after
receipt of the request. On the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the
hold order may be vacated, or the owner or person in charge of the food may be
directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into
compliance with the provisions of this section.
   (R)   Submission of plans.
      (1)   Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively
remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food
establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such
constructions, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the Village and
the Cook County Department of Public Health for review and approval before
construction, remodeling or conversion is begun.
      (2)   The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout,
arrangement, mechanical plans and construction materials of work areas and the
type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The Village and the
Cook County Department of Public Health shall approve the plans and
specifications if they meet the requirements of this section. No food
establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except
in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Village and the
Cook County Department of Public Health.
   (S)   Pre-operational inspection. Whenever plans and specifications are
required by division (R) of this section to be submitted to the Village and the
Cook County Department of Public Health, the Village and the Cook County
Department of Public Health shall inspect the food establishment prior to the
start of operations to determine compliance with the approved plans
specifications and with the requirements of this section.
   (T)   Procedure when infection is suspected. When the Cook County Department
of Public Health has reasonable cause to suspect possible disease transmission
by an employee of a food establishment, it may secure a morbidity history of
the suspected employee or make any other investigations as indicated and shall
take appropriate action. The Cook County Department of Public Health may
require any or all of the following measures:
      (1)   The immediate exclusion of the employee from employment in food
employments;
      (2)   The immediate closing of the food establishment concerned until, in
the opinion of the Cook County Department of Public Health, no further danger
of disease outbreak exists;
      (3)   Restriction of employee’s services to some area of the
establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease;
   (4)   Adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and of
other employees and of his and their body discharges.
   (U)   Reinspection costs. In the event a reinspection is deemed necessary by
the inspector, the cost of any and all subsequent reinspection shall be borne
by the holder of the license.
   (V)   Conditional license or permit. When structural, plumbing, electrical,
ventilation or similar such defects exist in an established food facility that
may require significant expenditures to correct, but are not considered to be
imminent health hazards, a conditional license or permit may be granted at the
discretion of the health authority. Under no circumstances will a conditional
license or permit be issued for more than 2 consecutive 12 month periods. The
purpose of the conditional license or permit is to allow a reasonable period of
time for correction of existing defects.
   (W)   Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall
be fined not more than $1,000 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation continues.
   (X)   Injunctions. The Village shall have the right to enjoin any person or
establishment in the event violations occur on a continuing basis.
(1997 Code, § 14.03) (Ord. CO-92-10, passed 8-13-1992; Am. Ord. C0-00-19,
passed 11-20-2000; Am. Ord. C0-00-38, passed 12-4-2000; Am. Ord. C0-04-36,
passed 11-15-2004; Am. Ord. CO-2014-35, passed 11-5-2014)
§ 95.04 HOME KITCHEN OPERATION.
   Home kitchen operations are authorized in the Village, subject to the
following requirements:
   (A)   Home kitchen operations shall obtain and maintain a Village-issued
business license pursuant to §
110.01 (Licenses Required) of the Village Code.
   (B)   Home kitchen operations shall submit a written disclosure to the
Village yearly, on or before each May 1, including a Federal Employer
Identification Number, a copy of a current Food Protection Manager
Certification from the Illinois Department of Public Health and such other
information and materials as the Health Officer may require.
   (C)   Home kitchen operations shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   Packaging or production shall be limited to non-potentially
hazardous baked goods, as defined in 410 ILCS 625/4(a), as amended from time to
time, which shall occur in a kitchen of a primary domestic residence for direct
sale by the owner or a family member.
      (2)   Non-potentially hazardous baked goods include goods such as, but
not limited to, breads, cookies, cakes, pies and pastries are allowed. Only
high-acid fruit pies that use the following fruits are allowed: apple, apricot,
grape, peach, plum, quince, orange, nectarine, tangerine, blackberry,
raspberry, blueberry, boysenberry, cherry, cranberry, strawberry, red currants
or a combination of these fruits.
      (3)   Monthly gross sales shall not exceed $1,000.
      (4)   A notice shall be provided to the purchaser that the product was
produced in a home kitchen.
      (5)   The food package shall be affixed with a label or other written
notice provided to the purchaser that includes:
         (a)   The common or usual name of the food product; and
         (b)   Allergen labeling as specified in federal labeling requirements
by the United States Food and Drug Administration.
      (6)   The food shall be sold directly to the consumer.
      (7)   The food shall be stored in the residence where it is produced or
packaged.
      (8)   A Food Protection Manager Certification from the Illinois
Department of Public Health shall be maintained.
      (9)   Additional requirements, if any, from 410 ILCS 625/3.6. as amended
from time to time.
   (D)   Upon receipt of a complaint regarding a home kitchen operation, the
Health Officer shall make or cause to have made an inspection of a home kitchen
operation. Other inspections, surveys, investigations and studies of home
kitchen operations shall be performed by the Health Officer as may be necessary
to determine that home kitchen operations are constructed, operated and
maintained in compliance with the standards and requirements set forth herein.
   (E)   Section 12 (On-Site Development Standards), Subsection 12.4 (Accessory
Structures and Uses), Subsection F (Home Occupations) of the Maywood Village
Zoning Code applies to home kitchen operations.
(Ord. CO-2020-26, passed 10-6-2020)
CHAPTER 96: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
   
96.01   Compliance required
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Location
   
96.04   Permit required
   
96.05   Recirculation pools
   
96.06   Materials
   
96.07   Structural design
   
96.08   Walk areas
   
96.09   Fences
   
96.10   Steps or ladders
   
96.11   Water supply
   
96.12   Inlets
   
96.13   Outlets
   
96.14   Recirculation system and appurtenances
   
96.15   Electrical requirements
   
96.16   Safety precautions
   
96.17   Operation and maintenance
   
96.18   Inspection
Cross-reference:
   Building Regulations, see
Ch. 150
   Village Planning, see
Ch. 151
   Zoning Code, see
Ch. 157
§ 96.01 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   Every existing private residential swimming pool and every such pool
constructed, installed and maintained hereafter shall comply with all
applicable provisions of this Code, the Village's Zoning Code and the special
provisions of this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 28.01) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967; Am. Ord. CO-2010-006, passed
4-15-2010)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   PERMANENT POOL. Any private pool that is not removable when not in use.
   PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL. A man-made rigid or semi-rigid receptacle
for water, having a depth at any point of 24 or more inches, intended for the
purpose of swimming, wading or bathing, and including all appurtenant equipment
constructed, installed, and maintained in or above the ground inside or outside
of a building used for a single family dwelling unit. This includes portable or
temporary type pools of plastic, rubberized cloth or similar materials. A
PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL shall be maintained by an individual
primarily for the sole use of his or her household and guests and not for the
purpose of profit or in connection with any business operated for profit. No
swimming pool intended for the use of members and their guests of a nonprofit
club or organization, or limited to house residents of a multiple dwelling
unit, a block, subdivision, neighborhood, community or other specified area of
residence shall be permitted in any residential zoning district within the
Village.
   TEMPORARY POOL. A private pool that is removable when not in use.
(1997 Code, § 28.02) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967; Am. Ord. CO-2010-006, passed
4-15-2010)
§ 96.03 LOCATION.
   (A)   Private residential swimming pools shall be permitted in any
residential zoning district within the Village.
   (B)   No portion of a permanent, private residential swimming pool shall be
located at a distance less than 8 feet from any side or rear property line or
building line. No portion of a temporary pool shall be located at a distance
less than 3 feet from any side or rear property line or building line. Pumps,
filters and pool water disinfection equipment installations shall be located at
a distance not less than 8 feet from any side property line. Pools and
appurtenant equipment shall not be permitted in the side yard between
dwellings.
(1997 Code, § 28.03) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967; Am. Ord. CO-2010-006, passed
4-15-2010)
§ 96.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall construct, install, enlarge, use or alter any private
residential swimming pool, whether permanent or temporary, without first having
obtained an annual permit therefor from the Village. Written application for
such permit shall be filed with the Building Director and shall be accompanied
by plans and specifications sufficiently detailed to enable determination of
whether the proposed pool complies with the requirements of this chapter. No
permit for an existing pool shall be granted by the Building Director until
compliance with this chapter is demonstrated to their satisfaction. Permit fees
shall be as set forth in §
150.004.
(1997 Code, § 28.04) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8- 1967; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 96.05 RECIRCULATION POOLS.
   All private residential swimming pools in excess of 1500 gallons capacity
shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation of the water is
maintained through the pool by pumps; the water drawn from the pool being
filtered, clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool. Such
pumps and recirculating equipment must have underwriters laboratory approval.
(1997 Code, § 28.05) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967)
§ 96.06 MATERIALS.
   (A)   Private residential swimming pool walls and floor shall be constructed
of any impervious material which will provide a tight tank with white or light
colored finished easily cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom surface of the
pool shall have a nonslip finish as smooth as possible.
   (B)   In the case of permanent pools below grade, the side and end walls of
such pool shall present a smooth finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at
least 6 feet or shall have a slope or curvature meeting one of the following
conditions:
      (1)   The pool wall may be vertical for 30 inches from the water level
below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any point
equal to the difference between the depth, at that point, and 30 inches;
      (2)   To a depth of 6 feet, except as in subsection (1) above, the wall’s
slope shall not be less than 1 foot horizontal in 6 feet vertical.
   (C)   Permanent below grade pool walls that are to be lined with a plastic
liner shall be constructed of masonry or reinforced concrete.
(1997 Code, § 28.06) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967)
§ 96.07 STRUCTURAL DESIGN.
   Residential swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure
from within and to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty. The
slope of the bottom of any part of a permanent type below-grade pool in which
the water is less than 5 feet in depth shall not be more than 1 foot in each 10
feet. The maximum slope where water is 5 feet or more in depth shall not exceed
1 foot in 2 feet.
(1997 Code, § 28.07) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967)
§ 96.08 WALK AREAS.
   Unobstructed walk areas not less than 36 inches wide shall be provided to
extend entirely around the pool.
(1997 Code, § 28.08) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967)
§ 96.09 FENCES.
   (A)   All private residential swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by
a fence or other structure on the same property as the property on which the
pool is located. Such fence or other structure shall not be less than 4 feet
nor more than 6 feet in height. All openings in such fence or other structure
shall be equipped with gates or doors with a self-closing and self-latching
device designed to keep and capable of keeping such door or gate securely
closed at all times when not in actual use and to prevent small children from
opening the door or gate; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling and
forming any part of the enclosure herein required need not be so equipped.
   (B)   Above ground type pools, whether temporary or permanent, which have an
above ground fence designed and constructed as an integral part of the pool,
which fence encloses the periphery of the pool to a height of 4 feet to 5 feet
above the top edge of the pool, shall be deemed to meet the enclosure
requirements of this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 28.09) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967; Am. Ord. 73-15, passed 8-9-
1973; Am. Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 96.10 STEPS OR LADDERS.
   Means of ingress and egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be
provided for all private residential swimming pools. At least 1 such means of
ingress and egress shall be located on a side of the pool at both the deep and
shallow end of the pool. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of
nonslip material and be at least 3 inches wide for their full length. Steps and
ladders shall have a hand-rail on both sides. For above ground type pools,
whether temporary or permanent, ladders or steps or devices used for entering
the pool must be removed to a minimum distance of 5 feet from the pool when the
pool is not being used.
(1997 Code, § 28.10) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967)
§ 96.11 WATER SUPPLY.
   No source of water other than that secured from the Village water
distribution system shall be used in private residential swimming pools.
(1997 Code, § 28.11) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967)
§ 96.12 INLETS.
   (A)   Private residential swimming pool water recirculation system inlet
shall be located so as to produce so far as possible uniform circulation of
water throughout the pool without the existence of dead spots and to carry pool
bottom deposits to the outlets and shall discharge at a minimum depth of 10
inches below the pool overflow level.
   (B)   Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding make-up
water as needed. There shall be no physical connection between the water supply
line and the pool system. If a hose connection from a sill cock or other
plumbing fixture is to be used for supplying make-up water, then an approved
vacuum breaker shall be installed between the sill cock or control valve at the
fixture and the hose connection. The vacuum breaker shall be installed at a
height not less than 7 feet 6 inches above the floor, platform or ground upon
which a person would stand when operating the sill cock or control valve.
   (C)   The system supplying recirculated water and make-up water to the pool
shall be constructed in conformance with Village ordinances.
(1997 Code, § 28.12) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967)
§ 96.13 OUTLETS.
   In private residential swimming pools, water circulation system outlets
shall be located so as to provide at least 1 outlet at the deepest point of the
pool. All pool drain outlets on permanent pools shall be equipped with
gratings. Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the
pool into the sewer. No direct connection shall be made to the sewer. Water
drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the sewer system during
periods of rain or storms. At no time shall the rate of drain water discharge
exceed a flow of 250 gallons per minute.
(1997 Code, § 28.13) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967)
§ 96.14 RECIRCULATION SYSTEM AND APPURTENANCES.
   (A)   Equipment required. Every private pool shall be equipped with a water
recirculation system. The recirculation system shall consist of pumping
equipment, a hair and lint catcher, rapid pressure filters, together with all
necessary pipe connections to the pool inlets and outlets and for backwashing
the filters, and equipment for disinfecting the pool water.
   (B)   Pump and filter capacity. The recirculation pump and filter tank and
surface area shall be sufficient to achieve the minimum turnover, filtration
and backwashing rates required by this chapter.
   (C)   Turnover period and filtration rate. There shall be 1 turnover of the
entire contents of the pool every 12 hours or less at a filtration rate of not
more than 3 gallons per square foot of filter area per minute.
   (D)   Hair and lint catcher. A hair and lint catcher shall be installed on
the suction side of the recirculation pump to prevent hair, lint, and other
extraneous matter from reaching the pump and filters. The hair and lint catcher
shall be so designed that it can be easily dismantled for cleaning and
inspection and shall be so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning.
   (E)   Filter backwashing and rate. The filters shall be backwashed at
regular intervals at a minimum rate of 10 gallons per square foot of filter
area per minute, or at the manufacturer’s recommended backwash flow rate,
whichever is greater. The backwash cycle shall be continued until the backwash
water is clear. All backwash water and effluents shall be discharged to the
sewer through an indirect connection.
   (F)   Test kit. A test kit with permanent color standards shall be provided
at every private pool and be used at frequent intervals to check on the
adequacy of the chlorine treatment.
   (G)   Disinfection. Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all
pool water. Any disinfection method using materials other than chlorine
compounds shall be subject to the approval of the Building Director.
Disinfection equipment installed for the use of chlorine compounds shall have
sufficient capacity to maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of 0.5 parts
per million. The disinfectant shall be introduced into the recirculation system
ahead of the filters.
   (H)   Chlorine. Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be made use of as a
disinfection method for pool water.
(1997 Code, § 28.14) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8- 1967; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 96.15 ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in
conjunction with private residential swimming pools shall be in conformance
with the Village ordinances.
   (B)   No current carrying electrical conductors, including extension cords,
shall cross private residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground
or within 15 feet horizontally of such pool.
   (C)   All metal fences, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to private
residential swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a result
of contact with broken overhead or other conductors, or from any other cause,
shall be effectively grounded.
(1997 Code, § 28.15) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967)
§ 96.16 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
   (A) A skilled swimmer shall be present at all times that private residential
swimming pools are in use.
   (B)   Every private residential swimming pool shall be equipped with one or
more throwing ring buoys and one or more light but strong poles not less than
12 feet in length for making reach assists.
(1997 Code, § 28.16) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967)
§ 96.17 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   No private residential swimming pool shall be made use of between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Adequate lighting must be provided at night.
   (B)   A suitable substantial protective cover shall be provided and
installed over all outdoor private residential swimming pool surfaces when not
being used. Such cover shall be of suitable material sufficiently strong when
pulled taut to sustain the weight of at least 100 pounds and shall be securely
attached to the outer side of the pool when same is unattended or not in use.
   (C)   Every pool shall be so designed and constructed as to facilitate
cleaning and shall be maintained and operated in such a manner as to be clean
and sanitary at all times.
   (D)   No private residential swimming pool shall be used, kept, maintained
or operated in the Village if such use, keeping, maintaining or operating shall
be the occasion of any nuisance or shall be dangerous to life or detrimental to
health.
(1997 Code, § 28.17) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8-1967)
§ 96.18 INSPECTION.
   The Building Director and Sanitarian Department periodically shall inspect
all private residential swimming pools to determine whether or not the
provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the Village regarding
health, sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being complied with. For
this purpose, they are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises in the
Village to investigate the existence of a swimming pool and to determine
whether or not any such pool complies with the requirements of this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 28.18) (Ord. 69-14, passed 6-8- 1967; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
CHAPTER 97: VILLAGE PARKS
Section
   
97.01   Parks open from dawn to dusk
   
97.02   Permit required to extend park hours
   
97.03   Permit decision
   
97.04   Appeal of denial of permit
   
97.05   Bond
   
97.06   Tot lots
   
97.07   Regulations
§ 97.01 PARKS OPEN FROM DAWN TO DUSK.
   All parks owned or maintained by the Village shall be open from dawn to dusk
unless otherwise authorized to be open pursuant to a permit validly issued
under this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 42.21) (Am. Ord. C0-03-20, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 97.02 PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXTEND PARK HOURS.
   (A)   The Village Manager may, upon application, issue a permit authorizing
a park, other than a park designated as a “tot lot” in §
97.06 to remain open for hours other than dawn to dusk for an event that is
social, recreational, educational, or cultural in nature. Permit applications
to have a park remain open past dusk or open prior to dawn shall be submitted
at least 15 days prior to the event to the Village Manager.
   (B)   The permit application shall, at a minimum, identify:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person making the
application;
      (2)   If the event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such
organization;
      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be
the primary organizer of the event and will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4)   The date when the event is to be held;
      (5)   The starting and ending time of the event;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons who will attend;
      (7)   A statement as to the reason the person or organization is
requesting to have the park remain open outside of the hours between dawn and
dusk;
      (8)   A statement as to what specific portion of the park the event will
occupy;
      (9)   Any additional information which the Village Manager shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
issue.
(1997 Code, § 42.21) (Am. Ord. C0-03-20, passed 7-21-2003; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 97.03 PERMIT DECISION.
   (A)   The Village Manager shall issue a decision concerning a permit within
7 working days after submission of a fully completed application.
   (B)   A permit may issue when, upon consideration of the application and
such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
      (1)   The conduct of the event is not reasonably likely to cause injury
to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct, or create a disturbance;
      (2)   The event will not require the diversion of so great a number of
police officers of the Village to properly police the event so as to prevent
normal police protection to the Village;
      (3)   The event is reasonably suited in its estimated size, scope, and
purpose for the park or portion thereof where it is proposed to be held; and
      (4)   The event is not being held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods, or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private
profit.
(1997 Code, § 42.21) (Am. Ord. C0-03-20, passed 7-21-2003; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 97.04 APPEAL OF DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   In the event that the Village Manager denies a permit application, the
applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial to the Village President
and Board of Trustees of the Village. The appeal must be made within 14 days
after receipt of the notice of rejection or denial. The President and Board of
Trustees shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Board of Trustees.
   In the event such meeting is after the requested date of the event, the
President and Board of Trustees shall not be required to conduct a special
meeting for the purpose of an appeal.
(1997 Code, § 42.21) (Am. Ord. C0-03-20, passed 7-21-2003; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 97.05 BOND.
   No permit shall issue without the posting of a cash bond with the Village in
the amount of $100 for events expected to be attended by 25 persons or less,
and, for events expected to be attended by more than 25 persons, in the amount
of $100 plus an additional $2 for each person over the initial 25. Such bond is
to be used for clean-up costs or damage resulting from the event and shall be
refunded in full if no such costs or damage are incurred. The permittee shall
be responsible for any clean-up costs or the actual damage repair costs that
exceed the amount of the cash bond.
(1997 Code, § 42.21) (Am. Ord. C0-03-20, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 97.06 TOT LOTS.
   (A)   The following parks are designated as "tot lots" for purposes of this
chapter:
      (1)   Fifth and Lexington Park - located at 5th Avenue and Lexington;
      (2)   Twenty-Second and Lexington Park - located at 22nd Avenue and
Lexington;
      (3)   Tot Lot Park - located at 4th Avenue and Huron; and
      (4)   Waterworks Park - located at 9th Avenue and Wolcott.
   (B)   The use of tot lots is specifically reserved and maintained for
children 12 years of age and under who are accompanied by a parent, legal
guardian, or other responsible adult.
(1997 Code, § 42.21) (Am. Ord. C0-03-20, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 97.07 REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to be within any park owned or
maintained by the Village at a time or in a manner other than as authorized by
this chapter unless the person is within the right-of-way of a public road or
street.
(1997 Code, § 42.21) (Am. Ord. C0-03-20, passed 7-21-2003)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 98: TREES, SHRUBS AND OTHER PLANTS
Section
   
98.01   Title
   
98.02   Purpose and intent
   
98.03   Definitions
   
98.04   [Reserved]
   
98.05   Village Arborist
   
98.06   Permits
   
98.07   Public nuisances
   
98.08   Interference with Arborist
   
98.09   Appeal
   
98.99   Penalty
§ 98.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Village of Maywood Tree
Ordinance" of Maywood, Illinois.
(Ord. C0-98-20, passed 9-10-1998)
§ 98.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote and protect the
public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the regulation of
the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other plants within
the Village.
   (B)   Intent. It is the intent of the Board of Trustees that the terms of
this chapter shall be construed so as to promote:
      (1)   The planting, maintenance, restoration and survival of desirable
trees, shrubs and other plants within the Village; and
      (2)   The protection of community residents from personal injury and
property damage and the protection of the Village from property damage, caused
or threatened by the improper planting, maintenance, or removal of trees,
shrubs, or other plants located within the community.
(Ord. C0-98-20, passed 9-10-1998)
§ 98.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   ARBORICULTURAL SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS OF PRACTICE FOR MAYWOOD. (The
title hereinafter shall be “Arboricultural Specifications Manual”). A manual
prepared by the Arborist pursuant to the ordinance containing regulations and
standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees, shrubs and other
plants upon Village owned property.
   ARBORIST. The Village Arborist of Maywood, Illinois.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The record owner or contract purchaser of any parcel of
land.
   TREES, SHRUBS and OTHER PLANTS. All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except
lawn grass and flowers less than 24 inches in height.
   VILLAGE OWNED PROPERTY. Property within the Village limits and;
      (1)   Owned by the Village in fee simple absolute; or
      (2)   Implied or expressly dedicated to the public for present or future
use for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or for public easements.
(Ord. C0-98-20, passed 9-10-1998)
§ 98.04 [RESERVED].
 
§ 98.05 VILLAGE ARBORIST.
   (A)   Establishment. The position of the Arborist is established.
   (B)   Duties. The Arborist shall perform the following duties.
      (1)   TThe Arborist, with the assistance of the Infrastructure and
Sustainability Committee, shall develop and each subsequent year update the
Urban Forestry Plan. The Plan shall outline urban forestry program activities
for a minimum of the next 5 years. This plan shall describe the urban forestry
activities to be undertaken by the Village, the reasons for those activities,
the possible funding source(s), the means of accomplishing the activities, the
alternatives available to the city to fund or accomplish the activity, the
projected date of completion, and the consequences if the activity is not
completed. Activities may include but are not limited to street tree inventory,
planting, tree removal, beautification projects and educational projects.
      (2)   The Arborist, with the assistance of the Infrastructure and
Sustainability Committee, shall develop and periodically review and revise, as
necessary, the Arboricultural Specifications Manual. This Manual shall contain
regulations and standards for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees,
shrubs and other plants upon Village owned property.
      (3)   The Arborist shall cause the Urban Forestry Plan and the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual and all revisions and amendments to it to
be published and promulgated and shall cause 3 copies of the Manual and all
revisions and amendments to be available for public inspection at the office of
the Clerk. Notice that such information is available for public inspection
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation with Cook County at
least 1 week day of each of 4 consecutive weeks immediately following the
initial availability of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual or revisions
or amendments thereto. The Arboricultural Specifications Manual and any
revisions and additions thereto shall become effective on the tenth day
following the final publication in a newspaper of general circulation required
under this subsection.
      (4)   The Arborist shall make available to any interested person copies
of the Tree Ordinance, information about the activities of the Infrastructure
and Sustainability Committee, copies of the Arboricultural Specifications
Manual and copies of the Urban Forestry Plan.
      (5)   The Arborist shall administer the Urban Forestry Plan, the Tree
Ordinance and the provisions of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual.
      (6)   The Arborist shall perform whatever acts are necessary, including
the planting and maintenance of trees, shrubs and other plants located on
Village owned property to conform with the Urban Forestry Plan, the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual and this chapter.
      (7)   The Arborist shall issue such permits as are required by this
chapter and shall obtain as a condition precedent to the issuance of such
permits the written agreement of each person who applies for such permits that
he or she will comply with the requirements of this chapter, the Urban Forestry
Plan and with the regulation and shall have the right to inspect all work
performed pursuant to such permits. If the Arborist finds that the work
performed is not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter the Urban
Forestry Plan or with the regulations or standards of the Arboricultural
Specifications Manual, the Arborist shall provide written notice of his finding
to the permit applicant. The notice shall contain a copy of subsection (B)(5)
of this section, and:
         (a)   The permit shall be nullified and shall be void; and
         (b)   The Arborist may issue a written order that the permit applicant
cease and desist all work for which the permit was required; and
         (c)   The permit applicant shall be subject to penalty under the terms
of this chapter; and
         (d)   The Arborist may take steps to correct the results of the non-
complying work and the reasonable costs of such steps shall be charged to the
permit applicant.
      (8)   The Arborist shall establish a program of public information and
education that will encourage the planting, maintenance, or removal of trees,
shrubs and other plants on private property in furtherance of the goals of the
Urban Forestry Plan.
(Ord. C0-98-20, passed 9-10-1998; Am. Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 98.06 PERMITS.
   (A)   Scope of requirement. No person except the Arborist, an agent of the
Arborist, public utility company or a contractor hired by the Arborist may
perform any of the following acts without first obtaining from the Arborist a
permit for which no fee shall be charged, and nothing in this section shall be
construed to exempt any person from the requirements of obtaining any
additional permits as are required by law:
      (1)   Plant trees or shrubs on Village owned property or treat, prune,
remove or otherwise disturb any tree, shrub or other plant located on Village
owned property, except that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit
owners of property adjacent to Village owned property from watering or
fertilizing, without a permit, any tree, shrub or other plant located on such
Village owned property;
      (2)   Trim, prune or remove any tree or portions thereof if such tree or
portions thereof reasonably may be expected to fall on Village owned property
and thereby to cause damage to persons or property;
      (3)   Place on Village owned property, either above or below ground
level, a container for trees, shrubs or other plants;
      (4)   Damage, cut, tap, carve, or transplant any tree, shrub, or other
plant located on Village owned property; attach any rope, wire, nail, sign,
poster or any other manmade object to any tree, shrub or other plant located on
Village owned property;
      (5)   Dig a tunnel or trench on Village owned property.
   (B)   Issuance. Within 7 days of receipt of the application, the Arborist
shall issue a permit to perform within 30 days of the day of issuance any of
the acts specified in division (A) of this section for which a permit is
requested whenever:
      (1)   Such acts would result in the abatement of a public nuisance; or
      (2)   Such acts are not inconsistent with the development and
implementation of the Urban Forestry Plan or with any regulations or standards
of the Arboricultural Specifications Manual; and whenever,
      (3)   An application has been signed by the applicant and submitted to
the Arborist detailing the location, number, size and species of trees, shrubs
or other plants that will be affected by such acts, setting forth the purpose
of such acts and the methods to be used and presenting any additional
information that the Arborist may find reasonably necessary;
      (4)   The applicant agrees to perform the work for which the permit is
sought in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Urban Forestry
Plan and with the regulations and standards set forth in the Arboricultural
Specifications Manual; and
      (5)   The applicant certifies that he or she has read and understands
those provisions of the Urban Forestry Plan, this chapter and of the
Arboricultural Specifications Manual which are pertinent to the work for which
the permit is sought; and
      (6)   If the work for which a permit is issued entails the felling of any
tree or part thereof, located on private property, which, as a result of such
felling reasonably may be expected to fall upon Village owned property and if
such felling is done by one other than the owner of the property on which such
felling is done, then the applicant shall agree to indemnify and to hold the
Village harmless for all damages resulting from work conducted pursuant to the
permit and shall deposit with the Director of Finance a liability insurance
policy in the amount of $100,000 per person/$300,000 per accident for bodily
injury liability and $50,000 aggregate for property damage liability, which
policy shall name the Village as an additional insured.
   (C)   Public utility companies. Public utility companies shall notify the
Village Arborist prior to the initiation of pruning cycles which will involve
trees located on Village owned property for the purpose of maintaining safe
line clearance. The notice shall state the estimated time frame of the pruning
cycle as well as the planned locations in the Village where the work will be
performed. All pruning work shall be carried out in accordance with accepted
arboricultural standards. Public utility companies shall also notify the
Village Arborist prior to the installation or maintenance of underground
utilities if such activity will occur within the dripline of trees located on
Village owned property. In the case of severe storms, natural disasters or
other emergencies, a public utility company may perform any required pruning or
underground utility maintenance necessitated by such situation and thereafter
notifies the Village Arborist of the work performed.
(Ord. C0-98-20, passed 9-10-1998)
§ 98.07 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   General. The following constitute a public nuisance in the Village:
      (1)   Any dead or dying tree, shrub, or other plant, whether located on
Village-owned property or on private property;
      (2)   Any otherwise healthy tree, shrub or other plant, whether located
on Village-owned property or on private property, which harbors insects or
diseases which reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree, shrub or
other plant;
      (3)   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof, whether located
on Village-owned property or on private property, which by reason of location
or condition constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of
the general public;
      (4)   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located
on Village-owned property or on private property which obstructs the free
passage of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a street sign on
city property;
      (5)   Any tree, shrub or other plant or portion thereof whether located
on Village-owned property or on private property which dangerously obstructs
the view as such may be determined by the Village Engineer pursuant to this
chapter.
   (B)   Right to inspect. The officers, agents, servants and employees of the
city have the authority to enter onto private property whereon there is located
a tree, shrub, plant or plant part that is suspected to be a public nuisance.
   (C)   Abatement. The following are the prescribed means public nuisances are
abated under this chapter:
      (1)   Any public nuisance under this chapter which is located on Village-
owned property shall be pruned, cut, trimmed or removed or otherwise treated by
the property owner or his agent in whatever fashion is required to cause the
abatement of the nuisance within a reasonable time after its discovery;
      (2)   Any public nuisance as defined under this chapter which is located
on privately owned property shall be pruned, cut, trimmed or removed or
otherwise treated by the property owner or his agent in whatever fashion is
required to cause the abatement of the nuisance.
      (3)   The Village may provide notice, abate nuisances, and file liens for
the cost of such abatement against properties containing nuisances under this
section by following the procedures set forth in §
92.25 of this Code.
      (4)   The Arborist or Building Director is empowered to cause the
immediate abatement of any public nuisance if the nuisance is determined by the
Arborist or Building Director to be an immediate threat to any person or
property.
(Ord. 42, passed 10-7-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-
2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 98.08 INTERFERENCE WITH ARBORIST.
   No person shall unreasonably hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the
Arborist or his agents while engaged in the execution or enforcement of this
chapter.
(Ord. C0-98-20, passed 9-10-1998)
§ 98.09 APPEAL.
   Any party who elects to dispute any action or decision by the Village
Arborist or Infrastructure and Sustainability Committee shall be entitled to
appeal to the Village Board for a final determination.
(Ord. C0-98-20, passed 9-10-1998; Am. Ord. CO-2021-19, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply
with any notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, upon being
found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $200 for
each separate offense. Each day during which any violation of the provisions of
this chapter, the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree, shrub or other plant
located on Village owned property is caused, the cost provisions of this
chapter, upon being found guilty of violation, shall be subject to a fine not
to exceed $200 for each separate offense. Each day during which any violation
of the provisions of this chapter shall occur or continue shall be a separate
offense. If, as the result of the violation of any provision of this chapter,
the injury, mutilation, or death of a tree, shrub or other plant located on
city owned property is caused, the cost of repair or replacement of such tree,
shrub or other plant shall be borne by the party in violation. The replacement
value of trees and shrubs shall be determined in accordance with the latest
revision of A Guide to the Professional Evaluation of Landscape Trees, Specimen
Shrubs and Evergreens, as published by the International Society of
Arboriculture.
(Ord. C0-98-20, passed 9-10-1998)
CHAPTER 99: TOWING OF VEHICLES
Section
   
99.01   Definitions
   
99.02   Authorization for towing or moving vehicles
   
99.03   Pre-tow notice for abandoned and inoperable vehicles
   
99.04   Pre-tow hearing procedures
   
99.05   Post-tow notice for hazardous and unlawful vehicles
   
99.06   Post-tow hearing procedures
   
99.07   Form for post-tow notice and signs
   
99.08   Form for pre-tow notice
   
99.09   Form for post-tow hearing
   
99.10   Form for owner’s permission to tow stolen vehicle
   
99.11   Application to be placed on towing list
   
99.12   Investigation and approval; creation of towing list
   
99.13   Insurance requirements
   
99.14   Operation of towing list
   
99.15   Heavy-duty towing
   
99.16   Removal from towing list
   
99.17   Tow service operator personnel qualifications
   
99.18   Prostitution and related offense; impoundment
   
99.19   Unlawful drugs; impoundment
   
99.20   Sound device restriction violations; impoundment
   
99.21   Driving while under the influence; impoundment
   
99.22   Driving on a suspended or revoked license; impoundment
   
99.23   Driving without proof of required insurance; impoundment
   
99.24   Driving without a valid license or permit; impoundment
   
99.25   Weapons-related offenses; impoundment
   
99.26   Aggravated fleeing and eluding a peace officer; impoundment
   
99.27   Dumping of garbag upon real property; impoundment
§ 99.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning. Any term
not defined herein shall have the meaning ascribed to it in other ordinances of
this Village, and if not defined in any other Village ordinances, it shall have
the meaning ascribed in the Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 ILCS 5.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle parked that has been unmoved for a period of at least 24
hours and from its condition, the period during which it has not been moved, or
some other circumstance appears to have been abandoned by its owner; or
      (2)   A vehicle parked in a public place or on private property without
the consent of the lot owner, proprietor or agent of the property, which person
has requested that the vehicle be towed; or
      (3)   A vehicle defined as abandoned, or capable of being towed, by any
other ordinances of the municipality, and which does not fall into the
categories of "hazardous" or "unlawful" vehicles, and therefore is not subject
to an immediate tow; or
      (4)   A vehicle that has been reported stolen;
      (5)   A vehicle that is parked in a location where the parking of the
vehicle is not allowed under the provisions of any applicable law, statute,
ordinance, rule or regulation; or
      (6)   A "trailer," as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-209, that is not attached
to or drawn by a "motor vehicle," as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-146, or not
attached to or drawn by a "truck," as defined by 625 ILCS 5/1-211.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The executive head of the Police Department or anyone
designated by them to perform the functions prescribed under this chapter.
   HAZARDOUS VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that has been involved in a collision and is disabled or
cannot be immediately moved by the owner or operator of the vehicle; or
      (2)   A vehicle that presents an immediate danger to the health, safety
or welfare of the members of the public; or
      (3)   A vehicle abandoned or disabled on a public street, way or alley
that is impeding the orderly flow of traffic or poses a potential danger to
pedestrians or other operators of vehicles; or
      (4)   A vehicle that must be moved to allow for snow removal from a
public street, way or alley.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle located on a public street, highway, alley or other
public way which is incapable of being driven;
      (2)   A vehicle not located in a public way, but which is visible from a
public street, sidewalk, highway, alley or other public way which for a period
of 5 days has been in such a state of disrepair that it is incapable of being
driven.
   OWNER. If a vehicle is registered, then the person in whose name the vehicle
is registered. If a
vehicle is not registered, or if registration cannot be determined, then the
person who holds legal title to a vehicle.
   TOW SERVICE OPERATOR. A person engaged in the business of, or offering the
services of, a vehicle wrecker or towing service, whereby motor vehicles are or
may be towed or otherwise moved from 1 place to another by use of a tow truck.
   TOW TRUCK. A truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to push,
tow, draw, or otherwise move disabled vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, tow
bar, tow line, auxiliary axle, or other means, and to render assistance to
disabled vehicles.
   TOWING LIST. A list maintained by the Police Department containing the names
of at least 2 but no more than 5 tow service operators licensed by the Village
and approved pursuant to this chapter to respond to requests for towing of
vehicles by the Police Department or Building and Code Enforcement Department
for the towing of vehicles.
   UNLAWFUL VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle that is the subject of a search and seizure by the Police
Department;
      (2)   A vehicle parked in violation of a state statute or a Village
ordinance which prohibits parking at the location in question or for the period
of time for which the vehicle has been parked, and where either the statute or
the ordinance authorized the vehicle to be towed and there are signs posted in
the general area stating that illegally parked vehicles are subject to being
towed;
      (3)   A vehicle parked in such a way that it obstructs access to or the
use of a fire hydrant;
      (4)   A vehicle parked in such a way that it obstructs or may obstruct
the movement of an emergency vehicle; or
      (5)   A vehicle operated with the permission, express or implied, of the
owner of record that is used in violation of 625 ILCS 5/12-503 or 12-611.
      (6)   A vehicle that has been reported stolen or bears license plates
that have been reported stolen or belong to a vehicle that has been reported
stolen.
      (7)   A vehicle parked on a lot with a vacant building without the
written permission of the owner of the lot, and/or without being listed as an
authorized vehicle on a list submitted pursuant to §§
72.25 and
150.031(A)(4) of this Code.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn, except devices moved by human power, devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, snowmobiles, and devices not
designed for use on public streets or highways. VEHICLES include but are not
limited to trucks, automobiles, motorcycles and motor driven cycles.
(1997 Code, § 44.01) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985; Am. Ord. CO-96-05, passed
6-13- 1996; Am. Ord. CO-97-06, passed 10-9-1997; Am. Ord. CO-02-29, passed 10-
7-2002; Am. Ord. C0-04-7, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0- 04-30, passed 9-20-
2004; Am. Ord. C0-07-24, passed 7-2-2007; Am. Ord. C0-08-33, passed 8- 19-2008;
Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2012-04, passed 2-7-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2012-41, passed 11-5-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2017-08, passed 3-9-2017; Am.
Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 99.02 AUTHORIZATION FOR TOWING OR MOVING VEHICLES.
   (A)   The towing or moving of vehicles by the Village, or by its approved
towing service operators on behalf of the Village, shall be authorized only by
the Police Department or the Building and Code Enforcement Department and only
under the circumstances provided in the Code.
      (1)   Towing without notice; immediate tows. Hazardous or unlawful
vehicles, as defined in §
99.01, may be towed immediately and without notice.
      (2)   Towing with prior notice. Abandoned and inoperable vehicles, as
defined in §
99.01, may be towed after notice and an opportunity for a pre-tow hearing as
set forth in §§
99.03 and
99.04.
   (B)   Towed vehicles shall be impounded at facilities designated by the
Police Department or the Village Manager until lawfully claimed or disposed of
in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code or
any other state statute governing the disposition and sale of abandoned, lost,
stolen and unclaimed vehicles.
(1997 Code, § 44.02) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985; Am. Ord. CO-96-05, passed
6-13- 1996; Am. Ord. C0-04-7, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-30, passed 9-20-
2004; Am. Ord. C0- 07-24, passed 7-2-2007; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009;
Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 99.03 PRE-TOW NOTICE FOR ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Notice pursuant to this section shall be personally delivered to the
owner of a vehicle that appears to be abandoned or inoperable or shall be
forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the
address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most current
registration list of the Secretary of State. The notice shall be in the form
provided in § 99.08 of this Code. In the event that a vehicle registered
outside the state is proposed to be towed, inquiry by computer, telephone or
letter shall be made of the Secretary of State of the particular jurisdiction
for the furnishing of the most current registered name and address of the owner
of the vehicle, and notice shall be mailed as provided herein to the address
furnished. Towing may occur within 5 days of personal service of notice,
provided no request for a hearing is received within that 5-day period. In
instances where personal service or delivery of the notice has occurred,
concurrent notice shall also be sent by certified or registered mail. In no
case will the Village be required to delay towing more than 5 days after
personal delivery of the notice or 7 days after the date of the mailing of the
notice in instances where no personal delivery has occurred, if no request for
a hearing has been received within that 5 or 7-day period. The notice required
by this division shall not be required if the vehicle that appears to be
abandoned or inoperable does not have a license plate, vehicle identification
number or other identification from which the owner of the vehicle can be
ascertained.
   (B)   A notice of intent to tow sticker with the earliest date upon which
the tow may take place and the address and phone number of the Police
Department shall be placed on the vehicle that appears to be abandoned or
inoperable.
(1997 Code, § 44.03) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985; Am. Ord. C0-02-29, passed
10-7-2002; Am. Ord. C0-04-9, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 99.04 PRE-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner or person entitled to possession of
a vehicle to be towed as an abandoned or inoperable vehicle shall have 7 days
after the date of mailing or 5 days after personal delivery of the notice to
request, in writing, a pre-tow hearing. Subsequent to this 5- or 7-day period,
the vehicle may be towed, if a written hearing request has not been received by
the Village Manager within the 5- or 7-day period, and any hearing rights under
the provisions of this chapter will be deemed waived.
   (B)   Scheduling of pre-tow hearings. The pre-tow hearing shall be scheduled
for a date within 14 days of the mailing or personal delivery of the pre-tow
notice. The Village shall not be required to delay towing longer than such a
14-day period.
   (C)   Request for pre-tow hearings. Requests for a pre-tow hearing are to be
made in writing to the office of the Village Manager. Forms for such request
shall be made available at the Police Department, the office of the Village
Manager and the office of the Building and Code Enforcement Department. At the
time of making the request, the owner will be provided a hearing date and time
by mail or in person as the circumstances require.
   (D)   Appointment of hearing officer. The Village Manager shall choose an
officer or employee of the municipality to serve as Hearing Officer. In no case
shall that Hearing Officer be an individual who was involved in the initial
decision to tow the vehicle. The Hearing Officer shall have the authority to
require the presence of the Code Enforcement Officer or police officer who
initiated the proposed tow or any other Village personnel.
   (E)   Nature of hearing. The hearing shall be informal in nature, and the
rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing will not be determinative of, or
adjudicate, any citation relative to any vehicle. After receiving all relevant
evidence, the Hearing Officer shall make a written decision based upon a
preponderance of the evidence as to whether towing of the vehicle is authorized
by the laws of the state or the ordinances of the Village, with a specific
statutory or ordinance section cited in the decision. The owner shall be
provided a copy of such pre-tow hearing decision.
   (F)   Decision to tow and rates to be charged. If the preponderance of the
evidence supports towing and compliance with the provisions of this chapter,
the Hearing Officer shall direct that the vehicle be towed, with any towing and
storage costs to then be imposed upon the owner thereof. The fees to be charged
for towing and storage services shall be no more than the maximum rates set by
the Village pursuant to the provisions of § 94.05 of this Code. The owner of
the vehicle having had such a hearing may avoid the towing by immediately
removing the vehicle from the improper location to a proper, lawful location
and correcting any unlawful condition of the vehicle.
   (G)   Decision not to tow. If the preponderance of the evidence fails to
support towing of the vehicle, the Hearing Officer shall direct that the
vehicle shall not be towed. The Village shall furnish a copy of such decision
to the owner, who may place it inside the vehicle in a location plainly visible
from the outside, such as the dashboard or rear window. No vehicle about which
such a decision has been rendered shall be towed by the municipality unless the
circumstances under which the decision was rendered have changed. If at some
subsequent time the Village should desire to tow the vehicle from the same
location, it shall follow the same procedures required for the towing of any
other similarly situated vehicle.
   (H)   Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions. Originals
or copies of all notices, pre-tow hearing decisions, towing reports, and any
associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Village for a
period of at least 5 years after each hearing, or after each tow if no hearing
was requested or held.
(1997 Code, § 44.04) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985; Am. Ord. C0-02-29, passed
10-7-2002; Am. Ord. C0-04-9, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-
2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 99.05 POST-TOW NOTICE FOR HAZARDOUS AND UNLAWFUL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Mailing or delivery of notice. Notice pursuant to this section shall
be forwarded by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, to the
address of the owner of any unlawful vehicle or hazardous vehicle as indicated
in the most current registration list of the Secretary of State, unless the
notice is personally delivered to the owner, in which case the date and time of
the delivery and the name of the Village employee making the delivery shall be
included among the records or reports pertaining to the towing of the vehicle.
The notice shall be in the form as provided in § 94.07(A) and (B) and shall be
personally delivered or sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, to the address of the owner of the vehicle as indicated in the most
current registration list of the Secretary of State. In the event that the
Village has towed a hazardous or unlawful vehicle which is not registered in
the state, inquiry by computer, telephone or letter shall be made to the
Secretary of State of the jurisdiction in which the vehicle is registered, if
such jurisdiction can be reasonably determined, for the furnishing of the most
current registered name and address of the owner of the vehicle, and notice
shall be mailed as provided herein to the address furnished. If the owner of a
vehicle cannot be ascertained because the vehicle lacks a license plate,
vehicle identification number and any other markings or information identifying
the owner, then a notice shall be posted in the Village Hall describing the
vehicle, stating that the vehicle has been towed, the reason for the tow and
that the vehicle will be sold or otherwise disposed of if it is not claimed by
its owner.
   (B)   Requests for post-tow hearings. Requests for hearings may be made in
writing or orally at the office of the Village Manager. The request for a
hearing must be received by the office of the Village Manager within 15 days of
the mailing or personal delivery of the notification of tow, or release of the
vehicle, whichever occurs first; otherwise, the right to a hearing shall be
deemed waived.
   (C)   Release of motor vehicles. Before the owner or person entitled to
possession of any impounded vehicle shall be permitted to remove the vehicle,
the owner or other person entitled to possession shall furnish evidence of his
identity, ownership of the vehicle, or his right to possession, sign a receipt
for the vehicle, and pay the amount currently owed for towing and storage fees
and any applicable Village fees or penalties to the towing service operator.
The Village Manager is authorized to promulgate regulations as to the documents
or other proof necessary to establish these facts.
   (D)   Establishment of maximum towing and storage rates. The owner shall pay
fees to the towing service operator for towing and storage on police-ordered
tows at rates that do not exceed maximum amounts to be administratively
established by the Village Manager and which may be revised from time to time.
The basic rates for such fees shall be shown in the form and sign concerning
vehicle release requirements set forth in §
94.07(A). However, nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent a competitive
towing service operator from charging less than the established maximum rates
for police-ordered or any other tows. In arriving at the maximum rates for
various services, the Village Manager shall consider such matters as the
prevalent market rates in the area for the towing of different types of
vehicles, the types of storage and area requirements for categories such as
large trucks and commercial vehicles, and the relative difficulties and amount
of work required to perform various types of towing operations. For
particularly difficult or unusual towing jobs, such as large or serious
accidents, the Village Manager is authorized to allow towing operators to
charge rates above those established for normal situations, which special
charges must be based upon the cost of services provided, taking into account
such matters as the man-hours and equipment time required for the job. A towing
service operator must fully itemize in writing the details of such a billing at
special rates for a particularly difficult or unusual tow and supply a copy of
the itemized bill to the owner and to the Village Manager. Any such special
rates charged must be customary in the towing industry in the area for the
nature and extent of the services provided. Every towing service operator and
the Police Department, the office of the Village Manager and the Building and
Code Enforcement Department shall have available a copy of the complete current
rate schedule and any special rate policy established by the Village Manager
for vehicle owners to view upon request. Included in the basic rate for each
tow originating with the Village shall be a $25 Village service fee. Such fee
shall be paid to the Village by approved tow service operators of the Village
on a monthly basis on or before the 10th day of the month following the month
in which the towed vehicle was released. In the event that a towed vehicle is
released by a tow service operator without the service fee having been
collected, the tow service operator shall remain liable to the Village for the
payment of such fee. The Village shall not be responsible for the collection of
receivables due for towing services performed by a tow service operator on
behalf of the village.
(1997 Code, § 44.05) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985; Am. Ord. C0-04-7, passed 3-
1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-30, passed 9-20-2004; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-
2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 99.06 POST-TOW HEARING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Opportunity for hearing. The owner of a vehicle towed as an immediate
tow, by or pursuant to the authority set forth in § 94.02(A), shall be provided
the opportunity for a post-tow hearing to determine the validity of such tow
and any towing or storage charges. The hearing will not be determinative of, or
adjudicate, any citation issued relative to any towed vehicle.
   (B)   Nature of the hearing and Hearing Officer. The nature of the hearing
and the appointment of the Hearing Officer shall be the same as set forth above
in § 94.04(D) and (E).
   (C)   Scheduling of post-tow hearings. Hearings shall take place as follows:
      (1)   In those instances where the vehicle has been released upon the
deposit of the full payment currently owed for towing and storage charges, and
the owner has properly requested a hearing, the hearing shall take place within
15 days after the release of such vehicle, unless the owner requests a later
date convenient to all parties;
      (2)   In those instances where the vehicle remains impounded, the hearing
shall take place, at the option of the owner:
         (a)   On the next day after an owner’s demand for such hearing,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, if such demand is made after 1500
hours (3:00 p.m.); or if the unavailability of a necessary witness or evidence
creates a particular difficulty in conducting the hearing on the next calendar
day, then a hearing shall be held on the second day following the request,
excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays; or
         (b)   If acceptable to the owner, within 15 days of said request on a
date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   Conduct of post-tow hearing. The Hearing Officer shall review all
evidence presented by the vehicle owner and Village officers and employees and
shall make a finding based upon the preponderance of the evidence presented as
to the lawful authority for the towing and storage of the vehicle. The Village
must establish such authority by a preponderance of the evidence.
   (E)   Post-tow hearing decision. For each hearing, the Hearing Officer shall
complete a post-tow hearing decision and supply a copy of the decision to the
owner by personal delivery if the owner is present, otherwise by mail. The
decision and findings shall be substantially as stated in the form for the
post-tow hearing decision, set forth in § 94.09 of this Code.
   (F)   Reports and documents to be retained; contesting decisions. All
originals or copies of the notices, post-tow hearing decisions, towing reports,
and any associated police reports or documents shall be retained by the Village
for a period of at least 5 years after each hearing, or after each tow if no
hearing was requested or held.
   (G)   Towing services subject to ordinance. Notwithstanding any other
ordinance or statutory provisions to the contrary, any towing service operator
authorized to perform tows on behalf of the Village must perform its services
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 44.06) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985; Am. Ord. C0-04-7, passed 3-
1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-9, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-30, passed 9-20-2004)
§ 99.07 FORM FOR POST-TOW NOTICE AND SIGNS.
   (A)   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
94.05 and
94.06 of this Code for posting in towing establishments and mailing or
delivering to owners:
NOTICE OF VEHICLE RELEASE
REQUIREMENTS AND HEARING RIGHTS
   Before the Owner or person entitled to possession of any impounded vehicle
shall be permitted to remove the same from custody of the Village or a towing
service operator, he shall furnish evidence of his identity and ownership of
the vehicle and right of possession thereto, shall sign a receipt for the
vehicle, and shall pay a fee not exceeding $               for a passenger
vehicle of not more than 7 passengers, and $                for a truck or
commercial vehicle to cover the cost of towing or removal to a vehicle pound or
authorized garage, and in addition thereto, the cost of storage not exceeding $
              per day for a passenger vehicle of not more than 7 passengers,
and $              per day for a truck or commercial vehicle. However, higher
fees may be charged in particularly difficult or unusual towing or storage
circumstances, for which rate information is available upon request at the
Police Department, the Building and Code Enforcement Department or the Village
Manager’s office or towing business location. If the Owner or person entitled
to possession wishes to contest the validity of the tow, he may obtain a
hearing under the conditions of either paragraph (A) or (B) stated below:
TO OBTAIN HEARING
   (A)   If the vehicle has been released, he may, within 15 days of the
release of the vehicle or the mailing or personal delivery to him of the
notification of the tow, whichever occurs fast, request a hearing by filing a
written request for a hearing in the office of the Village Manager, 115 S.
Fifth Avenue, Maywood, Illinois 60153, (312) 344-1200.
   The right to any hearing will be deemed waived unless a written request for
hearing is received by the office of the Village Manager within the applicable
15 day period.
   (B)   If the vehicle is still impounded, he may contact the above office and
obtain a hearing within the next day after the request, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays and holidays, unless the request is made after 3:00 p.m., or unless
there are particular difficulties in having the hearing on the next day, in
which case the hearing will take place on the second day thereafter, excluding
weekends and holidays.
NATURE OF HEARING
   The hearing shall be conducted according to the applicable ordinances, rules
and regulations of the Village and shall determine the validity of the
impounding of the vehicle and the imposition or refund of any towing or storage
charges, but the hearing will not determine or adjudicate any citations issued.
   If the Hearing Officer sustains the validity of the tow and storage, the
Owner or person entitled to possession will be required to pay all unpaid
towing and storage fees before obtaining the release of the vehicle.
   (B)   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§ 94.05
and 94.06 of this Code for the mailing or delivery of post-tow notice to
owners, including the form set forth in division (A) of this section:
   Post-Tow Incident Report No.              
To:    (Name)
    (Address)
Date of Certified or Registered Mailing:                 
               or
Date and Time of and Name of
Person Making Personal Delivery:
                                                                                                     
   POST-TOW NOTICE
   You are listed as the Registered Owner or person entitled to possession of
the following-described vehicle:
(make)     (model/year)
(other identifying features)
(license plate number and State)
which is impounded at:
(name and address of towing service operator or Village auto pound)
The vehicle was towed from  (location)  on  (date)  , by the authority of the
Village of Maywood, as an unlawful or hazardous vehicle, for the following
reason(s):
(facts forming basis of tow)
   The towing was authorized by  (ordinance or statutory section)  which
provides that:
                                                                                                                                                                                       
   You have the rights and payment obligations as set forth in the enclosed
Notice of Vehicle Release Requirements and Hearing Rights.
(1997 Code, § 44.07) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 99.08 FORM FOR PRE-TOW NOTICE.
   The following form shall be utilized in the administration of §§
94.03 and
94.04 of this Code for the mailing or delivery of pre-tow notices to owners:
   Pre-Tow Incident Report No.                    
To:    (Name)
    (Address)
   Date of Certified or Registered Mailing:             
               or
Date and Time of and Name of
Person Making Personal Delivery:                     
                                                                      
                                                             
   PRE-TOW NOTICE
   You are listed as the registered Owner or person entitled to possession of
the following described vehicle:
(make)     (model/year)
(other identifying features) (license plate number and State)
which is located at  (location)    
   This vehicle appears to be abandoned or inoperable for the following
reasons:
(facts forming basis of proposed tow)
   The Village of Maywood will tow the vehicle or cause it to be towed after 5
days from the above date of personal delivery of this Notice, or 7 days from
the above date of mailing of this notice in instances where no person delivery
has occurred, unless you move the vehicle to a lawful location or request a
hearing as set forth below. Any such hearing will only concern the proposed
towing, and will not be determinative of or adjudicate any parking ticket or
other citation concerning the vehicle. If the vehicle is towed, you will be
required to pay all towing and storage charges before the vehicle is released.
   The towing is authorized by  (ordinance or statutory section) , which
provides that:
                                                                                                                                        
   If you wish to request a hearing on the legality of the present location and
condition of your vehicle, you must contact the office listed below and file a
written request for such hearing which must be received by the office listed
below within 5 days from the date of personal delivery of this notice or 7 days
from the mailing of this notice in instances where no personal delivery has
occurred:
   Office of the Village Manager
   Village of Maywood
   40 W. Madison Street
   Maywood, Illinois 60153
(1997 Code, § 44.08) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985; Am. Ord. C0-02-29, passed
10-7-2002; Am. Ord. C0-04-9, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 99.09 FORM FOR POST-TOW HEARING.
   The following form shall be utilized by the Hearing Officer for post-tow
hearing decisions as required in § 94.06 of this Code:
   Post-Tow Incident Report No.                
   POST-TOW HEARING DECISION
   Following a hearing held after the towing of the vehicle as identified in
Post-Tow Notice bearing the same number as the Report Number stated above
concerning the vehicle owned by or under the control of  (Name of Owner)
("Owner"), the following findings and order are hereby entered, as checked in
the appropriate box and entered on the appropriate lines:
Amount Previously Paid by Owner for Towing and Storage $
                            
1.   Tow Authorized; Owner Responsible for All Charges. The towing and storage
of the vehicle was authorized by the following law of the State of Illinois:
                    ; or Village of Maywood Code Section or Ordinance No.
                  , and the Owner is liable for the full amount of towing and
storage fees incurred to date, in the amount of $                       .
2.   Tow Not Authorized. There was no authorization in law for the towing and
storage or the municipal employee causing the vehicle to be towed did not
comply with the requirements of the applicable statute or ordinance, as
follows:
                                                                                                                                       
   The Owner will not be charged for towing and storage and any amount
previously paid will be refunded by the municipality as shown here:
$              
3.   Tow Authorized; Storage Partially Reimbursable. The towing of the vehicle
was authorized by State Law:                  , or Village of Maywood Code
Section or Ordinance No.                   , but the Owner was caused to incur
additional improper storage charges because of improperly late notification of
towing or other reasons for which the Village or towing company are
responsible, as follows:
         Storage Amount to be Excused or
         Reimbursed to Owner:   $                   
         Towing and Storage Balance for which
         Owner is Responsible:   $                   
4.   Owner Failed to Appear, No Continuance Requested. This finding constitutes
a default against the Owner on the matters stated in the Post-Tow Notice. The
Owner is responsible for all towing and storage charges incurred to date, in
the amount of:    $                   .   
After making the appropriate computations with the amounts stated above in the
right-hand column for any Amount Previously Paid by Owner, and adding or
subtracting the appropriate amounts listed under paragraphs 1, 2, 3 or 4, the
final amount either owned by the Owner to date or to be refunded to the Owner
is hereby ordered as follows:
   Amount Currently Owed by Owner: $              
            or
   Amount to be Refunded to Owner: $              
   IMPORTANT FURTHER INFORMATION
   If the vehicle is presently still impounded, an order for the release of the
vehicle is attached to this Decision. The Owner must take possession of the
vehicle within 24 hours of the entry of this Decision, or he may be responsible
for further storage charges.
   ENTERED:  (date and time)
   SIGNATURE:                                       
                  Hearing Officer
(1997 Code, § 44.09) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985)
§ 99.10 FORM FOR OWNER'S PERMISSION TO TOW STOLEN VEHICLE.
   The following form shall be used by police officers when obtaining
permission from vehicle owners to tow stolen vehicles that are recovered:
PERMISSION TO TOW STOLEN
VEHICLE FORM
   I,  (Name of Owner) , am the owner of a motor vehicle which I have reported
to the Village of Maywood Police Department as having been stolen. The vehicle
is described as follows:
(Description of the vehicle)
   I understand that the Maywood Police Department may transmit notice of this
vehicle theft to other police agencies which may attempt to recover the
vehicle. I understand that if the vehicle is recovered, I have the option of
requesting that the vehicle be towed to a vehicle pound location or left at the
place where the vehicle has been found. While not requiring the law enforcement
agency which finds the vehicle to do so, I do hereby grant my permission to
have the vehicle towed. I understand that if the vehicle is towed, I will be
required to pay reasonable towing and storage charges.
DATED:                   , 20            .
(1997 Code, § 44.10) (Ord. 85-26, passed 7-11-1985)
§ 99.11 APPLICATION TO BE PLACED ON TOWING LIST.
   To be eligible to perform towing work for the Village, a tow service and its
storage facility must be located within the corporate limits of the Village or
within 3 miles of any corporate boundary of the Village. Any tow service
operator desiring to perform towing work for the Village shall, in addition to
complying with the automobile towing licensing requirements of Chapter 31 of
this Code, submit an application for placement on the towing list, prepared by
the Village, to the Village Manager. Such application shall include, at a
minimum, the name of the tow service operator and business, names of any
partners or shareholders, home and business addresses and telephone numbers,
information relevant to the corporate form of the business, if any, a
description of the equipment used by the applicant, the location, size, and
security features of the storage lot on which the towed vehicles will be
stored, the location to which the public must come to claim stored or impounded
vehicles, a statement of willingness to provide vehicle towing services on a
continuous 24-hour a day basis each day of the year; a list of towing equipment
used by the tow service operator and its size and capacity, a complete list of
insurance policies, carriers and agents that the tow service operator would
place into effect upon approval and that evidence the required insurance
amounts acceptable to the Village as set forth in this chapter, a description
of the 2-way communication to be used on each tow truck and at the office where
calls are received, a statement that the tow service operator will accept
responsibility for any and all personal property left in towed and stored
vehicles along with a description of the place he would use to adequately
protect the property left in towed or stored vehicles, and any other
information and qualifications required by the application, the Village or the
Police Department. Also required as part of the application shall be
certifications regarding, but not limited to, licensure to perform towing
services, proper registration and licensure of towing vehicles, membership in
applicable professional trade association, an acceptance of sole responsibility
to collect towing and storage fees, certifications concerning equipment,
facilities and hours of operation, record-keeping, and fitness to contract with
the Village under state and federal law. No person shall apply for placement on
the towing list for more than 1 towing service or more than 1 towing service
business address. No towing service whose owner or owners, partners or
stockholders who are also owners, partners or shareholders of a separate
approved towing service shall apply for placement on the towing list. Violation
of this section shall disqualify the applicant from approval and the approved
towing service shall be removed from the towing list and cannot reapply for a
period of 18 months.
(Ord. C0-04-7, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-30, passed 9-20-2004)
§ 99.12 INVESTIGATION AND APPROVAL, CREATION OF TOWING LIST.
   (A)   It will be the responsibility of the Police Department to maintain a
current towing list with no less than 2 and no more than 5 eligible companies
on it at any one time. No tow service operator may be placed on the towing list
until the applicant has furnished an application and any other information
required by the Village or Police Department, and has met any other qualifying
requirements.
   (B)   Completed applications shall be forwarded by the Village Manager to
the Chief of Police. Within 60 days after submittal of a completed application
for placement on the towing list, the Chief of Police shall complete an
investigation to determine the truth and accuracy of the information contained
in the application. Upon completion, the Chief of Police shall forward a copy
of the application to the Village Manager along with a recommendation for
approval or disapproval and the reasons, if any, for disapproval. Within the
60-day period, the Building Director and Fire Chief shall provide reports to
the Village Manager as to whether the storage facility and its location meets
the Zoning, Building, Fire and Life Safety Codes and regulations of the
Village. Upon receiving the Directors’ reports and recommendation, the Village
Manager shall determine whether or not the applicant has complied with the
necessary standards and criteria, and whether there are any available spots on
the towing list. If the tow service operator is found qualified, and the list
has less than the maximum of 5 tow service operators already on it, the tow
service operator shall be placed on the towing list.
(Ord. CO-04-7, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. CO-04-30, passed 9-20-2004; Am. Ord.
CO-08-33, passed 8-19-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-
2012-04, passed 2-7-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 99.13 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No tow service operator will be added to the towing list until they
have obtained and provided certificates of insurance to the Village Manager
specifically evidencing and addressing each of the following types and limits
of insurance. Such certificates must be provided annually. Each insurance
company must be acceptable to the Village Manager and meet state standards for
towing operations.
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability: $1,000,000 combined single limit
per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, death and property damage.
Minimum general aggregate shall be no less than $2,000,000. A copy of the
policy may be required.
      (2)   Public liability: $1,000,000 combined single limit per occurrence.
The minimum general aggregate shall be no less than $2,000,000.
      (3)   Automobile liability: $1,000,000 combined single limit per accident
for bodily injury and property damage. The insurance is to be extended to cover
hired and non-owned vehicles.
      (4)   Umbrella or excess liability: $2,000,000 per occurrence and in the
aggregate.
      (5)   Workers' compensation: to be provided as required by state statute,
by an insurance company licensed to write workers' compensation in the state.
      (6)   Garage-keepers liability: covering fire, theft, windstorm,
vandalism, and explosion in the amount of $25,000 with each vehicle suffering
damage being deemed a separate claim. The minimum general aggregate shall be no
less than $2,000,000.
      (7)   Garage liability policy: covering the operation of the tow service
operator's business, equipment, or other vehicles for any bodily injury or
property damage. This policy shall be in the minimum amount of $250,000 for any
1 person killed or injured, and a minimum amount of $500,000 for more than 1
person killed or injured in any accident and an additional $50,000 for property
damage.
   (B)   All insurance policies required by this contract shall be underwritten
by insurance companies with a minimum A.M. Best rating of A: VII.
   (C)   The comprehensive general liability, public liability and umbrella or
excess liability coverage shall name the Village an additional named insured.
All insurance noted above shall be primary and in no event will be considered
contributory to any insurance purchased by the Village. All insurance noted
above shall not be canceled, reduced, or materially changed without providing
the village 30 days advance notice, via certified mail.
(Ord. C0-04-7, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-30, passed 9-20-2004)
§ 99.14 OPERATION OF TOWING LIST.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall ensure that tow trucks on the towing list
are called in the current order of the list as far as practicable. The Police
Department shall rotate through the list on a per call basis. If the tow
service operator at the top of the list is unavailable, the next tow service
operator on the list shall be called. The Police Department shall not, except
upon the request of the owner, operator or person legitimately in possession of
the vehicle to be serviced, call any tow service operator not on the towing
list, unless all such tow service operators are unavailable.
   (B)   The Police Department may call a tow service operator out of sequence
where there is an urgent need for towing services, and where proximity to the
wreck and estimated response time make it more practical to do so.
(Ord. C0-04-7, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-30, passed 9-20-2004; Am. Ord.
C0-08-33, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 99.15 HEAVY-DUTY TOWING.
   Tow service operators with tow trucks capable of towing semi-tractor trailer
vehicles shall be placed on the regular towing list and on a separate heavy-
duty towing list. The heavy-duty towing list shall be used any time heavy-duty
towing is required.
(Ord. C0-04-7, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-30, passed 9-20-2004)
§ 99.16 REMOVAL FROM TOWING LIST.
   (A)   The Village Manager may remove any tow service operator temporarily or
permanently from the towing list when he finds:
      (1)   Placement on the list was secured by fraud or concealment of a
material fact, which if known would have caused disapproval of the applicant or
application;
      (2)   The tow service operator has violated any of the provisions of this
chapter or the Village Code; or
      (3)   (a)   The service provided by the tow service operator has been
substantially inadequate. What constitutes substantially inadequate service is
a matter within the sole discretion of the Village Manager. Factors that the
Village Manager shall consider in making a determination concerning adequacy of
service include, but are not limited to, failing to be available for or not
accepting calls, slow response time, excessive damage claims, and substantial
and repeated complaints from residents.
         (b)   A tow operator shall not be temporarily removed from the towing
list for more than 90 days at any one time.
   (B)   Any tow service operator aggrieved by an action of the Village Manager
removing the tow service operator from the towing list or refusing to place or
reinstate the tow service operator on the list may appeal the decision of the
Village Manager to the Board of Trustees. Any such appeal shall be made in
writing and delivered to the Village Manager within 5 days of the removal of
the tow service operator from the towing list or refusal to place or reinstate
the tow service operation on the towing list. The Village Board shall hear the
appeal within 30 days of the appeal's filing date and shall issue a decision
within 30 days of concluding its hearing on the matter.
(Ord. C0-04-7, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-30, passed 9-20-2004)
§ 99.17 TOW SERVICE OPERATOR PERSONNEL QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   No person who has been convicted under the laws of this state or any
other state of an offense which under the laws of this state would be a felony
theft of a vehicle or a felony offense under Chapter 4 of the Illinois Vehicle
Code (625 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.) shall be approved as a tow service operator to
be placed on the towing list, nor shall any tow service operator knowingly
permit such a person to operate a tow truck on the towing list calls; provided,
however, that a person whose last conviction was more than 4 years ago, and who
has shown evidence of rehabilitation, may be approved if otherwise eligible.
   (B)   Each tow service operator shall furnish to the Police Department a
complete and current list of all drivers who may respond to towing list calls.
No driver shall be permitted to respond to any towing list call unless his
name, sex, date of birth and driver’s license number have been furnished to the
Police Department at least 24 hours in advance by the tow service operator on
forms provided by the Police Department.
(Ord. C0-04-7, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0- 04-30, passed 9-20-2004)
§ 99.18 PROSTITUTION AND RELATED OFFENSES; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of prostitution as
defined in Section 11-14 of the Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/11-14), or
solicitation of a sexual act as defined in Section 11-14.1 of such Code (720
ILCS 5/111-14.1), patronizing a prostitute as defined in Section 11-18 of such
Code (720 ILCS 5/11-18), or patronizing a juvenile prostitute as defined in
Section 11-18.1 of such Code (720 ILCS 5/11-18.1), shall be subject to seizure
and impoundment under this division. In addition, any motor vehicle that is
used by any person who responds to the beckoning of a prostitute in a public
place by inquiring about, negotiating for, accepting an offer of or engaging in
an act of prostitution, or who allows another into his motor vehicle for
purposes of inquiring about, negotiating for, accepting an offer of or engaging
in an act of prostitution, shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under
this division. For purposes of this division, "public place" means any street,
sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park driveway, parking lot, or
transportation facility or the doorways and entrance-way to any building which
fronts on any of the aforesaid places or any other public way. The owner of
record of any vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment under this division
shall be liable to the Village for an administrative penalty of $1,000 in
addition to fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the Village or its agent. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and the vehicle owner's right to request a hearing to be conducted pursuant to
§
39.14 of this Code.
   (C)   The provisions of §
39.14 of this Code shall apply to any motor vehicle seized and impounded
pursuant to this section.
(Ord. C0-04-8, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-06-09, passed 4-18-200)
§ 99.19 UNLAWFUL DRUGS; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   A motor vehicle that contains any controlled substance, excluding
cannabis, as defined in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570/
100 et seq.), or that is used in the purchase, attempt to purchase, sale, or
attempt to sell such controlled substances shall be subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to this division. In addition, the owner of record of any
such vehicle shall be liable to the Village for an administrative penalty of
$1,500 plus any applicable towing and storage fees. This division shall not
apply if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft
was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the
theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; if the vehicle
was operating as a common carrier and the violation occurred without the
knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle; or if the owner proves that
the presence of the controlled substance was authorized under the Illinois
Controlled Substances Act. For purposes of this division, “controlled
substance” shall be defined as in the Illinois Controlled Substances Act (720
ILCS 570/100 et seq.)
   (B)   A motor vehicle that contains any cannabis in excess of the possession
limit permitted by state law, as defined in the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS
550/1 et seq.), and the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1 et
seq.), shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this division.
The possession of any amount of cannabis, even within the possession limits
permitted by state law, subjects a motor vehicle to seizure and impoundment if
the cannabis is not in a reasonably secured, sealed container or is reasonably
accessible while the vehicle is moving. In addition, the owner of record of any
such vehicle shall be liable to the Village for an administrative penalty of
$500 plus any applicable towing and storage fees. This division shall not apply
if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was
reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft
was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; if the vehicle was
operating as a common carrier and the violation occurred without the knowledge
of the person in control of the vehicle; or if the owner proves that the
presence of the cannabis was authorized under the Cannabis Control Act, or the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act. For purposes of this division, "cannabis"
shall be defined as in the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.)
   (C)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the Village or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a hearing pursuant to §
39.14 of this Code.
   (D)   The provisions of §
39.14 shall apply whenever any motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant
to this section.
(Ord. C0-04-8, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0- 06-09, passed 4-18-2006; Am. Ord.
CO-2020-20, passed 6-2-2020; Am. Ord. CO-2020-21, passed 7-14-2020)
§ 99.20 SOUND DEVICE RESTRICTION VIOLATIONS; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   No person shall play, use, operate or permit to be played, used or
operated, any radio, tape recorder, cassette player or other device for
receiving broadcast sound or reproducing recorded sound if the device is
located on the public way or in any motor vehicle on the public way, and the
sound generated by the device is clearly audible to a person with normal
hearing at a distance greater than 75 feet. For purposes of this section,
"public place" means any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza,
park driveway, parking lot, or transportation facility or the doorways and
entrance-way to any building which fronts on any of the aforesaid places or any
other public way.
   (B)   A motor vehicle that is used in the violation of division (A) of this
section shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this section. The
owner of record of such vehicle shall be liable to the Village for an
administrative penalty of $500 in addition to fees for the towing and storage
of the vehicle.
   (C)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the Village or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner's right to request a hearing pursuant to § 39.14 of
this Code.
   (D)   The provisions of § 39.14 shall apply whenever any motor vehicle is
seized and impounded pursuant to this section.
   (E)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the following
acts:
      (1)   Participation in a parade or public assembly for which a permit has
been obtained;
      (2)   Use of a sound amplification device as an alarm or emergency
warning device;
      (3)   Sounds generated at any stadium or in connection with any festival
parade, or street fair conducted pursuant to a valid permit; and
      (4)   Sounds generated in the operation of any mass transit system.
(Ord. C0-04-8, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 99.21 DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of the offense of
driving under the influence of alcohol, drugs, and/or intoxicating compounds as
provided in Section 11-501 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-501)
shall be subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section. In
addition, the owner of record of any such vehicle shall be liable to the
Village for an administrative penalty of $500 plus any applicable towing and
storage fees. This section shall not apply if the vehicle used in the violation
was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the appropriate police
authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered or reasonably should
have been discovered; or if the vehicle was operating as a common carrier and
the violation occurred without the knowledge of the person in control of the
vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the Village or its agent. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and the vehicle owner's right to request a hearing to be conducted pursuant to
§ 39.14 of this Code.
   (C)   The provisions of § 39.14 of this Code shall apply to any motor
vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this section.
(Ord. C0-04-8, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 99.22 DRIVING ON A SUSPENDED OR REVOKED LICENSE; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of the offense of
driving on a suspended or revoked license in violation of Section 6-303 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-303) shall be subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to this section. In addition, the owner of record of any
such vehicle shall be liable to the Village for an administrative penalty of
$500 plus any applicable towing and storage fees. This section shall not apply
if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was
reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft
was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; or if the vehicle was
operating as a common carrier and the violation occurred without the knowledge
of the person in control of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the Village or its agent. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and the vehicle owner's right to request a hearing to be conducted pursuant to
§ 39.14 of this Code.
   (C)   The provisions of § 39.14 of this Code shall apply to any motor
vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this section.
(Ord. C0-04-8, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 99.23 DRIVING WITHOUT PROOF OF REQUIRED INSURANCE.
   (A)   A motor vehicle that is being operated on a village street and is not
covered by a liability insurance policy in accordance with Section 7-601 or 7-
602 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/7-601, 7-602) shall be subject to
seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section. In addition, the owner of
record of any such vehicle shall be liable to the Village for an administrative
penalty of $500 plus any applicable towing and storage fees. This section shall
not apply if the vehicle used in the violation was stolen at the time and the
theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after
the theft was discovered or reasonably should have been discovered; or if the
vehicle was operating as a common carrier and the violation occurred without
the knowledge of the person in control of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the Village or its agent. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and the vehicle owner's right to request a hearing to be conducted pursuant to
§ 39.14 of this Code.
   (C)   The provisions of § 39.14 of this Code shall apply to any motor
vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this section.
(Ord. C0-04-8, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 99.24 DRIVING WITHOUT A VALID LICENSE OR PERMIT; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A) A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of the offense of driving
without a valid license or permit in violation of Section 6-101 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/6-101) shall be subject to seizure and impoundment
pursuant to this section. In addition, the owner of record of any such vehicle
shall be liable to the Village for an administrative penalty of $500 plus any
applicable towing and storage fees. This section shall not apply if the vehicle
used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the
appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered
or reasonably should have been discovered; or if the vehicle was operating as a
common carrier and the violation occurred without the knowledge of the person
in control of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the village or its agent. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and the vehicle owner's right to request a hearing to be conducted pursuant to
§ 39.14 of this Code.
   (C)   The provisions of § 39.14 of this Code shall apply to any motor
vehicle seized and impounded pursuant to this section.
(Ord. C0-04-8, passed 3-1-2004)
§ 99.25 WEAPONS-RELATED OFFENSES; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   A motor vehicle that is used in the commission of any of the following
weapons-related offenses shall be subject to seizure and impoundment under this
division: possession of explosives or explosive or incendiary devices (720 ILCS
5/20-2); unlawful use of a weapon (720 ILCS 5/24-1); unlawful use or possession
of weapons by felons (720 ILCS 5/24-1.1); aggravated discharge of a firearm
(720 ILCS 5/24-1.2); aggravated discharge of a machine gun or a firearm
equipped with a device designed or used for silencing the report of a firearm
(720 ILCS 5/24-1.2-5); reckless discharge of a firearm (720 ILCS 5/24-1.5);
aggravated unlawful use of a weapon (720 ILCS 5/24-1.6); unlawful use of
firearm projectiles (720 ILCS 5/24-2.1); manufacture, sale or transfer of
bullets or shells represented to be armor piercing bullets, dragon's breath
shotgun shells, bolo shells, or flechette shells (720 ILCS 5/24-2.2); unlawful
sale of firearms (720 ILCS 5/24-3); unlawful possession of firearms and firearm
ammunition (720 ILCS 5/24-3.1); unlawful discharge of firearm projectiles (720
ILCS 5/24-3.2); unlawful sale or delivery of firearms on the premises of any
school (720 ILCS 5/24-3.3); unlawful sale of firearms by liquor licensee (720
ILCS 5/24-3.4); unlawful purchase of a firearm (720 ILCS 5/24-3.5); unlawful
use of a firearm in the shape of a wireless telephone (720 ILCS 5/24-6);
gunrunning (720 ILCS 5/24-3A); and armed violence (720 ILCS 5/33A-2). The owner
of record of any vehicle subject to seizure and impoundment under this division
shall be liable to the Village for an administrative penalty in the amount of
$2,000, plus any applicable fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the police
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the Village or its agent. When the vehicle is towed, the police officer shall
notify the person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and the vehicle owner's right to request a hearing to be conducted pursuant to
§
39.14 of this Code.
   (C)   The provisions of §
39.14 of this Code shall apply to any motor vehicle seized and impounded
pursuant to this section.
(Ord. C0-06-09, passed 4-18-2006)
§ 99.26 AGGRAVATED FLEEING AND ELUDING A PEACE OFFICER; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   A motor vehicle used to commit the offense of aggravated fleeing or
attempting to elude a peace officer is subject to seizure and impoundment. The
offense of aggravated fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer is
committed by any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who, having been given a
visual or audible signal by a peace officer directing such driver or operator
to bring his or her vehicle to a stop, willfully fails or refuses to obey such
direction, increases his or her speed, extinguishes his or her lights, or
otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer, and either: (1) drives at a
rate of speed at least 21 miles per hour over the legal speed limit; (2) causes
bodily injury to any individual; (3) causes damage in excess of $300 to
property; (4) involves disobedience of two or more official traffic control
devices; or (5) involves the concealing or altering of the vehicle’s
registration plate or digital registration plate. The signal given by the peace
officer may be by hand, voice, siren, or red or blue light; provided that the
officer giving such signal shall be in police uniform, and, if driving a
vehicle, such vehicle shall display illuminated oscillating, rotating or
flashing red or blue lights which, when used in conjunction with an audible
horn or siren, would indicate the vehicle to be an official police vehicle.
Such requirement shall not preclude the use of amber or white oscillating,
rotating or flashing lights in conjunction with red or blue oscillating,
rotating or flashing lights as required in Section 12-215 of Chapter 12 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/12-215). The owner of record of any vehicle
subject to seizure and impoundment under this division shall be liable to the
Village for an administrative penalty in the amount of $1,000 plus any
applicable fees for the towing and storage of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever a peace officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the peace
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the Village or its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the peace officer shall
notify any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a hearing pursuant to §
39.14 of this code.
   (C)   The provisions of §
39.14 shall apply whenever any motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant
to this section.
(Ord. CO-2021-05, passed 3-16-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-24, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 99.27 DUMPING OF GARBAGE UPON REAL PROPERTY; IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   A motor vehicle used to commit the offense of dumping of garbage upon
real property in violation of section 47-15(a) of the Criminal Code of 2012
(720 ILCS 5/37-15(a)) is subject to seizure and impoundment. The offense of
dumping of garbage upon real property is committed by any driver or operator of
a motor vehicle who dumps, deposits, or places garbage, rubbish, trash, or
refuse upon any street or public place or upon any public or private real
property not owned by that person without the consent of the owner or person in
possession of the real property, except at any dump site which may be
authorized by the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Whenever a peace officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this section, the peace
officer shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility controlled by
the village of its agents. When the vehicle is towed, the peace officer shall
notify any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the vehicle owner’s right to request a hearing pursuant to §
39.14 of this code. In addition, the owner of record of any such vehicle shall
be liable to the village for an administrative penalty of $500 plus any
applicable towing and storage fees. This section shall not apply if the vehicle
used in the violation was stolen at the time and the theft was reported to the
appropriate police authorities within 24 hours after the theft was discovered
or reasonably should have been discovered; or if the vehicle was operating as a
common carrier and the violation occurred without the knowledge of the person
in control of the vehicle.
   (C)   The provisions of §
39.14 shall apply whenever any motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant
to this section.
(Ord. CO-2023-14, passed 4-18-2023)
Cross-reference:
   Garbage and refuse, see §
92.28
CHAPTER 100: TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Section
   
100.01   Purpose and scope
   
100.02   Definitions
   
100.03   General requirements
   
100.04   Application to existing franchise ordinances and agreements
   
100.05   Registration of telecommunications carriers and providers
   
100.06   Telecommunications licensing requirements
   
100.07   Telecommunications franchise
   
100.08   Fees and compensation
   
100.09   Conditions of grant
   
100.10   Construction standards
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Establish a local policy concerning telecommunications providers and
services.
   (B)   Establish clear local guidelines, standards and time frames for the
exercise of local authority with respect to the regulation of
telecommunications providers and services.
   (C)   Promote competition in telecommunications.
   (D)   Minimize unnecessary local regulation of telecommunications providers
and services.
   (E)   Encourage the provision of advanced and competitive telecommunications
services on the widest possible basis to the businesses, institutions and
residents of the Village.
   (F)   Permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways of the Village
for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis.
   (G)   Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public ways held in
public trust by the Village.
   (H)   Assure that the Village's current and ongoing costs of granting and
regulating private access to and use of the public ways are fully paid by the
persons seeking such access and causing such costs.
   (I)   Secure fair and reasonable compensation to the Village and the
residents of the Village for permitting private use of the public ways.
   (J)   Assure that all telecommunications carriers providing facilities or
services within the Village comply with the ordinances, rules and regulations
of the Village.
   (K)   Assure that the Village can continue to fairly and responsibly protect
the public health, safety and welfare.
   (L)   Enable the Village to discharge its public trust consistent with
rapidly evolving federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition
and technological development.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 100.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings,
unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall indicate
otherwise.
   AFFILIATE. A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned
or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with another person.
   ANNUAL GROSS REVENUE. (Reserved).
   CABLE ACT. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 532 et
seq., as now and hereafter amended.
   CABLE OPERATOR. A telecommunications carrier providing or offering to
provide cable service within the Village as that term is defined in the Cable
Act.
   CABLE SERVICE. Shall have the same meaning provided by the Cable Act.
   CORPORATE AUTHORITIES. The President and Board of Trustees of the Village of
Maywood.
   EXCESS CAPACITY. The volume or capacity in any existing or future duct,
conduit, manhole, hand hole or other utility facility within the public way
that is or will be available for use for additional telecommunications
facilities.
   FCC OR FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION. The federal administrative agency,
or lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications
carriers, services and providers on a national level.
   ICC or ILLINOIS COMMERCE COMMISSION. The state administrative agency, or
lawful successor, authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications
carriers, services and providers in the State of Illinois.
   OTHER WAYS. The highways, streets, alleys, utility easements or other rights
of way within the Village but under the jurisdiction and control of a
governmental entity other than the Village.
   OVERHEAD FACILITIES. Utility poles, utility facilities and
telecommunications facilities located above the surface of the ground,
including the underground supports and foundations for such facilities.
   PERSON. Means and includes corporations, companies, associations, joint
stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies and individuals and includes their lessors, trustees and receivers.
   PUBLIC STREET. Any highway, street, alley or other public right-of-way for
motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the Village which
has been acquired, established, dedicated or devoted to highway purposes not
inconsistent with telecommunications facilities.
   PUBLIC WAY. Means and includes all public streets and utility easements, as
those terms are defined herein, now or hereafter owned by the Village, but only
to the extent of the Village's right, title, interest or authority to grant a
license or franchise to occupy and use such streets and easements for
telecommunications facilities.
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   SURPLUS SPACE. That portion of the usable space on a utility pole which has
the necessary clearance from other pole users, as required by the orders and
regulations of the Illinois Commerce Commission, to allow its use by a
telecommunications carrier for a pole attachment.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Means and includes every person that directly or
indirectly owns, controls, operates or manages plant, equipment or property
within the Village, used or to be used for the purpose of offering
telecommunications service.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES. The plant, equipment and property, including,
but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals, antennas,
electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit, receive,
distribute, provide or offer telecommunications services.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.  Means and includes every person who provides
telecommunications service over telecommunications facilities without any
ownership or management control of the facilities.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing or offering for rent, sale or
lease, or in exchange for other value received, of the transmittal of voice,
data, image, graphic and video programming information between or among points
by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities, with or without benefit of any closed transmission medium.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM. See TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   UNDERGROUND FACILITIES. Utility and telecommunications facilities located
under the surface of the ground, excluding the underground foundations or
supports for overhead facilities.
   USABLE SPACE. The total distance between the top of a utility pole and the
lowest possible attachment point that provides the minimum allowable vertical
clearance as specified in the orders and regulations of the Illinois Commerce
Commission.
   UTILITY EASEMENT. Any easement owned by the Village and acquired,
established, dedicated or devoted for public utility purposes not inconsistent
with telecommunications facilities.
   UTILITY FACILITIES. The plant, equipment and property, including, but not
limited to, the poles, pipes, mains, conduits, ducts, cables, wires, plant and
equipment located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the
public ways of the Village and used or to be used for the purpose of providing
utility or telecommunications services.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Maywood, Illinois.
   VILLAGE PROPERTY. Means and includes all real property owned by the Village,
other than public streets and utility easements as those terms are defined
herein, and all property held in a proprietary capacity by the Village, which
are not subject to right-of-way licensing and franchising as provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 100.03 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Registration. Except as otherwise provided herein, all
telecommunications carriers and providers engaged in the business of
transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications originating or
terminating in the Village shall register with the Village pursuant to §
100.05 of this chapter.
   (B)   Telecommunications license. Except as otherwise provided herein, any
telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate,
maintain, or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or
across any public way of the Village for the sole purpose of providing
telecommunications service to persons and areas outside the Village shall first
obtain a license granting the use of such public ways from the Village pursuant
to §
100.06 of this chapter.
   (C)   Telecommunications franchise. Except as otherwise provided herein, any
telecommunications carriers who desire to construct, install, operate, maintain
or otherwise locate telecommunications facilities in, under, over or across any
public way of the Village, and to also provide telecommunications service to
persons or areas in the Village, shall first obtain a franchise granting the
use of such public ways from the Village pursuant to §
100.07 of this chapter.
   (D)   Cable television franchise. Except as otherwise provided herein, any
telecommunications carrier who desires to construct, install, operate, maintain
or locate telecommunications facilities in any public way of the Village for
the purpose of providing cable service to persons in the Village shall first
obtain a cable franchise from the Village.
   (E)   Compliance with other regulations. All telecommunication facilities
must comply with all applicable federal, state, county and Village regulations,
including the provisions of
Chapter 120 of this Code, if a tower or antenna is proposed.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 100.04 APPLICATION TO EXISTING FRANCHISE ORDINANCES AND AGREEMENTS.
   This chapter shall have no effect on any existing franchise ordinance or
franchise agreement until:
   (A)   The expiration of said franchise ordinance or agreement.
   (B)   An amendment to an unexpired franchise ordinance or franchise
agreement, unless both parties agree to defer full compliance to a specific
date not later than the present expiration date.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 100.05 REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS AND PROVIDERS.
   (A)   Registration required. All telecommunications carriers and providers
that offer or provide any telecommunications service for a fee directly to the
public, either within the Village or outside the corporate limits from
telecommunications facilities within the Village, shall register with the
Village pursuant to this section on forms to be provided by the Village Clerk
which shall include the following:
      (1)   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any
affiliates.
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
      (3)   A description of registrant's existing or proposed
telecommunications facilities within the Village.
      (4)   A description of the telecommunications service that the registrant
intends to offer or provide, or is currently offering or providing, to persons,
firms, businesses or institutions within the Village.
      (5)   Information sufficient to determine whether the registrant is
subject to public way licensing or franchising under this chapter.
      (6)   Information sufficient to determine whether the transmission,
origination or receipt of the telecommunications services provided or to be
provided by the registrant constitutes an occupation or privilege subject to
any municipal telecommunications tax, utility message tax or other occupation
tax imposed by the Village.
      (7)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied
for and received any certificate of authority required by the Illinois Commerce
Commission to provide telecommunications services or facilities within the
Village.
      (8)   Information sufficient to determine that the applicant has applied
for and received any construction permit, operating license or other approvals
required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide telecommunications
services or facilities within the Village.
      (9)   Such other information as the Village Manager's office may
reasonably require.
   (B)   Registration fee. Each application for registration as a
telecommunications carrier or provider shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.
   (C)   Purpose of registration. The purpose of registration under this
section is to:
      (1)   Provide the Village with accurate and current information
concerning the telecommunications carriers and providers who offer or provide
telecommunications services within the Village or that own or operate
telecommunication facilities within the Village.
      (2)   Assist the Village in enforcement of this chapter.
      (3)   Assist the Village in the collection and enforcement of any
municipal taxes, franchise fees, license fees or charges that may be due the
Village.
      (4)   Assist the Village in monitoring compliance with local, state and
federal laws.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 100.06 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   License required. A telecommunications license shall be required of
any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy specific public ways of
the Village for the sole purpose of providing telecommunications services to
persons or areas outside the Village.
   (B)   Application for license. Any person that desires a telecommunications
license pursuant to this section shall file an application with the Village
which shall include the following information:
      (1)   The identity of the license applicant, including all affiliates of
the applicant.
      (2)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will
be offered or provided by licensee over its telecommunications facilities.
      (3)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
licensee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
      (4)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of
the facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
         (a)   The location and route requested for applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
         (b)   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route.
         (c)   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
         (d)   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate. Any trees that are temporarily removed or relocated shall
be maintained and guaranteed for not less than 1 year by the permittee. Any of
these trees that are determined to be unacceptable after 1 year by the Village
shall be replaced as directed by the Village. Underground installation will be
designed and installed in such a manner as to minimize the disturbance and
damage to the root system of existing trees, roadways or other Village
facilities. Plans will be reviewed so as to determine if augering or boring
under or around public facilities will be required.
         (e)   That all proposed plans for the installation of underground or
overhead facilities shall be reviewed and approved by an arborist certified by
the International Society of Arboriculture.
      (5)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
      (6)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
         (a)   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or
conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
         (b)   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
      (7)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
         (a)   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits.
         (b)   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits
after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
      (8)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date.
      (9)   A preliminary traffic-control plan in accordance with the IDOT
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      (10)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability
to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
      (11)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
      (12)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
      (13)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to §
100.08 of this chapter.
      (14)   Such other and further information as may be required by the
Village Manager’s office.
   (C)   Determination by the Village. Within 60 days after receiving a
complete application under division (B) hereof, the Village Manager's office
shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in
whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is
denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial.
      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant.
      (3)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.
      (4)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility
and telecommunications facilities if the license is granted.
      (5)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the license is granted.
      (6)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
      (7)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and
region.
      (8)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
license is granted.
      (9)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the
proposed facilities.
      (10)   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations
and policies.
      (11)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the
public ways will serve the community interest.
   (D)   Extension of determination by the Village. The Village reserves the
right to extend the time period in which it shall issue a written determination
granting or denying the application in whole or in part an additional 60 days.
Written notice containing the reasons for the extension shall be provided to
the applicant. The decision to extend the time period is at the sole discretion
of the Village.
   (E)   Agreement. No license granted hereunder shall be effective until the
applicant and the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth the
particular terms and provisions under which the license to occupy and use
public ways of the Village will be granted.
   (F)   Nonexclusive grant. No license granted under this section shall confer
any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the
public ways of the Village for delivery of telecommunications services or any
other purposes.
   (G)   Rights granted. No license granted under this section shall convey any
right, title or interest in the public ways but shall be deemed a license only
to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated in
the grant. Further, no license shall be construed as any warranty of title.
   (H)   Term of grant. Unless otherwise specified in a license agreement, a
telecommunications license granted hereunder shall be in effect for a term of 5
years.
   (I)   License route. A telecommunications license granted under this section
shall be limited to a grant of specific public ways and defined portions
thereof.
   (J)   Location of facilities. Unless otherwise specified in a license
agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in
accordance with the following terms and conditions:
      (1)   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
      (2)   A licensee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
      (3)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the Village, a licensee with permission to occupy the same public way must also
locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
      (4)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities
or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Building
Director, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption
of the public ways.
      (5)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the
capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate
future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory
access to future telecommunications carriers.
   (K)   Construction permits. All licensees are required to obtain
construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in §
100.10 of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall
prohibit the Village and a licensee from agreeing to alternative plan review,
permit and construction procedures in a license agreement, provided such
alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for
responsible construction practices.
   (L)   Compensation to Village. Each license granted under this section is
subject to the Village's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a
fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to
the licensee, provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit the Village and
a licensee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid.
   (M)   Service to Village users. A licensee may be permitted to offer or
provide telecommunications services to persons or areas within the Village upon
submitting an application for approval pursuant to §
100.07 of this chapter.
   (N)   Amendment of grant.
      (1)   A new license application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend or locate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Village which are not
included in a license previously granted under this chapter.
      (2)   If ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously
granted license, the Village shall grant a license amendment without further
application.
   (O)   Renewal applications. A grantee that desires to renew its license
under this section shall, not more than 180 days nor less than 90 days before
expiration of the current license, file an application with the Village for
renewal of its license which shall include the following information:
      (1)   The information required pursuant to division (B) hereof.
      (2)   Any information required pursuant to the license agreement between
the Village and the grantee.
   (P)   Renewal determinations. Within 60 days after receiving a complete
application under division (O) hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or
in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is
denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant.
      (3)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
      (4)   The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and the license agreement.
      (5)   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules
and policies.
      (6)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to
use the public ways will serve the community interest.
   (Q)   Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal. No license shall be
renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the licensee's performance
of the license agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been
cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has
been approved by the Village.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 100.07 TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Franchise required. A telecommunications franchise shall be required
of any telecommunications carrier who desires to occupy public ways of the
Village and to provide telecommunications services to any person or area in the
Village.
   (B)   Application for franchise. Any person that desires a
telecommunications franchise pursuant to this section shall file an application
with the Village which shall include the following information:
      (1)   The identity of the franchise applicant, including all affiliates
of the applicant.
      (2)   A description of the telecommunications services that are or will
be offered or provided by the franchise applicant over its existing or proposed
facilities.
      (3)   A description of the transmission medium that will be used by the
franchisee to offer or provide such telecommunications services.
      (4)   Preliminary engineering plans, specifications and a network map of
the facilities to be located within the Village, all in sufficient detail to
identify:
         (a)   The location and route requested for applicant's proposed
telecommunications facilities.
         (b)   The location of all overhead and underground public utility,
telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the
public way along the proposed route.
         (c)   The location(s), if any, for interconnection with the
telecommunications facilities of other telecommunications carriers.
         (d)   The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and
obstructions, if any, that applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently
remove or relocate. Any trees that are temporarily removed or relocated shall
be maintained and guaranteed for not less than 1 year by the permittee. Any of
these trees that are determined to be unacceptable after 1 year by the Village
shall be replaced as directed by the Village. Underground installation will be
designed and installed in such a manner as to minimize the disturbance and
damage to the root system of existing trees, roadways or other Village
facilities. Plans will be reviewed so as to determine if augering or boring
under or around public facilities will be required.
         (e)   That all proposed plans for the installation of underground or
overhead facilities shall be reviewed and approved by an arborist certified by
the International Society of Arboriculture.
      (5)   If applicant is proposing to install overhead facilities, evidence
that surplus space is available for locating its telecommunications facilities
on existing utility poles along the proposed route.
      (6)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in existing
ducts or conduits within the public ways, information in sufficient detail to
identify:
         (a)   The excess capacity currently available in such ducts or
conduits before installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
         (b)   The excess capacity, if any, that will exist in such ducts or
conduits after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
      (7)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the public ways:
         (a)   The location proposed for the new ducts or conduits;
         (b)   The excess capacity that will exist in such ducts or conduits
after installation of applicant's telecommunications facilities.
      (8)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion dates.
      (9)   A preliminary traffic-control plan in accordance with the Illinois
Department of Transportation (IDOT) Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
      (10)   Financial statements prepared in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles demonstrating the applicant's financial ability
to construct, operate, maintain, relocate and remove the facilities.
      (11)   Information in sufficient detail to establish the applicant's
technical qualifications, experience and expertise regarding the
telecommunications facilities and services described in the application.
      (12)   Information to establish that the applicant has obtained all other
governmental approvals and permits to construct and operate the facilities and
to offer or provide the telecommunications services.
      (13)   Whether the applicant intends to provide cable service, video dial
tone service or other video programming service and sufficient information to
determine whether such service is subject to cable franchising.
      (14)   An accurate map showing the location of any existing
telecommunications facilities in the Village that applicant intends to use or
lease.
      (15)   A description of the services or facilities that the applicant
will offer or make available to the Village and other public, educational and
governmental institutions.
      (16)   A description of applicant's access and line extension policies.
      (17)   The area or areas of the Village the applicant desires to serve
and a schedule for build-out to the entire franchise area.
      (18)   All fees, deposits or charges required pursuant to §
100.08 of this chapter.
      (19)   Such other and further information as may be requested by the
Village Manager's office.
   (C)   Determination by the Village. Within 60 days after receiving a
complete application under division (B) hereof, the Village Manager's office
shall issue a written determination granting or denying the application in
whole or in part, applying the following standards. If the application is
denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for denial.
      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant.
      (3)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate the applicant's
proposed facilities.
      (4)   The capacity of the public ways to accommodate additional utility
and telecommunications facilities if the franchise is granted.
      (5)   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements, service, travel or landscaping if the franchise is granted.
      (6)   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction within the public ways.
      (7)   The service that applicant will provide to the community and
region.
      (8)   The effect, if any, on public health, safety and welfare if the
franchise requested is granted.
      (9)   The availability of alternate routes and/or locations for the
proposed facilities.
      (10)   Applicable federal and state telecommunications laws, regulations
and policies.
      (11)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the grant to use the
public ways will serve the community interest.
   (D)   Extension of determination by the Village. The Village reserves the
right to extend the time period in which they shall issue a written
determination granting or denying the application in whole or in part an
additional 60 days. Written notice containing the reasons for the extension
shall be provided to the applicant. The decision to extend the time period is
at the sole discretion of the Village.
   (E)   Agreement. No franchise shall be granted hereunder unless the
applicant and the Village have executed a written agreement setting forth the
particular terms and provisions under which the franchise to occupy and use
public ways of the Village will be granted.
   (F)   Nonexclusive grant. No franchise granted under this section shall
confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use
the public ways of the Village for delivery of telecommunications services or
any other purposes.
   (G)   Term of grant. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise agreement, a
telecommunications franchise granted hereunder shall be valid for a term of 10
years.
   (H)   Rights granted. No franchise granted under this section shall convey
any right, title or interest in the public ways but shall be deemed a franchise
only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated
in the grant. Further, no franchise shall be construed as any warranty of
title.
   (I)   Franchise territory. A telecommunications franchise granted under this
section shall be limited to the specific geographic area of the Village to be
served by the franchise grantee and the specific public ways necessary to serve
such areas.
   (J)   Location of facilities. Unless otherwise specified in a franchise
agreement, all facilities shall be constructed, installed and located in
accordance with the following terms and conditions:
      (1)   Telecommunications facilities shall be installed within an existing
underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within such utility
facility.
      (2)   A franchisee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available.
      (3)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the Village, a franchisee with permission to occupy the same public way must
also locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
      (4)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities
or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Building
Director, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption
of the public ways.
      (5)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the
capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate
future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory
access to future carriers.
   (K)   Construction permits. All franchisees are required to obtain
construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in § 100.10
of this chapter; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit
the Village and a franchisee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit
and construction procedures in a franchise agreement, provided such alternative
procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for responsible
construction practices.
   (L)   Compensation to Village. Each franchise granted under this section is
subject to the Village's right, which is expressly reserved, to annually fix a
fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property rights granted to
the franchisee, provided, nothing in this section shall prohibit the Village
and a franchisee from agreeing to the compensation to be paid.
   (M)   Nondiscrimination. A franchisee shall make its telecommunications
services available to any customer within its franchise area who shall request
such service, without discrimination as to the terms, conditions, rates or
charges for grantee's services; provided, however, that nothing in this section
shall prohibit a franchisee from making any reasonable classifications among
differently situated customers.
   (N)   Service to the Village. A franchisee shall make its telecommunications
services available to the Village at its most favorable rate for similarly
situated users, unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise agreement.
   (O)   Amendment of grant.
      (1)   A new franchise application and grant shall be required of any
telecommunications carrier that desires to extend its franchise territory or to
locate its telecommunications facilities in public ways of the Village which
are not included in a franchise previously granted under this chapter.
      (2)   If ordered by the Village to locate or relocate its
telecommunications facilities in public ways not included in a previously
granted franchise, the Village shall grant a franchise amendment without
further application.
   (P)   Renewal applications. A grantee that desires to renew its franchise
under this section shall, not more than 240 days nor less than 150 days before
expiration of the current franchise, file an application with the Village for
renewal of its franchise which shall include the following information:
      (1)   The information required pursuant to division (B) hereof.
      (2)   Any information required pursuant to the franchise agreement
between the Village and the grantee.
   (Q)   Renewal determinations. Within 60 days after receiving a complete
application under division (P) hereof, the corporate authorities shall issue a
written determination granting or denying the renewal application in whole or
in part, applying the following standards. If the renewal application is
denied, the written determination shall include the reasons for nonrenewal.
      (1)   The financial and technical ability of the applicant.
      (2)   The legal ability of the applicant.
      (3)   The continuing capacity of the public ways to accommodate the
applicant's existing facilities.
      (4)   The applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and the franchise agreement.
      (5)   Applicable federal, state and local telecommunications laws, rules
and policies.
      (6)   Such other factors as may demonstrate that the continued grant to
use the public ways will serve the community interest.
   (R)   Obligation to cure as a condition of renewal. No franchise shall be
renewed until any ongoing violations or defaults in the grantee's performance
of the franchise agreement, or of the requirements of this chapter, have been
cured, or a plan detailing the corrective action to be taken by the grantee has
been approved by the Village.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 100.08 FEES AND COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the payment
and recovery of all direct and indirect costs and expenses of the Village
related to the enforcement and administration of this chapter.
   (B)   Application, review and construction fee.
      (1)   Any applicant for a license or franchise pursuant to §§
100.06 or
100.07 of this chapter shall pay a fee of $1,000 or 1% of the estimated cost of
applicants proposed telecommunications facilities, as certified by the
applicant's professional engineer, whichever is greater, plus any and all
direct and indirect costs incurred by the Village including the fees and costs
of professional consultants retained by the Village to assist with the
technical and legal review of the application.
      (2)   The application review and construction fee shall be deposited with
the Village as part of the application filed pursuant to §§
100.06 or
100.07 of this chapter.
      (3)   An applicant whose license or franchise application has been
withdrawn, abandoned or denied shall, within 60 days of its application review
and construction fee written request, be refunded the balance of its deposit
under this section, less:
         (a)   Five hundred dollars or 0.5% of the estimated cost of applicants
proposed telecommunications facilities, whichever is greater, as established
pursuant to division (B)(1) above, and
         (b)   Any and all direct and indirect costs incurred by the Village in
employing professional consultants that review the application.
   (C)   Other Village costs. All license or franchise grantees shall, within
30 days after written demand therefor, reimburse the Village for all direct and
indirect costs and expenses incurred by the Village in connection with any
modification, amendment, renewal or transfer of the license or franchise or any
license or franchise agreement.
   (D)   Reserved compensation for public ways.  The Village reserves its right
to annually fix a fair and reasonable compensation to be paid for the property
rights granted to a telecommunications license or franchise grantee. Nothing in
this section shall prohibit the Village and a grantee from agreeing to the
compensation to be paid for the granted property rights.
   (E)   Compensation for Village property. If the right is granted, by lease,
license, franchise or other manner, to use and occupy Village property for the
installation of telecommunications facilities, the compensation to be paid
shall be fixed by the Village.
   (F)   Annual fees. Unless otherwise agreed in a license or franchise grant
agreement, each license or franchise grantee shall pay an annual license fee to
the Village equal to $500 as reimbursement for the Village's costs in
connection with reviewing, inspecting and supervising the use and occupancy of
the public ways in behalf of the public and existing or future users,
   (G)   Cable fees. Cable television franchisees shall be subject to the
franchise fees, payments and costs set forth in a franchise agreement entered
into between the Village and the cable company.
   (H)   Regulatory fees and compensation not a tax. The regulatory fees and
costs provided for in this section, and any compensation charged and paid for
the public ways provided for in division (D) hereof are separate from, and
additional to, any and all federal, state, local and Village taxes as may be
levied, imposed or due from a telecommunications carrier or provider, its
customers or subscribers, or on account of the lease, sale, delivery or
transmission of telecommunications services.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 100.09 CONDITIONS OF GRANT.
   (A)   Location of facilities. All facilities shall be constructed, installed
and located in accordance with the following terms and conditions, unless
otherwise specified in a license or franchise agreement:
      (1)   A grantee shall install its telecommunications facilities within an
existing underground duct or conduit whenever excess capacity exists within
such utility facility.
      (2)   A grantee with permission to install overhead facilities shall
install its telecommunications facilities on pole attachments to existing
utility poles only, and then only if surplus space is available. All tree
trimming necessary for overhead line clearance shall be performed under the
direction of an arborist certified by the International Society of
Arboriculture.
      (3)   Whenever any existing electric utilities, cable facilities or
telecommunications facilities are located underground within a public way of
the Village, a grantee with permission to occupy the same public way must also
locate its telecommunications facilities underground.
      (4)   Whenever any new or existing electric utilities, cable facilities
or telecommunications facilities are located or relocated underground within a
public way of the Village, a grantee that currently occupies the same public
way shall relocate its facilities underground within a reasonable period of
time, which shall not be later than the end of the grant term. Absent
extraordinary circumstances or undue hardship as determined by the Building
Director, such relocation shall be made concurrently to minimize the disruption
of the public ways.
      (5)   Whenever new telecommunications facilities will exhaust the
capacity of a public street or utility easement to reasonably accommodate
future telecommunications carriers or facilities, the grantee shall provide
additional ducts, conduits, manholes and other facilities for nondiscriminatory
access to future carriers.
   (B)   Compliance with JULIE. All license or franchise grantees shall, before
commencing any construction in the public ways, comply with all regulations of
JULIE.
   (C)   Construction permits. All license or franchise grantees are required
to obtain construction permits for telecommunications facilities as required in
§
100.10 of this chapter. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit the
Village and a grantee from agreeing to alternative plan review, permit and
construction procedures in a license or franchise agreement, provided such
alternative procedures provide substantially equivalent safeguards for
responsible construction practices.
   (D)   Interference with the public ways. No license or franchise grantee may
locate or maintain its telecommunications facilities so as to unreasonably
interfere with the use of the public ways by the Village, by the general public
or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public ways.
All such facilities shall be moved by the grantee, temporarily or permanently,
as determined by the Village Engineer.
   (E)   Damage to property. No license or franchise grantee nor any person
acting on a grantee's behalf shall take any action or permit any action to be
done which may impair or damage any Village property, public ways of the
Village, other ways or other property located in, on or adjacent thereto.
   (F)   Notice of work. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise
agreement, no license or franchise grantee, nor any person acting on the
grantee's behalf, shall commence any non-emergency work in or about the public
ways of the Village or other ways without 10 working days' advanced notice to
the Village.
   (G)   Repair and emergency work. In the event of an unexpected repair or
emergency, a grantee may commence such repair and emergency response work as
required under the circumstances, provided the grantee shall notify the Village
as promptly as possible, before such repair or emergency work or as soon
thereafter as possible, if advance notice is not practicable.
   (H)   Maintenance of facilities. Each license or franchise grantee shall
maintain its facilities in good and safe condition and in a manner that
complies with all applicable federal, state and local requirements.
   (I)   Relocation or removal of facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the Village, a license or franchise grantee shall, at its own
expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of any telecommunications facilities within the public ways whenever
the corporate authorities shall have determined that such removal, relocation,
change or alteration is reasonably necessary for:
      (1)   The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Village or other public improvement in or upon the public ways.
      (2)   The operations of the Village or other governmental entity in or
upon the public ways.
   (J)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the Village, any grantee, telecommunications carrier or other
person that owns, controls or maintains any unauthorized telecommunications
system, facility or related appurtenances within the public ways of the Village
shall, at its own expense, remove such facilities or appurtenances from the
public ways of the Village. A telecommunications system or facility is
unauthorized and subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the grantee's telecommunications
license or franchise.
      (2)   Upon abandonment of a facility within the public ways of the
Village.
      (3)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior grant of a telecommunications license or franchise.
      (4)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed without the
prior issuance of a required construction permit.
      (5)   If the system or facility was constructed or installed at a
location not permitted by the grantee's telecommunications license or
franchise.
   (K)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities.  The Village retains
the right and privilege to cut or move any telecommunications facilities
located within the public ways of the Village, as the Village may determine to
be necessary, appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety
emergency.
   (L)   Damage to grantee's facilities. Unless directly and proximately caused
by the willful, intentional or malicious acts by the Village, the Village shall
not be liable for any damage to or loss of any telecommunications facility
within the public ways of the Village as a result of or in connection with any
public works, public improvements, construction, excavation, grading, filling
or work of any kind in the public ways by or on behalf of the Village.
   (M)   Restoration of public ways, other ways and Village property.
      (1)   When a license or franchise grantee, or any person acting on its
behalf, does any work in or affecting any public ways, other ways or Village
property, it shall, at its own expense, promptly remove any obstructions
therefrom and restore such ways or property to as good a condition as existed
before the work was undertaken, unless otherwise directed by the Village.
      (2)   If weather or other conditions do not permit the complete
restoration required by this section, the grantee shall temporarily restore the
affected ways or property. Such temporary restoration shall be at the
licensee's sole expense and the licensee shall promptly undertake and complete
the required permanent restoration when the weather or other conditions no
longer prevent such permanent restoration.
      (3)   A grantee or other person acting in its behalf shall use suitable
barricades, flags, flagmen, lights, flares and other measures as required for
the safety of all members of the general public and to prevent injury or damage
to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such work in or affecting such
ways or property.
      (4)   All open excavations necessary for the installation of underground
facilities shall be properly backfilled. Under hard surface areas, such as
roadways, sidewalks and drives, trench backfill shall be compacted and
certified to Village construction code standards. Under unpaved right of way
and other natural surfaced areas, backfill material shall be compacted in 6-
inch lifts with the final 6-inch lift being suitable topsoil.
   (N)   Facilities maps. Each license or franchise grantee shall provide the
Village with an accurate map or maps certifying the location of all
telecommunications facilities within the public ways. Each grantee shall
provide updated maps annually.
   (O)   Duty to provide information. Within 10 days of a written request from
the Village Manager, each license or franchise grantee shall furnish the
Village with information sufficient to demonstrate:
      (1)   That grantee has complied with all requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   That all municipal sales, message and/or telecommunications taxes
due the Village in connection with the telecommunications services and
facilities provided by the grantee have been properly collected and paid by the
grantee.
      (3)   All books, records, maps and other documents, maintained by the
grantee with respect to its facilities within the public ways shall be made
available for inspection by the Village at reasonable times and intervals.
   (P)   Leased capacity. A license or franchise grantee shall have the right,
without prior Village approval, to offer or provide capacity or bandwidth to
its customers; provided:
      (1)   Grantee shall furnish the Village with a copy of any such lease or
agreement.
      (2)   The customer or lessee has complied, to the extent applicable, with
the requirements of this chapter.
   (Q)   Grantee insurance. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise
agreement, each grantee shall, as a condition of the grant, secure and maintain
the following liability insurance policies insuring both the grantee and the
Village and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees
as coinsureds:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less
than:
         (a)   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any one
accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars for all other types of liability.
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
limit of $3,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.
      (3)   Worker's compensation within statutory limits and employer's
liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.
      (4)   Comprehensive form premises- operations, explosions and collapse
hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not
less than $3,000,000.
      (5)   The liability insurance policies required by this division shall be
maintained by the grantee throughout the term of the telecommunications license
or franchise and such other period of time during which the grantee is
operating without a franchise or license hereunder or is engaged in the removal
of its telecommunications facilities. Each such insurance policy shall contain
the following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until ninety (90) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the Village
Manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
      (6)   Within 60 days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in
no event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the grantee shall
obtain and furnish to the Village replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this division.
   (R)   General indemnification. Each license or franchise agreement shall
include, to the extent permitted by law, grantee's express undertaking to
defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its officers, employees, agents and
representatives harmless from and against any and all damages, losses and
expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of suit or defense,
arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result from the
negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or misconduct
of the grantee or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents, contractors or
subcontractors in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal
of its telecommunications facilities, and in providing or offering
telecommunications services over the facilities or network, whether such acts
or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a
grant agreement made or entered into pursuant to this chapter.
   (S)   Performance and construction surety.  Before a license or franchise
granted pursuant to this chapter is effective, and as necessary thereafter, the
grantee shall provide and deposit such monies, bonds, letters of credit or
other instruments in form and substance acceptable to the Village as may be
required by this chapter or by an applicable license or franchise agreement.
   (T)   Security fund. Each grantee shall establish a permanent security fund
with the Village by depositing the amount of $50,000 with the Village in cash,
an unconditional letter of credit or other instrument acceptable to the
Village, which fund shall be maintained at the sole expense of grantee so long
as any of grantee's telecommunications facilities are located within the public
ways of the Village.
      (1)   The fund shall serve as security for the full and complete
performance of this chapter, including any costs, expenses, damages or loss the
Village pays or incurs because of any failure attributable to the grantee to
comply with the codes, ordinances, rules, regulations or permits of the
Village.
      (2)   Before any sums are withdrawn from the security fund, the Village
shall give written notice to the grantee:
         (a)   Describing the act, default or failure to be remedied, or the
damages, cost or expenses which the Village has incurred by reason of grantee's
act or default.
         (b)   Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to first remedy
the existing or ongoing default or failure, if applicable.
         (c)   Providing a reasonable opportunity for grantee to pay any monies
due the Village before the Village withdraws the amount thereof from the
security fund, if applicable.
         (d)   That the grantee will be given an opportunity to review the act,
default or failure described in the notice with the Village Manager or their
designee.
      (3)   Grantees shall replenish the security fund within 14 days after
written notice from the Village that there is a deficiency in the amount of the
fund.
   (U)   Construction and completion bond. Unless otherwise provided in a
license or franchise agreement, a performance bond written by a corporate
surety acceptable to the Village equal to at least 100% of the estimated cost
of constructing grantee's telecommunications facilities within the public ways
of the Village shall be deposited before construction is commenced.
      (1)   The construction bond shall remain in force until 60 days after
substantial completion of the work, as determined by the Building Director,
including restoration of public ways and other property affected by the
construction.
      (2)   The construction bond shall guarantee, to the satisfaction of the
Village:
         (a)   Timely completion of construction.
         (b)   Construction in compliance with applicable plans, permits,
technical codes and standards.
         (c)   Proper location of the facilities as specified by the Village.
         (d)   Restoration of the public ways and other property affected by
the construction.
         (e)   The submission of as-built drawings after completion of the work
as required by this chapter.
         (f)   Timely payment and satisfaction of all claims, demands or liens
for labor, material or services provided in connection with the work.
   (V)   Coordination of construction activities. All grantees are required to
cooperate with the Village and with each other.
      (1)   By February 1 of each year, grantees shall provide the Village with
a schedule of their proposed construction activities in, around or that may
affect the public ways.
      (2)   Each grantee shall meet with the Village, other grantees and users
of the public ways annually or as determined by the Village to schedule and
coordinate construction in the public ways.
      (3)   All construction locations, activities and schedules shall be
coordinated, as ordered by the Building Director, to minimize public
inconvenience, disruption or damages.
   (W)   Transfer and assignment.
      (1)   Except in the event of the merger, consolidation or reorganization
of a licensee or franchisee, the licensee or franchisee shall not have the
right to assign its rights and privileges under this chapter or to otherwise
transfer them in any manner whatsoever, without the prior written approval of
the Village, pursuant to an ordinance enacted by the corporate authorities.
      (2)   In the event of a transfer or assignment of the rights and
privileges of the licensee or franchisee under this chapter, all provisions of
this chapter which are obligatory upon, or which inure to the benefit of a
licensee or franchisee shall also be obligatory upon and shall inure to the
benefit of any and all successors and assigns of the licensee or franchisee.
   (X)   Transactions affecting control of grant. Any transactions which
singularly or collectively result in a change of 10% or more of the ownership
or working control of the grantee, of the ownership or working control of a
telecommunications license or franchise, of the ownership or working control of
affiliated entities having ownership or working control of the grantee or of a
telecommunications system, or of control of the capacity or bandwidth of
grantee's telecommunication system, facilities or substantial parts thereof,
shall be considered an assignment or transfer requiring Village approval
pursuant to division (W) hereof. Transactions between affiliated entities are
not exempt from Village approval.
   (Y)   Revocation or termination of grant. A license or franchise granted by
the Village to use or occupy public ways of the Village may be revoked for the
following reasons:
      (1)   Construction or operation in the Village or in the public ways of
the Village without a license or franchise grant of authorization.
      (2)   Construction or operation at an unauthorized location.
      (3)   Unauthorized substantial transfer of control of the grantee.
      (4)   Unauthorized assignment of a license or franchise.
      (5)   Unauthorized sale, assignment or transfer of grantee's franchise or
license assets, or a substantial interest therein.
      (6)   Misrepresentation or lack of candor by or on behalf of a grantee in
any application to the Village.
      (7)   Abandonment of telecommunications facilities in the public ways.
      (8)   Failure to relocate or remove facilities as required in this
chapter.
      (9)   Failure to pay taxes, compensation, fees or costs when and as due
the Village.
      (10)   Insolvency or bankruptcy of the grantee.
      (11)   Violation of material provisions of this chapter.
      (12)   Violation of the material terms of a license or franchise
agreement.
   (Z)   Notice and duty to cure. In the event that the Village Manager
believes that grounds exist for revocation of a license or franchise, they
shall give the grantee written notice of the apparent violation or
noncompliance, providing a short and concise statement of the nature and
general facts of the violation or noncompliance, and providing the grantee a
reasonable period of time not exceeding 30 days to furnish evidence:
      (1)   That corrective action has been, or is being actively and
expeditiously pursued, to remedy the violation or noncompliance.
      (2)   That rebuts the alleged violation or noncompliance.
      (3)   That it would be in the public interest to impose some penalty or
sanction less than revocation.
   (AA)   Hearing. In the event that a grantee fails to provide evidence
reasonably satisfactory to the Village Manager as provided in division (Z)
hereof, the Manager shall refer the apparent violation or noncompliance to the
corporate authorities. The corporate authorities shall provide the grantee with
notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard concerning the matter.
   (BB)   Standards for revocation or lesser sanctions.  If persuaded that the
grantee has violated or failed to comply with material provisions of this
chapter, or of a franchise or license agreement, the corporate authorities
shall determine whether to revoke the license or franchise, or to establish
some lesser sanction and cure, considering the nature, circumstances, extent
and gravity of the violation as reflected by one or more of the following
factors:
      (1)   Whether the misconduct was egregious.
      (2)   Whether substantial harm resulted.
      (3)   Whether the violation was intentional.
      (4)   Whether there is a history of prior violations of the same or other
requirements.
      (5)   Whether there is a history of overall compliance.
      (6)   Whether the violation was voluntarily disclosed, admitted or cured.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 100.10 CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   No person shall commence or continue with the construction, installation or
operation of telecommunications facilities within the Village except as
provided in this section.
   (A)   Construction codes. Telecommunications facilities shall be
constructed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local codes, rules and regulations including the
National Electrical Safety Code.
   (B)   Construction permits required. No person shall construct or install
any telecommunications facilities within the Village without first obtaining a
construction permit therefor; provided, however:
      (1)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities within the Village unless the telecommunications
carrier has filed a registration statement with the Village pursuant to §
100.05 of this chapter.
      (2)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities in the public ways unless the telecommunications
carrier has applied for and received a license or franchise pursuant to §§
100.06 or
100.07 of this chapter.
      (3)   No permit shall be issued for the construction or installation of
telecommunications facilities without payment of the construction permit fee
established in §
100.08(B) of this chapter.
   (C)   Applications for permits. Applications for permits to construct
telecommunications facilities shall be submitted upon forms to be provided by
the Village and shall be accompanied by drawings, plans and specifications in
sufficient detail to demonstrate:
      (1)   That the facilities will be constructed in accordance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations.
      (2)   The location and route of all facilities to be installed on
existing utility poles.
      (3)   The location and route of all facilities to be located under the
surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for the burial at
all points along the route which are within the public ways.
      (4)   The location of all existing underground utilities, conduits,
ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are within the public ways along
the underground route proposed by the applicant.
      (5)   The location of all other facilities to be constructed within the
Village, but not within the public ways.
      (6)   The construction methods to be employed for protection of existing
structures, fixtures and facilities within or adjacent to the public ways.
      (7)   The location, dimension and types of all trees within or adjacent
to the public ways along the route proposed by the applicant, together with a
landscape plan for protecting, trimming, removing, replacing and restoring any
trees or areas to be disturbed during construction.
   (D)   Engineer's certification. All permit applications shall be accompanied
by the certification of a registered professional engineer that the drawings,
plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable
technical codes, rules and regulations.
   (E)   Traffic-control plan. All permit applications which involve work on,
in, under, across or along any public ways shall be accompanied by a traffic-
control plan demonstrating the protective measures and devices that will be
employed, consistent with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices, to
prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to
efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (F)   Issuance of permit. Within 45 days after submission of all plans and
documents required of the applicant and payment of the permit fees required by
this chapter, the Building Director, if satisfied that the applications, plans
and document comply with all requirements of this chapter, shall issue a permit
authorizing construction of the facilities, subject to such further conditions,
restrictions or regulations affecting the time, place and manner of performing
the work as they may deem necessary or appropriate.
   (G)   Construction schedule. The permittee shall submit a written
construction schedule to the Building Director 10 working days before
commencing any work in or about the public ways. The permittee shall further
notify the Building Director not less than 2 working days in advance of any
excavation or work in the public ways.
   (H)   Compliance with permit. All construction practices and activities
shall be in accordance with the permit and approved final plans and
specifications for the facilities. The Building Director and their
representatives shall be provided access to the work and such further
information as they may require to ensure compliance with such requirements.
   (I)   Display of permit. The permittee shall maintain a copy of the
construction permit and approved plans at the construction site, which shall be
displayed and made available for inspection by the Building Director or his
representatives at all times when construction work is occurring.
   (J)   Survey of underground facilities. If the construction permit specifies
the location of facilities by depth, line, grade, proximity to other facilities
or other standard, the permittee shall cause the location of such facilities to
be verified by a registered Illinois land surveyor. The permittee shall
relocate any facilities which are not located in compliance with permit
requirements.
   (K)   Noncomplying work. Upon order of the Building Director, all work which
does not comply with the permit, the approved plans and specifications for the
work or the requirements of this chapter shall be removed.
   (L)   Completion of construction. The permittee shall promptly complete all
construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the Village ways and
other public and private property. All construction work authorized by a permit
within Village ways, including restoration, must be completed within 120 days
of the date of issuance.
   (M)   As-built drawings. Within 60 days after completion of construction,
the permittee shall furnish the Village with 2 complete sets of plans, drawn to
scale and certified to the Village as accurately depicting the location of all
telecommunications facilities constructed pursuant to the permit.
   (N)   Restoration of improvements. Upon completion of any construction work,
the permittee shall promptly repair any and all public and private property
improvements, fixtures, structures and facilities in the public ways or
otherwise damaged during the course of construction, restoring the same as
nearly as practicable to its condition before the start of construction.
   (O)   Landscape restoration.
      (1)   All trees, landscaping and grounds removed, damaged or disturbed as
a result of the construction, installation maintenance, repair or replacement
of telecommunications facilities, whether such work is done pursuant to a
franchise license or permit shall be replaced or restored as nearly as may be
practicable, to the condition existing prior to performance of work.
      (2)   All restoration work within the public ways shall be done in
accordance with landscape plans approved by the Building Director.
   (P)   Construction surety. Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the
permittee shall provide a performance bond, as provided in §
100.09(U) of this chapter.
   (Q)   Exceptions. Unless otherwise provided in a license or franchise
agreement, all telecommunications carriers are subject to the requirements of
this section.
   (R)   Responsibility of owner. The owner of the facilities to be constructed
and, if different, the license or franchise grantee, are responsible for
performance of and compliance with all provisions of this section.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalties. Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense. A
separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day on which a
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Other remedies. Nothing in this chapter shalt be construed as limiting
any judicial remedies that the Village may have, at law or in equity, for
enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007)
CHAPTER 101:STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-
OF-WAY
Section
   
101.01   Purpose and scope
   
101.02   Definitions
   
101.03   Annual registration required
   
101.04   Permit required; applications and fees
   
101.05   Action on permit applications
   
101.06   Effect of permit
   
101.07   Revised permit drawings
   
101.08   Insurance
   
101.09   Indemnification
   
101.10   Security
   
101.11   Permit suspension and revocation
   
101.12   Change of ownership or owner’s identity or legal status
   
101.13   General construction standards
   
101.14   Traffic control
   
101.15   Location of facilities
   
101.16   Construction methods and materials
   
101.17   Vegetation control
   
101.18   Removal, relocation or modifications of utility facilities
   
101.19   Cleanup and restoration
   
101.20   Maintenance and emergency maintenance
   
101.21   Variances
   
101.22   Enforcement
   
101.23   Severability
   
101.99   Penalty
§ 101.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to establish
policies and procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the
Village's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the Village
rights-of-way and the Village as a whole. In enacting this chapter, the Village
intends to exercise its authority over the rights-of-way in the Village and, in
particular, the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by
establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by utility
facilities, including without limitation:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      (5)   Protect against increased stormwater run-off due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      (6)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      (7)   Preserve open space, particularly the tree-lined parkways that
characterize the Village's residential neighborhoods;
      (8)   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (B)   Facilities subject to this chapter. This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way within the jurisdiction of the Village. A facility lawfully established
prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be maintained,
repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and located,
except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise, license or
similar agreement.
   (C)   Franchises, licenses, or similar agreements. The Village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the Village
rights-of-way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the Village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the Village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   (D)   Effect of franchises, licenses, or similar agreements.
      (1)   Utilities other than telecommunications providers.  In the event
that a utility (e.g., cable company, natural gas company, electric company,
etc.) other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the Village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      (2)   Telecommunications providers. In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the Village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (E)   Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict. This chapter also supplements the provisions of Title
IX (General Regulations) §
94.11 (Poles and Wires), §
94.13 (Openings and Stairways in Streets), §
94.18 (Vaults Under Street), §
94.19 (Excavations), §
94.22 (Restoration Bond Required for Work to be Performed on or Affecting
Public Improvements) and §
98.06 (Permits) and any other applicable provisions of this Code and the more
restrictive provisions of this Code shall control.
   (F)   Conflicts with state and federal laws. In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (G)   Sound engineering judgment. The Village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the Village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
Village to regulate its rights-of-way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 101.02 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise,
the words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in §
10.02 of this Code, Chapter 154 (Zoning Ordinance) of this Code, and 92 Ill.
Adm. Code § 530.30, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. Whether
these terms as used in this chapter are capitalized or not shall not have any
effect on their meaning as defined below.
   AASHTO. American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
   ANSI. American National Standards Institute.
   ASTM. American Society for Testing and Materials.
   APPLICANT. A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
   BACKFILL. The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a
trench or pit.
   BORE or BORING. To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the
insertion of a pipe or electrical conductor.
   BUILDING DIRECTOR. The Building Director or his or her designee, which may
include the Village Engineer.
   CABLE OPERATOR.  That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(5).
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6).
   CABLE SYSTEM. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7).
   CARRIER PIPE. The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be
transported.
   CASING. A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.
   CLEAR ZONE.  The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe  use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of
a shoulder, a recoverable slope, a non-recoverable slope, and a clear run-out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide, as amended.
   COATING. Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
   CODE. The Village Code of the Village of Maywood, Illinois.
   CONDUCTOR. Wire carrying electrical current.
   CONDUIT. A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
   CONSTRUCTION or CONSTRUCT. The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
   COVER. The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
   CROSSING FACILITY. A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of
a right-of-way.
   DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.  For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right-of-way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right-of-way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil; and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
   EMERGENCY. Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety
of the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
   ENCASEMENT. Provision of a protective casing.
   EQUIPMENT. Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used
to facilitate construction of facilities.
   EXCAVATION. The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying
bare by digging.
   EXTRA HEAVY PIPE. Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
   FACILITY. All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, equipment
enclosures, cabinets or boxes, communications and video cables and wires,
antennas, vaults, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables,
and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across,
or within rights-of-way under this chapter, except those owned or operated by
the Village. For purposes of this chapter, FACILITY shall not include any
facility owned or operated by the Village.
   FREESTANDING FACILITY. A facility that is not a crossing facility or a
parallel facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. A roadway, usually parallel, that provides access to land
adjacent to the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a
highway.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
Building Director to  pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life,
health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
   HIGHWAY. A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic
including rural or urban roads or streets. HIGHWAY includes all highway land
and improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges,
drainage structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
   HIGHWAY CODE. The Illinois Highway Code, 605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq., as
amended from time to time.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and
Video Competition Law, 220 ILCS 5/21- 401.
   ICC. Illinois Commerce Commission.
   IDOT. Illinois Department of Transportation.
   JACKING. Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means
with or without boring.
   JETTING. Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to
create a cavity ahead of the pipe.
   JOINT USE. The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by 2 or more
utilities.
   J.U.L.I.E. The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators utility
notification program.
   MAJOR INTERSECTION. The intersection of 2 or more major arterial highways.
   OCCUPANCY. The presence of facilities on, over or under a right-of-way.
   PARALLEL FACILITY. A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to
the centerline of a right-of-way.
   PARKWAY. Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
   PAVEMENT CUT.  The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or
for the construction of a facility.
   PERMITTEE. That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to §§
101.04 and 101.05 of this chapter.
   PRACTICABLE. That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than
that which is simply convenient.
   PRESSURE. The internal force acting radically against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
   PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES. Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal-slurry.
   PROMPT. That which is done within a period of time specified by the Village.
If no time period is specified, the period shall be 30 calendar days.
   PUBLIC ENTITY. A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
   RESTORATION. The repair of a right-of-way, easement, highway, roadway, or
other area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility and/or drainage easements in which the Village has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the Village. RIGHT-OF-WAY or RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall
not include any real or personal Village property that is not specifically
described in the previous sentence and shall not include Village buildings,
fixtures, and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are
situated in the right-of-way.
   ROADWAY.  That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
   SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL.  The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
   SECURITY FUND.  That amount of security required pursuant to §
101.10.
   SHOULDER. A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
   SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT. A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
   STRUCTURE or ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE.  As defined in §
101.02 of this Code or
Chapter 154 (Zoning Ordinance) of this Code.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary 2-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable 1-way or 2-way communications, and any other
transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means, between
or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. PRIVATE LINE means a dedicated non-traffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to 1 or more other specified locations.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. TELECOMMUNICATIONS
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-
to-end communications. TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the Cable Communications
Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. Sections 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended
or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee
payable to the Village through an open video system as defined in the Rules of
the Federal Communications Commission (47 C.F.R. § 76.1500 and following) as
now or hereafter amended.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER.  Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form. TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER also shall  include
cable service providers and video service providers as those terms are used in
the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-100 et. seq.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER. Means and includes every person engaged in
making sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
   TRENCH. A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
   UTILITY. The individual or entity owning or operating any facility as
defined in this chapter.
   VENT. A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
   VIDEO SERVICE. That term as defined in Section 21-201(v) of the Illinois
Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007, 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).
   VILLAGE. The Village of Maywood, Illinois.
   WATER LINES. Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
   WET BORING. Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 101.03 ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the Village shall register
on January 1 of each year with the Buildling Director, providing the utility’s
name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers, the name of
1 or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in connection
with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in the right-of-way and a
24-hour telephone number for each such person, and evidence of insurance as
required in §
101.08 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 101.04 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall construct (as defined in this
chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any Village right-of-way which changes the location of the facility, adds a new
facility, disrupts the right-of way (as defined in this chapter), or materially
increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on, over, above,
along, under across or within the right-of-way, without first filing an
application with the Building Director and obtaining a permit from the Village
therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No permit shall be
required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers’
premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way.
   (B)   Permit application. All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the Village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the Village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as proprietary or
confidential by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum general application requirements. The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      (1)   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers.
      (2)   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility,
its telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work.
      (3)   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application.
      (4)   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed.
      (5)   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the Village:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the latest edition
of the Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or
damage to persons or property and to minimize disruptions to efficient
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the Village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the Village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed.
      (6)   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an Illinois registered professional engineer
that such drawings, plans, and specifications comply with applicable codes,
rules, and regulations. Such plans shall at a minimum address the applicable
construction standards in this Code and include but not be limited to:
         (a)   Sufficient detail of existing right-of-way and easements
dimensioned from a section corner, lot corners or other known survey
monumentation.
         (b)   As may be required by the Village, sufficient topographic
information identifying all existing physical features along and near the
proposed utility site(s), including but not limited to the edge of roadway
pavement, existing utilities, trees and bushes, street lights, roadway signage,
drainage ditches/swales, etc. Grading information shall be provided for all
proposed utility sites where existing drainage problems exist.
         (c)   Proposed permanent and temporary easements as may be required to
construct proposed utilities. Plats of easement shall be provided as necessary.
         (d)   Detail drawings depicting the width, length, height, color and
materials for all utility structures proposed to protrude above the ground
surface.
         (e)   Sufficient notes describing construction methods, proposed depth
of facilities, separation from existing utilities, proposed final grading plan,
ground restoration specifications, and erosion control plans as may be
required.
      (7)   Evidence of insurance as required in §
101.08 of this chapter.
      (8)   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in §
101.10 of this chapter.
      (9)   Any request for a variance from 1 or more provisions of this
chapter (See §
101.21).
      (10)   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
Village.
   (D)   Supplemental application requirements for specific types of utilities.
In addition to the requirements of division (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      (1)   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected, to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      (2)   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      (3)   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied;
      (4)   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District, and any other local or state entities with jurisdiction, have been
satisfied; or
      (5)   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or
types of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the
design standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant's duty to update information. Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the Village within 30 days after the
change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application fees. Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee as set forth in §
100.08 of this Code. No application fee is required to be paid by any municipal
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the Electricity
Infrastructure Maintenance Fee Act.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 101.05 ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Village review of permit applications. Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Building
Director within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules,
and regulations, the Building Director shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the Building Director is satisfied
that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and all
applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the Building
Director shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all
instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the
satisfaction of the Building Director, that the construction proposed under the
application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Additional Village review of applications of telecommunications
retailers and holders of state authorization under the Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007.
      (1)   Pursuant to Section 4 of the Telephone Company Act, 220 ILCS 65/4,
a telecommunications retailer shall notify the Village that it intends to
commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the Village not less than 10 days prior to the commencement of work
requiring no excavation and not less than 30 days prior to the commencement of
work requiring excavation. The Building Director shall specify the portion of
the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      (2)   In the event that the Building Director fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either 10
days after service of notice to the Village by the telecommunications retailer
in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction or 25 days
after service of notice by the telecommunications retailer in the case of work
involving excavation for new construction, the telecommunications retailer may
commence work without obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      (3)   Upon the provision of such specification by the Village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to §
101.04 of this chapter, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the
Village an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of division (A) of this
section.
      (4)   Holders of state authorization under the Cable and Video
Competition Law of 2007. Applications by a utility that is a holder of a state-
issued authorization under the Cable and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be
deemed granted 45 days after submission to the Village, unless otherwise acted
upon by the Village, provided the holder has complied with applicable Village
codes, ordinances, and regulations.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 101.06 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A
permit from the Village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on Village rights-of-way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in or adjacent to the rights-of-
way.
   (B)   Duration. No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than 6 months unless construction is actually begun within that
period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Pre-construction meeting required. No construction shall begin
pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the
permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any
work under the permit at a pre-construction meeting. The pre-construction
meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by the Village with
such Village representatives in attendance as the Village deems necessary. The
meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and
reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur,
including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities
in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other
utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and access
and egress by adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Business license required. All contractors and subcontractors
performing work or construction activities authorized by a permit issued by the
Village shall be properly licensed and bonded in accordance with the
requirements of this Code. Issuance of a permit by the Village does not excuse
the contractors and subcontractors of the applicant from obtaining the proper
Village licenses to do business in the Village.
   (E)   Compliance with all laws required. The issuance of a permit by the
Village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the Village and all applicable federal, state, county and local statutes, laws,
ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 101.07 REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS.
   In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of "as-built" drawings or plans to the Village within 90
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with §
101.21 of this chapter. If the Village denies the request for a variance, then
the permittee, at its cost, shall either remove the facility from the right-of-
way or modify the facility so that it conforms to the permit and submit revised
drawings or plans therefor.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 101.08 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required coverages and limits. Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying a right-of-way or
constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and specifically naming the Village, and its elected and appointed officials,
officers, president and trustees, agents, employees, representatives,
consultants, attorneys, engineers and volunteers as additional insureds on the
policies listed in divisions (1) and (2) below:
      (1)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X," "C," and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
         (a)   Five million dollars for bodily injury or death to each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars for property damage resulting from any 1
accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars for all other types of liability;
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with
combined single limit of $1,000,000 for personal injury and property damage for
each accident;
      (3)   Worker's compensation with statutory limits; and
      (4)   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than
$1,000,000 per employee and per accident.
NOTE: If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors
and subcontractors performing the work, then the contractors and subcontractors
shall each comply with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Excess or umbrella policies. The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following-form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies required. The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the Village within 10 days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the Village.
   (D)   Maintenance and renewal of required coverages.
      (1)   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by
the Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of
a written notice addressed to the Village Manager of such intent to cancel or
not to renew."
      (2)   Within 10 days after receipt by the Village of said notice, and in
no event later than 10 days prior to said cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the Village evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-insurance. A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by division (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under division (A) or the requirements of divisions (B), (C), and (D)
of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide to the
Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under division (A) of
this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self insurer"
under the Workers Compensation Act.
   (F)   Effect of insurance and self-insurance on utility's liability. The
legal liability of the utility to the Village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance companies. All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be written under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
All insurance companies and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and be of a class size "X" or higher as rated by A.M. Best Company or any
similar insurer rating company.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 101.09 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall
be deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the Village and its elected
and appointed officials, officers, president and trustees, agents, employees,
representatives, consultants, attorneys, engineers and volunteers harmless from
and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses
and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of suit or
defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or result
from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to act or
misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees, agents,
contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or occupancy of
the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the facilities,
whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or prohibited by this
chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement; provided, however,
that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not apply to any
injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses arising out
of or resulting solely and exclusively from the negligence, misconduct or
breach of this chapter by the Village, its officials, officers, president and
trustees, agents, employees, representatives, consultants, attorneys, engineers
and volunteers.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 101.10 SECURITY.
   (A)   Purpose. The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The security fund shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements
of this chapter;
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the Village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the Village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      (3)   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the Village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the Village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the Village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form. The permittee shall provide the security fund to the Village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the Village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the Village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this division shall, at a minimum:
      (1)   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
Village and the permittee;
      (2)   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the Village of any amounts covered by it; and
      (3)   Shall provide a location convenient to the Village and within the
State of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount. The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to satisfy the items identified in
divisions (A) (1), (2) and (3) above and shall be determined by the Village
Engineer, in their discretion, based on estimated project costs as set forth in
the permittee’s application. The restoration of the right-of-way shall be
performed to at least as good a condition as that existing prior to the
construction under the permit, as determined by the Director of Sustainability
and Innovation, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs,
including attorney’s fees, that the Village estimates are likely to be incurred
if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. The reasonably estimate
cost as described above shall be multiplied by 125% to establish the security
fund amount. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit
will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the Village, with each
phase consisting of construction of facilities in 1 location or a related group
of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be undertaken
prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases,
the Director of Sustainability and Innovation may, in the exercise of sound
discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall
be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of
the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount
that would have been required under the provisions of this division for any
single phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals. The Village, upon 14 calendar days advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this division, may withdraw an amount from the security fund, provided
that the permittee has not reimbursed the Village for such amount within the
14-day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      (1)   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      (2)   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      (3)   Fails to reimburse the Village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the Village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or non-performance by the permittee; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the Village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   (E)   Replenishment. Within 14 calendar days after receipt of written notice
from the Village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security fund, the
permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in division
(C) of this section.
   (F)   Interest. The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the Village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the Village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in division (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing and return of security fund. Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit as confirmed by the Village, the permittee shall be
entitled to the return of the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains
on deposit, within a reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets
necessary to compensate the Village for failure by the permittee to comply with
any provisions of this chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any
revocation of the permit, the security fund, and any and all accrued interest
therein, shall become the property of the Village to the extent necessary to
cover any reasonable costs, loss or damage incurred by the Village as a result
of said revocation, provided that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or
damage shall be refunded to the permittee.
   (H)   Rights not limited.  The rights reserved to the Village with respect
to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the Village,
whether reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of any right with respect to said security fund shall
affect any other right the Village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights, which may be infringed or otherwise violated.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 101.11 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Village right to revoke permit. The Village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      (1)   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      (2)   Non-compliance with this chapter;
      (3)   The permittee's physical presence or presence of perrnittee's
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights-
of-way presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or
welfare; or
      (4)   The permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially
in accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice of revocation or suspension. The Village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee alternatives upon receipt of notice of revocation or
suspension. Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the Village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      (1)   Immediately provide the Village with evidence, that no cause exists
for the revocation or suspension;
      (2)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the Village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the Village within 5 working days after receipt of the written
notice of revocation; or
      (3)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way
to the satisfaction of the Village, providing written proof of such removal to
the Village within 10 working days after receipt of the written notice of
revocation. The Village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend
the time periods provided in this division.
   (D)   Stop work order. In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the Village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within division (A) of
this section.
   (E)   Failure or refusal of the permittee to comply. 
      (1)   If the permittee fails to comply with the provisions of division
(C) above, the Village or its designee may, at the option of the Village:
         (a)   Correct the deficiencies;
         (b)   Upon not less than 20 days notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or
         (c)   After not less than 30 days notice to the permittee of failure
to cure the non-compliance, deem them abandoned and property of the Village.
      (2)   The permittee shall be liable in all events to the Village for all
costs of removal, storage or disposal of any equipment or facilities and any
contractor fees, consultant fees or attorney's fees and related expenses
incurred by the Village as a consequence of the permittee's failure or refusal
to comply with division (C) above.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 101.12 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS.
   (A)   Notification of change.  A utility shall notify the Village no less
than 30 calendar days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Amended permit. A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership within 30 calendar days of assuming ownership
or control of the utility. If the new owner fails to have a new or amended
permit issued in its name within the 30-day period, the new owner shall be
presumed to have accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions
of the permit if the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the
Village's right-of-way.
   (C)   Insurance and bonding. All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 101.13 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards and principles. All construction in the right-of-way shall
be consistent with applicable federal, state, county and local laws,
ordinances, codes, rules and regulations, and commonly recognized and accepted
traffic control and construction principles, sound engineering judgment,
including §
101.21 of this Code. Where applicable, the principles and standards set forth
in the following IDOT publications, as amended:
      (1)   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      (2)   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      (3)   Highway Design Manual;
      (4)   Highway Standards Manual;
      (5)   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      (6)   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Ill. Adm.
Code § 545);
      (7)   Flagger's Handbook; and
      (8)   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations.
   (B)   Interpretation of municipal standards and principles. If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Building Director shall determine, based on the recommendation of
the Village Engineer, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the Building Director shall state which standard or principle
will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a facility in the
future.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 101.14 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Minimum requirements. The Village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code.
   (B)   Warning signs, protective devices, and flaggers. The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   (C)   Interference with traffic. All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice when access is blocked. At least 48 hours prior to beginning
work that will partially or completely block access to any residence, business
or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or institution
of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work; provided, however,
that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to §
101.20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance. The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the Village.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 101.15 LOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   General requirements. In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this division.
      (1)   No interference with Village facilities. No utility facilities
shall be placed in any location if the Building Director determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
Village’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the Village’s utility facilities.
      (2)   Minimum interference and impact. The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      (3)   No interference with travel. No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      (4)   No limitations on visibility. No utility facility shall be placed
in any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      (5)   Size of utility facilities. The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
      (6)   New utility facilities (utility service cables, wires, ducts and
lines). All new service facilities, which include utility service cables,
wires, ducts and lines, that serve new customers within the Village that
traditionally are installed overhead shall be installed underground, at the
cost of the utility. Utilities may repair and replace existing overhead service
facilities without having to install such facilities underground, unless
underground placement is requested by the Village and the parties reach a
mutual agreement regarding the payment of the costs of the underground
installation.
   (B)   Parallel facilities located within highways.
      (1)   Overhead parallel facilities. An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right-of-way
line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of 2 feet (0.6 m) behind the face of the
curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of 4 feet (1.2 m) outside the outer
shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground-mounted appurtenance is located within 1 foot (0.3 m)
of the right-of-way line or as near as possible to the right-of-way tine.
      (2)   Underground parallel facilities. An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right-of-way line as
practicable and not more than 5 feet (1.5 m) from the right-of-way line, and
any above-ground appurtenance shall be located within 1 foot (0.3 m) of the
right-of-way line or as near as practicable;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   The design parameters specified in this division (B)(2)(a) above
shall be used as guidelines to be followed in all cases unless special
circumstances, as determined by the Building Director, warrant consideration of
a variance.
   (C)   Facilities crossing highways.
      (1)   No future disruption. The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of Village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      (2)   Cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities. Crossing
facilities shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage
facilities.
      (3)   90-degree crossing required. Crossing facilities shall cross at or
as near to a 90-degree angle to the centerline as practicable.
      (4)   Overhead power or communication facility. An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled "Construction of Electric Power and Communication Lines" (83
Ill. Adm. Code 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within 1 foot (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line
of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      (5)   Underground power or communication facility. An underground power
or communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance-free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      (6)   Markers. The Village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 C.F.R. § 192.707
(1989)).
   (D)   Facilities to be located within particular rights-of-way. The Village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways. As part of its
application, the permittee shall be required to submit a site plan showing the
proposed location of the facilities for Village approval by the Building
Director when the permittee desires to locate any facilities in a public right-
of-way. The site plan shall be drawn to scale on a sheet not less than 8½
inches x 11 inches, which contains the location of property lines; location of
proposed facilities, all buildings, structures, improvements, fences, and paved
areas on immediately adjacent properties; location of each natural landscaping
area; the type of screening and landscape buffer to be installed around the
perimeter of the facilities, a list by scientific and common name of vegetative
species intended to be planted, cultivated, and maintained as part of the
landscape buffer; and the setback distance of the facilities and landscape
buffer that will be located near any property line. The Village may require
that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways. The landscaping and screening
requirements specified herein are intended to foster aesthetically pleasing
improvements within rights-of-way which will protect and preserve the
appearance, character, health, safety, and welfare of the community.
   (E)   Freestanding facilities.
      (1)   The Village may restrict the location and size of any proposed
freestanding facility to be located within a right-of-way as part of the
approval of the application, the site plan and the landscape plan.
      (2)   Except for telephone poles and related wires, any freestanding
facility located within a right-of-way shall be screened with earthen berms,
landscape materials or a solid wood or masonry fence or a combination of such
screening, as determined appropriate and necessary by the Building Director, to
effectively screen the facility from public view.
   (F)   Appearance standards.
      (1)   The Village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality and appearance,
character, health, safety, and welfare of the community.
      (2)   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right-of-way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed or create a
safety hazard to pedestrians, bicycle riders and motorists using the right-of-
way or adjacent streets, parkways and sidewalks.
      (3)   All screening (fences) and landscape materials shall be maintained
in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance;
shall be replaced when dead or dying or in disrepair; and shall be kept free of
refuse and debris. The permittee shall be responsible for the maintenance,
repair and replacement of all required screening and landscape materials or may
contract with the Village to provide such services.
      (4)   Effective year-round landscape screening shall be provided to
lessen the visual prominence of facilities. Innovative landscape design
proposals that promote sustainability, reduce irrigation requirements, and that
utilize effective on site storm water management techniques are encouraged.
Thoughtful selection and placement of plant material based on ecological
principles are also encouraged.
   (G)   Facilities installed above ground. Above ground facilities may be
installed only if:
      (1)   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      (2)   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      (3)   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single-pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing (or substantially similar) design and color of utility poles
and light standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of
additional utility poles is strongly discouraged.
   (H)   Facility attachments to bridges or roadway structures.
      (1)   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      (2)   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 101.16 CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS.
   (A)   Standards and requirements for particular types of construction
methods.
      (1)   Boring or jacking. All work shall be done in accordance with the
applicable provisions of Section 552 of the IDOT Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction.
         (a)   Pits and shoring.  Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall
be accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
Building Director from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking
shall be excavated no more than 48 hours in advance of boring or jacking
operations and backfilled within 48 hours after boring or jacking operations
are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly marked and protected
by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected, supported, braced, and
maintained so that it will safely support all vertical and lateral loads that
may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking operation.
         (b)   Wet boring or jetting. Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings with diameters greater than 6 inches. Borings over 6
inches (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished by directional drilling or
with an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not
exceed the outside diameter of the following pipe by more than 1 inch (25 mm)
unless otherwise approved in advance by the Village Engineer.
         (d)   Borings with diameters 6 inches or less.  Borings of 6 inches or
less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, directional drilling,
guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree preservation. Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the Village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      (2)   Trenching. Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights-of-way shalt be done in accord with the applicable
portions of Section 603 of IDOT's Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction and any open trench areas not backfilled by the end of any workday
shall be enclosed with construction fencing in accordance with the provisions
of § 94.19 of this Code.
         (a)   Length. The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe-line testing. Only
one-half of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless special
permission is obtained from the Building Director.
         (b)   Open trench and excavated material. Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by Chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location. Trench boxes shall be used as required
by the applicable regulations set forth in OSHA.
         (c)   Tree drip line. The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the Village to be preserved.
      (3)   Backfilling.
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of 3 years from the date construction of a facility
is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore any
backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Building Director, the utility, at its expense, shalt within 10
working days remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the
installed facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and
restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as
determined by the Building Director.
      (4)   Pavement cuts. Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this division is
permitted under §
101.21, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under or within 2 feet of any paved areas shall
be backfilled and compacted as soon as practicable with granular material of
CA-6, CA-7 or CA-10 gradation, as designated by the Building Director.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the Village.
         (c)   All pavement removals shall be accomplished by straight, full
depth saw cuts.
         (d)   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last 7 years, or resurfaced in the last 3 years,
pavement cut permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to be
an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
J.U.L.I.E. locate.
      (5)   Encasement.
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shalt be continuous either
by 1-piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
Village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within 1
foot (0.3m) of the right-of-way line. No above-ground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or Village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the Village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of 60 psig or less, encasement may
be eliminated as approved by the Building Director.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than 60 psig, encasement may be eliminated only if:
            1.   Extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair and
            2.   Cathodic protection of the pipe is provided;
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      (6)   Minimum cover of underground facilities. Cover shall be provided
and maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for
minimum cover for the type of facility:
 
TYPE OF FACILITY                         MINIMUM COVER
Power or communication line (in general; 30 inches
electric lines                            
Communication, cable or video service     
lines                                    18 to 24 inches
Gas or petroleum products                30 inches
                                         Sufficient cover to provide freeze
Water line                               protection or 66 inches, as determined
                                         by the Village Engineer
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage  Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                     protection or 48 inches, as determined
                                         by the Village Engineer
 
   (B)   Standards and requirements for particular types of facilities.
      (1)   Electric power or communication lines.
         (a)   Code compliance. Electric power or communications facilities
within Village rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Ill, Adm. Code Part 305 (formerly General
Order 160 of the Illinois Commerce Commission) entitled "Rules for Construction
of Electric Power and Communications Lines," and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         (b)   Overhead facilities. Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so that guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be
allowed if there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with
guy guards for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground facilities.
            1.   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            2.   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if:
               a.   The crossing is installed by the use of "moles," "whip
augers," or other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening
for cable installation or
               b.   The installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            3.   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Safety Code.
         (d)   Burial of drops. All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the Village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within 10 business days after
placement.
      (2)   Underground facilities other than electric power or communication
lines. Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles," "whip augers," or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      (3)   Gas transmission. Distribution and service. Gas pipelines within
rights-of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a Village
approved manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of
Pipeline Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, Part 192 –
Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety
Standards (49 C.F.R. § 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction," and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      (4)   Petroleum products pipelines. Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping. (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      (5)   Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm water sewer lines or
drainage lines. Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois."
      (6)   Ground-mounted appurtenances.  Ground-mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall
be provided with a vegetation-free area extending 1 foot (305 mm) in width
beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation-free area may be
provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the Building Director. With the approval of the
Building Director, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place
of vegetation free area. The housing for ground-mounted appurtenances shall be
painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   (C)   Materials.
      (1)   General standards. The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standards
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction," the requirements of the
Illinois Commerce Commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      (2)   Material storage on right-of-way. No material shall be stored on
the right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Building Director.
No such material shall be stored in the drip line of any trees. When such
storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms, or other
materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
right-of-way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If
materials are to be stored on right-of-way during the project prior written
approval must be obtained from the Building Director and at the end of any
workday, such materials shall be enclosed with construction fencing to prevent
an accident or injury.
      (3)   Hazardous materials. The plans submitted by the utility to the
Village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational restrictions.
      (1)   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the Village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      (2)   These restrictions may be waived by the Building Director when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      (3)   Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, the hours for
construction operations in rights-of-way are the same as those set forth for
construction or repair of buildings in §
92.30(B)(10) of this Code.
   (E)   Location of existing facilities. Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the Village shall contact J.U.L.I.E. and ascertain the presence
and location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the
rights-of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The Village will make
its permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying
possible facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the
Village or by J.U.L.I.E., a utility shall locate and physically mark its
underground facilities within 48 hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in
accordance with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220
ILCS 50/1 et seq.)
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 101.17 VEGETATION CONTROL.
   (A)   Electric utilities - compliance with state laws and regulations. An
electric utility shall conduct all tree-trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way in accordance with applicable Illinois and local
laws and regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other
agreement with the Village as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other utilities - tree trimming permit required. Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      (1)   Application for tree trimming permit. Applications for tree
trimming permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by
competent workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      (2)   Damage to trees. Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The Village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The Village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen trees or trees of special significance. The Village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical use. No utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on
or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation in the Village for any purpose,
including the control of growth, insects or disease, unless the utility
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Village Building Director that such
spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 101.18 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the Village, a
utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently
disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any utility
facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the Village has determined that
such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the
construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any Village improvement
in or upon, or the operations of the Village in or upon, the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Removal of unauthorized facilities. Within 30 days following written
notice from the Village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      (2)   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior
grant of a license or franchise, if required;
      (3)   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      (4)   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The Village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the Village, as the Village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the Village shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of- way of the Village, the utility shall notify the Village within 90
days. Following receipt of such notice the Village may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the Building Director determines
that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and
welfare. In the event that the Village does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
Village the abandoning utility shalt be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 101.19 CLEANUP AND RESTORATION.
   The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and
terrain and other property within 10 working days after any portion of the
rights-of-way are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or
maintenance by the utility, all to the satisfaction of the Village as
determined by the Building Director. This includes restoration of entrances and
side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using materials and
methods approved by the Building Director. Such cleanup and repair may be
required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding, resodding, or any
other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition substantially
equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the project. The
time period provided in this section may be extended by the Building Director
for good cause shown.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-201)
§ 101.20 MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   General.  Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights-of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the Village and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency maintenance procedures. Emergencies may justify non-
compliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      (1)   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking of equipment on the shoulder in order to make repair
operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the
shoulder in such an emergency will be permitted only when no other means of
access to the facility is available.
      (2)   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Building Director or his or her duly authorized agent of the emergency,
informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection of the
traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If
the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of
traffic, the utility shall immediately notify the Village police.
      (3)   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to
complete repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to
the traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency repairs. The utility must file in writing with the Village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within 48 hours after
an emergency repair.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 101.21 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Request for variance. A utility requesting a variance from 1 or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Building
Director as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each
provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority to grant variances. The Building Director shall decide on an
individual basis whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this
chapter identified in the variance request.
   (C)   Conditions for granting of variance. The Building Director may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      (1)   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such
as terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special
hardship that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the
public purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      (2)   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform to the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional conditions for granting of a variance. As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Building Director may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right to appeal. Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Building
Director under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to
the Village Board, or such other board or commission as it may designate. The
application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the Village Clerk
within 30 days after the date of such order, requirement, decision or
determination. The Village Board shall commence its consideration of the appeal
at the Board’s next regularly scheduled meeting occurring at least 7 days after
the filing of the appeal. The Village Board (or other board with jurisdiction)
shall timely decide the appeal and the decision shall be final.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 101.22 ENFORCEMENT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the Village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 101.23 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 101.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this Code, as amended. There may be times when the Village will incur
delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility will
not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless the
utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested
action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the Village's costs of damages
and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing
the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other administrative agency
or commission may review or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the
Village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs
apportioned to it.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007; Am. Ord. C0-07-46, passed 11-6-2007)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Chapter
   
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES
   
111.   GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   
112.   ROOMING HOUSES
   
113.   NURSING HOMES
   
114.   AMUSEMENTS
   
115.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND CANVASSERS
   
116.   TOBACCO
   
117.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
   
118.   TAXICABS
   
119.   LIVERY SERVICES
   
120.   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
   
121.   GARAGE SALES
   
122.   PAY TELEPHONES
   
123.   CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
   
124.   CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS, RELATED PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS
SUPPORT FEE
   
125.   VIDEO GAMING
   
126.   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANIES
   
127.   CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULE COUNTY ORDINANCES
   
128.   VACATION RENTALS
   
129A.   CANNABIS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   
129B.   JOINT COMMISSION FOR TOBACCO AND CANNABIS REGULATION AND LICENSING
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
   
110.01   Licenses required
   
110.02   Issuance
   
110.03   Applications for business licenses and certificates of registration
   
110.04   Investigation
   
110.05   Payment of fee
   
110.06   License period
   
110.07   Debt to Village
   
110.08   Display
   
110.09   Renewal
   
110.10   Suspension and revocation
   
110.11   Examination
   
110.12   Public ways
   
110.13   Fees
   
110.14   Premises to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations
   
110.15   Transferability
   
110.16   Inspections
   
110.17   Hearing
   
110.18   Registration of business
   
110.19   Prevention of loitering
§ 110.01 LICENSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is the intent of this chapter to require that all business,
commercial and industrial activities in the Village of whatever nature except
those listed in §
110.18 obtain a license to operate. The requirement of a general business
license and the imposition of a fee therefor is intended:
      (1)   To provide the Village with complete identifying information
concerning businesses and their owners and the owners of the premises on which
the businesses are located, in order to protect the business in case of
emergency, and to protect the public and other businesses in case of complaints
alleging unsanitary or unsafe conditions;
      (2)   To reimburse the Village for the cost of administering the license
regulations of the Village to the extent that such cost is not paid by license
fees received for the issuance of other licenses provided for under this Code;
and
      (3)   To provide reimbursement to the Village for the cost of inspections
and investigations conducted by Village personnel for businesses not licensed
under other sections of this Code.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation not otherwise licensed by this Code
except those engaged in a business listed in §
110.18 shall engage in any commercial, business or industrial activity of
whatever kind in the Village without first having obtained a general business
license as provided in this section. Application for a general business license
shall be made in conformance with the requirements of §
110.03 relating to applications for licenses.
   (C)   General business licenses shall be of 4 types:
      (1)   Type “A” general business licenses shall require the payment of a
fee of $200 and shall apply to retail businesses which regularly invite the
public into their establishment for the purpose of providing goods and
services, and to other businesses which are subject to substantial regulation
by this Code and which require substantial investigation and an inspection
prior to the issuance of a license or during its term;
      (2)   Type “B” general business licenses shall require the payment of a
fee of $100. Type “B” licenses shall apply to all businesses in the Village
which consist solely of an office, provided goods are not actually transferred
within the office;
      (3)   Type “C” general business licenses shall require the payment of a
fee of $100 and shall apply to all businesses required to be licensed under
this section and not included in Type “A,” Type “B” or “industrial
establishment” licenses. In general, Type “C” general business licenses shall
apply to businesses other than mere offices, retail businesses and
manufacturing establishments which do not require substantial investigation and
inspection by the Village and are not subject to substantial regulation under
this Code;
      (4)   "Industrial establishment" licenses shall apply to those businesses
which occupy a building or premises or a portion thereof, the principal use of
which is for manufacturing, including assembly, processing, fabrication and
storage or scientific research and development. The license fee for industrial
establishment licenses shall be the applicable fee set forth in §
110.13 of this Code.
   (D)   The Building Director shall make the initial determination as to
whether each applicant for a general business license shall be required to
obtain a Type “A,” Type “B,” Type “C” or “industrial establishment” license. He
shall make his determination after reviewing the information provided in each
application in light of the factors noted in division (C) above, and the intent
of the section that businesses subject to substantial regulation under this
Code shall pay their share of the cost of the Village business regulation
program and that businesses licensed primarily for registration and information
gathering purposes shall pay a nominal fee or no fee. The decision of the
Building Director in this matter may be appealed to the Village Manager, whose
decision shall be final.
(1997 Code, § 31.01) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9- 1977; Am. Ord. 82-23, passed 12-
23-1982; Am. Ord. 83-9, passed 5-26-1983; Am. Ord. 87-2, passed 1-8-1987; Am.
Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am.
Ord. CO-2022-22, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 110.02 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   In all cases where licenses are required to be procured, such licenses
shall be granted by the Village President, or his or her designee, and attested
by the Village Clerk, except where provision is expressly made for the granting
of licenses by some other officer of the Village.
   (B)   All licenses, authorized to be issued and required to be procured by
any provision of this Chapter, which are granted by the Village President, or
his or her designee, shall be issued by the Village Clerk, except where
otherwise specifically provided, upon instruction or direction from the Village
President, or his or her designee.
   (C)   All such licenses so issued shall bear the seal of the Village, the
name of the licensee, address, nature or kind of business or occupation
licenses, amount of fee paid, and such other material information as the
Village President and Director of Finance shall prescribe. All licenses shall
be subject to the provisions of this title and chapter which may be in force at
the time of the issuance thereof or which may subsequently be passed by the
Board of Trustees.
(1997 Code, § 31.02) (Ord. CO-2014-14, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 110.03 APPLICATIONS FOR BUSINESS LICENSES AND CERTIFICATES OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All applications for business licenses and all applications for
certificates of registration shall be made in writing to the Director of
Finance on a form provided for that purpose.
   (B)   Every application for a license and every application for a
certificate of registration shall contain the name of the applicant, the
address and telephone number of the applicant’s place of business, and the
address and telephone number of the owner of the premises on which the
applicant’s place of business is located. If the applicant is a partnership or
firm, the application shall contain the names and residence addresses and
telephone numbers of each of its members; if a limited partnership, the names
and residence addresses and telephone numbers of each general partner thereof;
and if a corporation, the application shall contain the names and residence
addresses and telephone numbers of its principal officers. In addition to such
statements, there shall be set forth in such application such other information
as may be required by the Village Manager, the Director of Finance or the
Building Director in order for them to administer the provisions of this Code.
   (C)   The Director of Finance shall be the custodian of all applications for
business licenses and certificates of registration.
(1997 Code, § 31.03) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9- 1977; Am. Ord. 83-9, passed 5-26-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-
2021)
§ 110.04 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Except where otherwise specifically provided, upon receipt of an
application for a license which requires an investigation or an inspection by
any department or board of the Village, and the approval thereof as to the
character or fitness of any applicant for a license, or as to the proper
location or condition of the premises in which the business for which a license
is applied is to be managed, conducted, operated or carried on, the Director of
Finance shall transmit to each department or board charged with the
investigation and approval of any such application such information as may be
necessary in order that the required investigation or inspection may be made.
Each department head or president of a board charged with such investigation or
inspection shall, immediately upon receipt of such information from the
Director of Finance, cause an investigation or inspection to be made and shall,
within 10 calendar days after the receipt of the information from the Director
of Finance, either approve or disapprove the issuance of such license and shall
notify the Director of Finance accordingly.
   (B)   Upon receiving satisfactory proof from the Director of Finance that
the applicant or each of the principal officers, if the applicant is a
corporation, is a fit and proper person to be granted such license, and that
all laws and provisions of this chapter, title and code regulating the business
or occupation for which such license is applied for have been complied with,
the Village President, or his or her designee, may authorize the issuance of
the license by the Village Clerk.
(1997 Code, § 31.04) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9-1977; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed
4-1-2014)
§ 110.05 PAYMENT OF FEE.
   (A)   All applications for a license made to the Director of Finance shall,
after approval by the Building Director as to compliance with all applicable
Codes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village, be accompanied by the
full amount of the fee payable for such license.
   (B)   Whenever a license cannot be issued at the time the application for
the same is made, the Director of Finance shall issue a receipt to the
applicant for the money paid in advance. All such receipts shall have plainly
indicated thereon that the receipt of payment of the license fee is not to be
construed as the issuance of a license.
   (C)   No such receipt, or the payment of any license fee in advance of the
issuance of the license in due form, shall entitle or authorize any person to
any of the rights or privileges conferred by the issuance of any license or to
the opening or maintaining of any business or establishment contrary to any of
the provisions of this chapter.
(197 Code, § 31.05) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9- 1977; Am. Ord. 83-9, passed 5-26-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-
2021)
§ 110.06 LICENSE PERIOD.
   Except where otherwise expressly provided, no license shall be granted for a
period longer than 1 year, and except where otherwise expressly provided every
license shall expire on December 31 following the date of its issuance. No
license shall be issued for any period of time less than a year or for a sum
less than the full annual license fee, except when otherwise expressly
provided.
(1997 Code, § 31.06) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9-1977; Am. Ord. 77-13, passed 10-17-
1977)
§ 110.07 DEBT TO VILLAGE.
   No license or permit shall be issued to any person indebted to the Village
unless and until such person pays to the Village all indebtedness then due from
such person or by authority of the corporate authorities otherwise discharges
all such indebtedness in accordance with the terms and conditions fixed by the
corporate authorities.
(1997 Code, § 31.07) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9-1977)
§ 110.08 DISPLAY.
   When a license certificate is delivered to any licensee which has designated
therein a building, room, store, office, or place in which the licensed
business or occupation is to be conducted, it shall be the duty of such
licensee to post the same in a conspicuous place upon the licensed premises.
(1997 Code, § 31.08) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9-1977)
§ 110.09 RENEWAL.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to cause a written
notice to be mailed to each licensee directing the attention of such licensee
to the fact that a new license will be required on the day following the
expiration of his existing license and directing his attention also to the
amount of the license fee and to the penalty for failure to procure a license
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter governing the issuance of
such license; provided, however, that failure on the part of the Director of
Finance to cause such notice to be mailed to each licensee shall not be deemed
a defense to a suit brought by the Village to recover the penalty for a
violation of the provision of this chapter under which the licensee is required
to obtain a license.
   (B)   Except where otherwise specifically provided, the Director of Finance
may authorize the renewal of any license at the beginning of the license year.
Upon request in writing by any department or board in control of any regulation
affecting the licensees or the licensed premises, the Director of Finance shall
furnish lists of licenses renewed in any designated class of licenses.
   (C)   In any case where frontage consents are required to be procured before
a license shall issue, it shall not be necessary to secure the renewal of such
frontage consents upon the expiration of such license if such license be
renewed or a new license for the same business be procured forthwith.
(1997 Code, § 31.09) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9-1977; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed
4-1-2014)
§ 110.10 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Except where otherwise specifically provided for, any license issued
under this title may be refused for renewal, suspended up to 60 calendar days
per incident or revoked by the Village President, or his or her designee,
following notice and a hearing pursuant to §
110.17, if it is determined that the applicant or license holder has:
      (1)   Made any false, fraudulent or misleading material statement on the
application for a license, or to Village officials; or
      (2)   Has been found guilty of perpetrating a fraud upon any person,
whether or not such fraud was perpetrated in the course of conducting any
business in the Village; or
      (3)   Conducted any activities directly related to his or her business in
the Village in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the
public; or
      (4)   Suffered a revocation or refusal to issue or renew a license
applicable to conduct of the business or a substantially similar business by
any state, municipality or licensing authority; or
      (5)   Failed to pay any taxes, fees, penalties or fines owed to the
Village, including, but not limited to, bills for water or sewer or garbage
service;
      (6)   Created a condition or conducted or performed an act, practice or
trade that constitutes a nuisance pursuant to
Chapter 92 or other applicable provisions of this Code; or
      (7)   Committed an act considered home repair fraud as defined in 815
ILCS 515/3 and 5; or
      (8)   Maintained the licensed premises in a manner in violation of the
license or permit, the Village’s property maintenance code, or of any other
state or municipal law, ordinance, rule or regulation of the Village related to
maintenance or condition or use of the premises; or
      (9)   Interfered with any Village employee or official in the performance
of his or her duties; or
      (10)   Been convicted of any felony as defined in Section 2-7 of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 2012 (720 ILCS 5/2-7) or a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude; or
      (11)   Violated any state, Village or other local law, ordinance, rule or
regulation relating to the license or permit, licensed or permitted activity,
the subject matter of the license or permit or the premises licensed.
   (B)   Such nonrenewal, suspension or revocation, if ordered, shall not
preclude prosecution and imposition of any other penalties provided for the
violation of applicable ordinances of the Village, including monetary penalties
pursuant to §
10.99 (General Penalty) or as specified elsewhere in this Code.
   (C)   When the conduct or operation of any business or establishment,
whether or not licensed, shall pose a clear and present danger to the public
health, safety or general welfare, the Village President, or his or her
designee, shall have the authority to summarily order the cessation of business
and the closing of the premises, and the suspension of any valid license or
permit for a period not to exceed 10 calendar days. Within 5 calendar days
after he or she has so acted, the Village President or his or her designee
shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the license
should be further suspended or revoked.
(1997 Code, § 31.10) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9-1977; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed
4-1-2014)
§ 110.11 EXAMINATION.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Director to examine or cause to be
examined all persons and places of business subject to license or registration
for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not the required licenses and
certificates of registration have been procured. In case of a neglect or
refusal of any person or business to procure a license or a certificate of
registration as required by this chapter, the Building Director shall have the
authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 31.11) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9-1977; Am. Ord. 83-9, passed 5-26-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-
2021)
§ 110.12 PUBLIC WAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any business or occupation
on premises which abut a public way to litter or to permit the accumulation of
any paper, rubbish or refuse upon that portion of the public way abutting said
premises. It shall be unlawful for any person using any part of a public way
for or in connection with his business or occupation to litter or to permit the
accumulation of any paper, rubbish or refuse upon the portion of the public way
so used. It shall be the duty of a business which is required to either be
licensed or obtain a certificate of registration under the provisions of this
chapter to remove snow and ice from the public sidewalks located in those parts
of the public right-of-way which abut the premises where the business is
located.
(1997 Code, § 31.12) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9-1977; Am. Ord. 83-9, passed 5-26-
1983)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 110.13 FEES.
   (A)   All businesses located in or operating in the Village shall pay a
business license fee to the Village in accordance with this chapter. License
fees payable to the Village shall be collected by the Director of Finance.
License fees under the terms of this chapter, for businesses, occupations,
activities and uses set forth, shall be as provided herein. Any business
located in or operating in the Village included in this section, but which the
Village is preempted from regulating under the Illinois Professional Regulation
Acts (225 ILCS) or under any other applicable regulatory or licensing state or
federal laws, shall be subject to a comparable certificate fee as outlined in §
110.18 of this Code.
   (B)   License fees shall be paid annually unless otherwise provided, and
proof of any bond or liability insurance policy required by this chapter shall
be provided with the license fee.
      (1)   General business.
         (a)   Type “A”              $200;
         (b)   Type “B”              $100;
         (c)   Type "C"            $100.
      (2)   Industrial establishment.
   Floor Area in Square Feet
         0 - 10,000                $250
         10,001 - 20,000             $300
         20,001 - 30,000             $400
         30,001 - 40,000             $500
         40,001 - 50,000             $550
         50,001 - 75,000             $600
         75,001 - 100,000             $700
         100,001 - 200,000          $800
         200,001 - or over            $850
      (3)   Business occupation or trade.
Business Occupation or Trade                     Annual License Fee ($)
Ambulance service                                100
Ambulatory surgical centers                      2,000
Amusement (not otherwise licensed)               100 per day
Amusement-arcade (10 or more automatic devices)  1,000 plus device fees
Amusement devices (pool tables, skill games,     100 each
shuffleboard, darts, and the like)
Amusement operators (distributors, placing,      200
leasing or selling)
Amusement park                                   500 plus ride and day
Amusement park daily fee                         25 each day open
Amusement park rides                             70 each
Art supply store                                 140
Auctioneer                                       140
Auto car wash                                    140
Auto car wash - self service                     140
Auto car waxing                                  140
Automobile dealer (new and used vehicles)        800
Automobile dealer (new vehicles only)            280
Automobile dealer (used vehicles only)           800
Automobile towing or wreckers                    200 plus copy of insurance
Auto repair or vehicle customizing shop          140
Auto supply store                                140
Bakery                                           140
Bakery truck                                     49
Bank:                                            420
   Commercial                                 280
   Savings and Loan
Barber shop                                      100
Battery supply and rebuild shop                  100
Beverage stand                                   100
Billiards, pool hall                             280
Billboards                                       140 each
Boiler operator                                  100
Book operator                                    140
Book store                                       140
Bottler:                                         35
   1-10 employees                             70
   11-25 employees                            105
   26-50 employees                            140
   51-75 employees                            280
   76-100 employees                           420
   101 and over
Bowling alley                                    280 each lane
Building contractor, general                     100
Burglar alarm installer                          100
Camping equipment and/or military surplus store  100
Candy wholesale                                  140
Carnival or circus                               280 per day
Carpentry contractor                             100 plus copy of insurance
Carpet sales                                     140
Carry-out food                                   140
Catch basin cleaners                             200
Cement contractor                                100 plus copy of insurance
Ceramic studio                                   140
Christmas trees                                  140
Cigarettes/tobacco dealer                        140
Clothing store                                   140
Coal or wood (out of town)                       100
Coin operated amusement device                   140
Community mental health independent living       490
center
Concert or theatrical                            7 per performance
Concrete ready-mix trucks (out of town)          100
Confectionery store                              140
Convalescent homes                               10 per bed
Convenience store                                140
   6,000 sq. ft. or less of gross floor area
Currency store                                   280
Dances:                                          280
   Public                                     7
   Single
Dance studio                                     100
Drain layer                                      100 plus copy of insuranc e
Driving instruction                              100
Dry cleaner                                      140
Dry cleaner, self-service                        140
Dry cleaning plant                               210
Electrical contractor                            100 plus copy of insurance
Excavation contractor                            100 plus copy of insurance
Explosive storage and handling                   2,000 plus copy of insurance
Exterminator                                     100
Fence contractor                                 100 plus copy of insurance
Fire alarm, etc. repair and service              100
Fish market                                      100
Flea market operator (permit)                    1,400
Florist                                          140
Food dispenser (light lunches only)              100
Foresters and landscapers                        140
Fraternal and service clubs, having their own    100 plus liquor fee
building
Fuel dealer                                      140
Furniture delivery                               100
Games of skill                                   100 each
General contractor                               100
Glazing                                          100 plus copy of insurance
Grocery store                                    280
   6,001 sq. ft. or more of gross floor area
Heating, ventilating, air conditioning,          100 plus copy of insurance
refrigeration
House and building wrecker                       200 plus copy of insurance
House mover                                      100 plus copy of insurance
Itinerant vendor                                 100
Junk dealer                                      490
Junk peddler                                     140
Junk yard or scrap iron dealer                   490 plus copy of insurance
Landscaping contractors                          100 plus copy of insurance
Lathing and plastering                           100 plus copy of insurance
Laundromat (self-service)                        154
Laundry                                          140
Laundry vehicle (out of town)                    100 each
Limousine service                                100 per vehicle
Liquor distributor                               125
Live entertainment:                              200
-   Single event license (max. of 2 per year) 500
-   Up to 10 events per year                  1,000
-   Between 11 and 20 events per year         2,000
-   21 events per year or more
Livery and garage (public)                       100
Locksmith                                        100
Lumber yard retail/wholesale                     280
Masonry contractor                               70 plus copy of insurance
Medical supply company (including dental and     140
veterinarian supply)
Milk products                                    100
Milk refrigerators (not in groceries)            100
Milk truck                                       100
Mirror or glass installation                     100
Mobile catering vehicles                         200 per vehicle
Mobile food dispenser vehicles:                  140
   First vehicle                              35
   Each additional vehicle
Mortician (temporary license)                    14 (one day)
Motel or hotel                                   28 per room
Motor vehicle                                    see automobile dealer
Movers and delivery service                      100
Music studio                                     100
Newspaper agency                                 105
Nursery school                                   140
Office machine and products                      140
Painter and decorator                            100 plus copy of insurance
Parking lots                                     140
Paving contractor                                100 plus copy of insurance
Pawnbrokers                                      700
Peddler                                          210
Pet grooming                                     100
Pet store                                        100
Pharmacy/drug store                              140
Photographer                                     100
Plaster/lather contractor                        100
Printer:   Under 6,000 sq. ft.                140
      6,000 sq. ft. and over               280
Produce truck                                    100
Produce market                                   140
Record shop                                      100
Restaurant:                                      140
   1-15 seats                                 140 plus 2 per seat for each
   16-100 seats                               seat in excess of 15 seats
   Over 100 seats                             280 plus 1 per seat for each
                                                 seat in excess of 100 seats
Retail store (combined hardware and paint store) 175
Roller and ice rinks                             400 plus commodities
Rooming house                                    280 plus 20 per room
Sale of items designed or marketed for use with  490
illegal cannabis or drugs
Scavenger (waste disposal)                       700 plus copy of insurance
Scavenger (hazardous materials)                  2,100 plus copy of insurance
Scavenger (waste processing)                     700 plus copy of insurance
Secondhand store or dealer                       420
Service station (motor vehicle - gasoline)       280 plus 10 per gasoline pump
                                                 over 5 pumps
Sewer and catch basin cleaners                   100 plus copy of insurance
Sewer contractor                                 100 plus copy of insurance
Sheet metal contractor                           100 plus copy of insurance
Shoe repair                                      100
Sign erector                                     100 plus copy of insurance
Smoking lounge                                   500
Structural iron contractor                       100 plus copy of insurance
Taxicabs                                         100 plus copy of insurance
Telemarketing                                    7 per phone
Television and radio repair/dealer, CB store     100
Theater                                          1,120
Tile contractor                                  100 plus copy of insurance
Tire repair service                              100
Tobacco shop                                     500
Tree trimming company                            100 plus copy of insurance
Truck/trailer rental                             100 plus copy of insurance
Tuckpointing contractor                          100 plus copy of insurance
Undertaker                                       210
Upholstery                                       100
Vacation Rental                                  500
   First Year                                 250
   Renewals
Vending Machine:   Candy                      35
   Cigarettes                                 140
   Coffee                                     35
   Gum ball                                   7
   Ice                                        35
   Juke box                                   105
   Milk                                       35
   Pastry                                     35
   Sandwich                                   35
   Soap                                       35
   Soda                                       35
   Trinkets                                   35
Video gaming terminals                           500
   First terminal                             250
   Each additional terminal
Video tape rentals:                              140
   Primary business                           70
   Ancillary business
Waste disposal for commercial and industrial     1,400 plus copy of insurance
establishments
Weapons sale                                     700 plus copy of insurance
Weighmasters                                     100
Window manufacturing establishment               175
Wrecking contractor                              100 plus copy of insurance
 
   (C)   In the event that a license is not renewed at or prior to the
expiration of the preceding license period, then the license fee to be paid by
the licensee shall be 150% of the applicable license fee set forth in this
section.
(1997 Code, § 31.13) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9- 1977; Am. Ord. 87-2, passed 1-8-
1987; Am. Ord. CO-00-23, passed 12-4-2000; Am. Ord. CO-04- 31, passed 9-20-
2004; Am. Res. R-2013-08, passed 3-13-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-
2013; Am. Ord. CO-2015-22, passed 8-3-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2019-26, passed 8-20-
2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-22, passed 11-1-2022; Am. Ord. CO-2023-36, passed 6-20-
2023; Am. Ord. CO-2023-56, passed 12-5-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2024-05, passed 2-6-
2024)
§ 110.14 PREMISES TO COMPLY WITH ALL APPLICABLE LAWS, ORDINANCES, RULES AND
REGULATIONS.
   No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business or for the
performance of any act if the premises on which the business is to be located
or the act which is to be performed do not fully comply with all applicable
Codes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village. No license or
certificate of registration shall be issued for any business or for the
performance of any act which would violate an applicable law, ordinance, code,
rule or regulation of the United States, the state or the Village. 
(1997 Code, § 31.14) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9-1977; Am. Ord. 83-9, passed 5-26-
1983)
§ 110.15 TRANSFERABILITY.
   (A)   Licenses issued may be transferred upon applications by the original
licensees; provided, that written notice thereof is given to the Director of
Finance 10 days before the transfer is made, but no more than 1 transfer of any
license shall be made within any license year, provided, that it shall be
unlawful to transfer any peddler's, itinerant merchant's or chauffeur's license
and any attempted transfer of such license shall have no effect.
   (B)   The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any
permitted act, may be changed; provided, that 10 days notice thereof is given
to the Director of Finance; further that the building, zoning and frontage
consent requirements of this Code are complied with.
   (C)   The fee for the transfer of a license shall be 25% of the annual fee
originally paid; and no such transfer shall be made or have effect unless and
until such fee is paid to the Village.
   (D)   Where a bond is required as a prerequisite to the issuance of the
license, the transferee thereof shall furnish a similar bond, and where there
is a provision that no such license shall be issued to any but a person of good
character, the character and qualifications of the transferee shall be subject
to the same restriction.
(1997 Code, § 31.15) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9-1977)
§ 110.16 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever it is necessary to inspect premises or to analyze a commodity
or material in order to determine whether there is compliance with the
requirements of this chapter or any other applicable Code, ordinance, rule or
regulations, such inspection or analysis shall, unless otherwise specified in
the Code, ordinance, rule or regulation, be made by or at the direction of the
Building Director. The Building Director shall not inspect any premises or take
control of any commodity or material for purposes of analysis unless either:
      (1)   The person in control of the premises to be inspected or in control
of the commodity or material to be analyzed voluntarily agrees to permit the
inspection or to have the commodity or material analyzed; or
      (2)   A warrant has been issued by a court which authorizes the
inspection of the premises or the seizing of the commodity or material to be
analyzed.
   (B)   If a person in control of premises refuses to permit the premises to
be inspected or if a person in control of a commodity or a material refuses to
permit the commodity or material to be analyzed, the Building Director shall
apply for the issuance of a warrant which will authorize the inspection of the
premises or the seizing of the material or commodity to be analyzed.
(1997 Code, § 31.16) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9- 1977; Am. Ord. 83-9, passed 5-26-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-
2021)
§ 110.17 HEARING.
   (A)   Except where otherwise specifically provided for, business licenses
issued under the ordinances of the Village, may only be refused for renewal,
revoked or suspended after notice and hearing pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Notice of the hearing for the nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of
a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of
the contemplated action and the date, time and place of the hearing. Such
notice shall be personally served or sent certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the licensee at his or her last known address listed on the most
recent application for a license at least 5 calendar days prior to the date set
for hearing. The initial date for a hearing shall be no more than 21 calendar
days after notice of hearing was sent to the licensee.
   (C)   The Village Manager, or his or her designee, shall present the
Village’s case. The applicant or license holder shall have the right to appear
in person and be represented by legal counsel at such hearing. The licensee
shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine
witnesses.
   (D)   The Village President, or his or her designee, shall not be bound by
common law or statutory rules of evidence or by technical or formal rules of
procedure, but shall conduct hearings in such manner as seems best calculated
to result in substantial justice.
   (E)   Following the conclusion of the hearing, the Village President, or his
or her designee, shall issue a written decision and findings of fact and shall
mail the same to the applicant or license holder. The written decision shall
state that the applicant or license holder may seek judicial review of the
decision pursuant to a writ of certiorari. The decision and findings of fact
shall be mailed within 7 business days following the conclusion of the hearing.
   (F)   A court reporter or other method of creating a record of proceedings
will be provided by the Village for all hearings held pursuant to this chapter.
The cost associated with the court reporter and/or the preparation of a
transcript of the hearing shall be the responsibility of the licensee.
   (G)   Twenty-four hours before the commencement of any suspension or
revocation, the Village of Maywood Police Department shall post on all
entrances to the licensed premises a placard entitled, “Notice of Closure.” The
title shall be in letters not less than 1 inch high. In the case of a
suspension, the notice of closure shall give the times of the suspension and in
the case of a revocation state the exact time when the revocation goes into
effect. The notice of closure shall also state the section number and title of
the Village Code or state law, which has been violated along with the telephone
number of appropriate Village department that may be called for additional
information. The notice of closure shall not be removed before the suspension
period or less than 7 calendar days after the posting of a revocation notice.
   (H)   Any person aggrieved by the action of any Village official in denying
an initial application for a license or refusing to issue a certificate of
registration shall have the right to a hearing before the Village President, or
his or her designee, provided a written request is filed with the Village Clerk
within 10 calendar days after he or she is notified that the license has been
denied or the certificate of registration will not be issued. The hearing
provided shall follow the procedures set forth in divisions (B) through (F)
above.
   (I)   Appeals of any final determination of the Village President or his or
her designee following a hearing held pursuant to this section may be sought by
seeking a writ of certiorari from the Chancery Division of the Circuit Court of
Cook County according to applicable law.
(1997 Code, § 31.17) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9-1977; Am. Ord. 83-9, passed 5-26-
1983; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 110.18 REGISTRATION OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   All businesses located in the Village which are solely engaged in any
of the businesses, professions or occupations listed below shall not be
required to obtain business licenses but shall be required to register with the
Village:
      (1)   The practice of architecture;
      (2)   The practice of beauty culture;
      (3)   Private business and vocational schools which have been issued a
certificate of approval by the
State Superintendent of Education;
      (4)   The practice of shorthand reporting;
      (5)   The practice of dentistry;
      (6)   The administering of detection of deception examinations;
      (7)   The private detective business;
      (8)   Insurance companies, insurance brokers, and insurance agencies;
      (9)   The practice of land surveying;
      (10)   The practice of law;
      (11)   The practice of medicine or midwifery for which a state license is
required;
      (12)   The practice of professional nursing;
      (13)   Businesses which operate and manage nursing homes; provided,
however, that all nursing homes located in the Village must comply with the
provisions of Chapter 113 of this Code;
      (14)   The practice of optometry;
      (15)   The practice of pharmacy;
      (16)   The practice of physical therapy;
      (17)   The practice of podiatry;
      (18)   The practice of professional engineering;
      (19)   The practice of psychology;
      (20)   The public accounting business;
      (21)   Real estate brokers and real estate salesperson;
      (22)   The practice of structural engineering;
      (23)   The practice of social work;
      (24)   The business of tree experts;
      (25)   The practice of veterinary medicine and surgery;
      (26)   The business of installing water wells and pumps;
      (27)   The operation go cannabis business establishments;
      (28)   Massage therapist (plus a copy of state certification); and
      (29)   Roofing contractor (plus copy of current state certification).
   (B)   It is the intent of this section to require all businesses which are
not licensed by the Village to register with the Village. This registration
requirement and the requirement that a registration fee be paid is intended:
      (1)   To provide the Village with complete identifying information
concerning all businesses which are not licensed by the Village, their owners
and the owners of the premises on which they are located in order to protect
such businesses in case of emergency and to protect the public and other
businesses in case of complaints alleging unsanitary or unsafe conditions on
the premises where the business is located; and
      (2)   To provide reimbursement to the Village for the cost of inspecting
the premises where such businesses are located. It is not the intent of this
section to regulate the businesses, professions and occupations which are
listed in this section in the conduct of their business or the practice of
their profession or occupation.
   (C)   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any of the businesses
listed in division (A) of this section within the Village unless such business
has registered with the Village and has been issued a certificate of
registration. Applications for certificates of registration shall be made in
conformance with the requirements of §
110.03 of this chapter relating to applications for certificates of
registration. No certificate of registration shall be issued until the
applicant has paid a registration fee of $100 and the Building and Code
Enforcement Department has inspected the premises of the business for which the
certificate is to be issued and has found that the premises are in compliance
with all applicable codes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the Village. No
certificate of registration shall be issued to any business which is indebted
to the Village.
(1997 Code, § 31.18) (Ord. 77-9, passed 7-9- 1977; Am. Ord. 83-9, passed 5-26-
1983; Am. Ord. 87-2, passed 1-8-1987; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am.
Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am.
Ord. CO-2022-22, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 110.19 PREVENTION OF LOITERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any business
operating within the Village to allow any person or persons to stand, sit or
lie in or upon any private parking lot, private sidewalk, private walkway area
or private property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct
unreasonably the free passage of business patrons or pedestrians thereon or so
as to prevent the free access into or out of the entrance(s) of any business
premises which is open to the public.
   (B)   Any owner or operator who violates this section shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in §
10.99 of this Code. In addition, the holder of a business license for premises
where violations of this section are found to have occurred shall be subject to
citation and to all penalties provided in §
110.10, including but not limited to monetary fines and suspension or
revocation of the business license following notice and a hearing pursuant to §
110.17.
(Ord. CO-2014-11, passed 4-1-2014)
CHAPTER 111: GENERAL BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
   
111.01   Auctions and auctioneers
   
111.02   Coal yards
   
111.03   Contractors
   
111.04   Dance studios
   
111.05   Public dances
   
111.06   Dry cleaners; self-service dry cleaners
   
111.07   Excavation contractors
   
111.08   Flea markets
   
111.09   Florists
   
111.10   Food establishment operators
   
111.11   Food vending machines
   
111.12   Foresters and landscapers
   
111.13   House movers
   
111.14   Junk dealers
   
111.15   Laundries
   
111.16   Laundry vehicles
   
111.17   Machine shops
   
111.18   Community mental health independent living centers
   
111.19   Motels and hotels
   
111.20   Motor vehicle repair shops
   
111.21   Parking lots
   
111.22   Pawnbrokers
   
111.23   Photographers
   
111.24   Public garages
   
111.25   Retail hardware stores
   
111.26   Retail paint stores
   
111.27   Secondhand dealers
   
111.28   Self-service automobile laundries
   
111.29   Service stations; self service
   
111.30   Sewer and catch basin cleaners
   
111.31   Tobacco dealers; retail, wholesale
   
111.32   Undertakers
   
111.33   Waste disposal
   
111.34   Firearms and weapons sale
   
111.35   Gunsmiths and gun shops
   
111.36   Live entertainment license
   
111.37   Real estate transfer tax
   
111.38   Automobile renting occupation tax
   
111.39   Automobile renting use tax
   
111.40   (Reserved)
   
111.41   Temporary use of trailer for office
   
111.42   Unobstructed view of interior premises
   
111.43   Motor fuel tax
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS.
   (A)   License. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct an auction in
the Village or to do business as an auctioneer without a license therefor. The
fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13.
   (B)   Investigation. The Chief of Police, or any other officer designated by
the Village Manager, shall investigate the character of every applicant for an
auctioneer’s license, and no license shall be issued to any person who is not
of good character.
   (C)   Street auctions. No person shall sell or attempt to sell or offer for
sale at public auction any goods or property of any kind upon the public
streets or sidewalks of the Village.
   (D)   Exemptions. Nothing in this section shall apply to any public auction
or sale made or conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order
or process or by virtue of any power or authority contained in a mortgage or
trust deed.
(1997 Code, § 32.01)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.02 COAL YARDS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to establish any coal yard within
the Village limits, and no license shall be issued for the establishment of any
yard therein.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to pile any coal in such a way
that it can fall down upon adjoining property or upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place.
(1997 Code, § 32.02)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.03 CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   License; bond amount. No person shall engage in the businesses
hereinafter described without a license therefor and furnishing a bond in the
amounts as hereinafter named. The license fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
   Bond
   Carpenter contractor   $5,000
   Cement or concrete contractor   5,000
   Excavation contractor   20,000
   General building contractor   5,000
   Masonry contractor   5,000
   Paving contractor   5,000
   Plastering and lathing contractor   5,000
   Roofing contractor   5,000
   Sheet metal contractor   5,000
   Structural iron work contractor   5,000
   Tile, marble and mosaic contractor   5,000
   Tuckpointing and building cleaning contractor   5,000
   Wrecking contractor   20,000
   (B)   Bond. Every person licensed under this section shall deposit with the
Director of Finance a bond in the amount specified with surety to be approved
by the Board of Trustees to protect the Village from any and all loss, cost,
expense or liability which the Village may suffer, or be put to, or which may
be recovered from it by reason of the issuance of such license or by reason of
any act or thing done or neglected to be done under or by virtue of the
authority given in such license.
(1997 Code, § 32.03) (Ord. 58-14, passed 3-22-1958)
§ 111.04 DANCE STUDIOS.
   (A)   Definition. The term DANCE STUDIO or DANCING SCHOOL as used in this
section shall mean any building, room, enclosure, premises, place or
establishment where instruction in the art of dancing or dancing lessons are
given and where a charge or fee for such instruction or lessons is made, paid
or received.
   (B)   License. No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on any
dance studio or dancing school without a license therefor. This section shall
not apply to a dancing school having but a single instructor engaged
exclusively in teaching dancing or giving dancing lessons to children under 16
years of age. The fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13.
   (C)   Fire prevention and health requirements. The Director of
Sustainability and Innovation and the Fire Chief may cause such investigation
to be made as in their judgment is deemed necessary for the purpose of
determining whether the premises occupied by the applicant for a license under
this section comply with the Village ordinances relating to health, safety and
sanitation so as to properly safeguard the lives and health of the employees
engaged and pupils receiving their instruction therein; and if from such
investigation, they find that such applicant has failed to comply with the fire
prevention, sanitary and health regulations of the Village, or with the general
ordinances thereof relating to such business, they shall immediately report the
same in writing to the Village President who shall refuse to issue such
license.
(1997 Code, § 32.04) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12,
passed 6-10-2025)
§ 111.05 PUBLIC DANCES.
   (A)   License. It shall be unlawful to operate or conduct a public dance in
the Village without a license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in §
111.13.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   Applications for licenses shall specify the location of the
proposed dance and the person or organization sponsoring the same.
      (2)   No license shall be issued by the Village President, or his or her
designee, to a person who is not a person of good moral character, nor to a
corporation or organization which is not represented in the Village by a person
of good moral character.
      (3)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to make or cause to be
made an investigation into the character of each applicant and report the
results of such investigation to the Village President.
      (4)   The Fire Chief or their representative shall inspect the premises
to be used for a public dance to determine if they conform to the fire
prevention and other safety regulations of this Code.
   (C)   Improper conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to indulge in or
for the licensee or manager of a public dance to permit any improper or immoral
conduct at any public dance.
   (D)   Exits. It shall be unlawful to conduct a public dance in any hall or
place which is not equipped with sufficient and adequate exits; and no hall or
building which is not provided with at least 2 exits of 4 feet or more in width
shall be used for such purpose.
(1997 Code, § 32.05) (Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed 4-1-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.06 DRY CLEANERS; SELF-SERVICE DRY CLEANERS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate
meaning.
         DRY CLEANER. Any person keeping or using more than 1 gallon of
gasoline, naphtha, benzine or other volatile flammable liquids for the purpose
of dry cleaning or spotting wearing apparel or any fabric for profit or reward.
         RETAIL OUTLET. Any cleaning or spotting establishment located within
the Village where dry cleaning is sold, solicited or offered for sale directly
to the retail consumer.
         RETAILER. Any person or member of the cleaning and spotting trade who
operates or for whom there is operated a retail outlet.
         SPOTTER. Any person keeping or using 2 quarts or less of gasoline,
naphtha, benzine or other volatile flammable liquids for the purpose of dry
cleaning or spotting wearing apparel or any fabric for profit or reward.
      (2)   License. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of dry cleaning or spotting, in which gasoline, naphtha, benzine or
other volatile, flammable liquids are used to clean or renovate any clothing or
articles of wearing apparel or any fabric of any kind, without a license for
each dry cleaning or spotting establishment to be conducted by such person. The
fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13.
      (3)   Application; investigation.
         (a)   A separate application for a license shall be made for each dry
cleaning or spotting establishment operated by the applicant wherever located
within the Village.
         (b)   Every application shall be approved by the Building Director and
the Chief of the Fire Department as to compliance of the premises named therein
with the building provisions and fire regulations of this Code, respectively,
before a license shall be issued.
         (c)   The Building Director shall cause an investigation to be made of
the premises named and described in such application for the purpose of
determining whether the provisions of this Code regulating health, safety and
sanitation relating to such establishment have been complied with.
      (4)   Transfer of license. No license granted under the provisions of
this section shall be transferred to any other person, nor shall any license
authorize any person other than the licensee named therein to do business or
act under such license.
      (5)   Certificate of fitness.
         (a)   Before any operation shall begin under a license for the
business of dry cleaning, the licensee shall file with the Chief of the Fire
Department, in writing, the name of the person designated by them to have
charge of the room, the equipment, the flammable liquids and their handling and
using during the conduct of such business of dry cleaning. Any such person
before being permitted to exercise any of such functions shall make application
in writing to the Chief of the Fire Department for a “certificate of fitness.”
The Chief of the Fire Department shall examine such applicant as to their
qualifications to fill such position under the conditions herein prescribed. No
operation of dry cleaning or the handling of flammable liquids shall be carried
on upon the premises unless there is in charge and authority upon such premises
a person who shall have obtained a “certificate of fitness” as herein provided.
         (b)   To receive a certificate of fitness the person must:
            1.   Be at least 21 years of age;
            2.   Be able to understand and speak the English language;
            3.   Be of temperate habits;
            4.   Show by written certification that they have had 6 months or
more experience in the actual work of dry cleaning and the handling of
flammable liquids;
            5.   Be familiar with the provisions of the law and the regulations
governing dry cleaning, particularly that part relating to the service to be
performed by the applicant;
            6.   Be familiar with the risks incident to the service to be
performed by them and capable of taking all necessary precautions.
         (c)   The annual fee for the issuance or renewal of any certificate
shall be $10 and shall be paid to the Director of Finance.
      (6)   Sleeping or living quarters.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on or conduct the
business of dry cleaning in any building, any portion of which is used or
intended to be used as a sleeping apartment or dwelling place.
         (b)   No person shall be permitted to sleep in any dry cleaning or
drying room plant.
      (7)   Inspections. It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire
Department or his authorized officers and of the Building Director to inspect
each dry cleaning or spotting establishment at least once every 6 months.
      (8)   Other uses of premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to
conduct or operate the business of dry cleaning in any building, any portion of
which is used or intended to be used for other than dry cleaning or drying
purposes.
      (9)   Vapors or odors. Vapors or odors emanating from any dry cleaning or
spotting establishment shall not be permitted at any time to become a nuisance
to any portion of the premises in which such establishment is located, nor to
any adjoining or nearby premises.
      (10)   Separation of clean and soiled articles. Every person engaged in
the business of dry cleaning or spotting shall provide proper facilities and
equipment for the separate handling of cleaned and soiled articles, and no
clean article shall be allowed to come in contact with any uncleaned or soiled
article of any kind at any time.
(1997 Code, § 32.06)
   (B)   Self-service dry cleaners.
      (1)   Definition. An AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINE, as the term is used
herein, shall be construed to include and mean any device or apparatus for the
cleaning of clothes or fabrics and designed to be used or operated by any
person not the owner, or an employee of the owner thereof, which machine or
device makes use of or contains perchlorethylene or any other chemical solvent
or substance which may cause harm to human beings by reason of inhalation or
contact.
      (2)   Compliance required. It shall be unlawful to install, operate or
maintain any automatic dry cleaning machine except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or without complying with all of the provisions
pertaining to the installation and operation of such machine herein contained;
or in violation of any laws, rules or regulations of the Illinois Department of
Public Health, relating thereto.
      (3)   License and permit.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful to install any automatic dry cleaning
machine without first having secured a permit therefor. Applications for such
permit shall contain full information as to the mechanical equipment of such
machine and provisions for ventilation for both the machine and the room in
which the machine will be located. The fee for such permit shall be $25 for
each unit or machine.
         (b)   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of maintaining
any such machine for use by the public upon payment of a fee without a license
therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
      (4)   Plans. Any person establishing a dry cleaning establishment of the
coin-operated self-service type shall be required to submit to the Building
Director for their approval a complete set of plans and specifications of the
building in which any such dry cleaning establishment is to be located and also
a complete diagram of the floor plan of each room to be occupied by such dry
cleaning establishment, correctly showing the arrangement or setting of all
machinery and equipment to be installed therein. Each such plan shall be
explicit and complete.
      (5)   Installation requirements.
         (a)   The solvent shall be stored in closed metal containers and shall
be transferred to the machines from the containers in a line free of leaks.
         (b)   Only the front or customer side of the dry cleaning machine
should be readily accessible to the customer area. The working or maintenance
portion of the machines should not be accessible to the customers in the store.
In the event it becomes necessary to service dry cleaners from customer area,
the concentration of perchlorethylene vapors should be kept at a level of 100
ppm (parts per million) or less if customers are present.
         (c)   The exhaust ventilation shall be provided on a continuous basis
while the store is open for business. The fan wiring shall be such that the dry
cleaning equipment cannot be operated unless the fan system is in operation.
         (d)   Access doors to the maintenance area shall be kept locked.
         (e)   The cleaning equipment must be provided with an exhaust system
capable of maintaining a minimum of 100 feet per minute face velocity through
the loading door whenever the door is open. The duct work connections from this
system must be sealed (soldered or taped) and the discharge stack extended
above the roof line.
         (f)   As a means of preventing any leaking liquid from escaping the
enclosure or room in which the dry cleaning equipment is installed, a dike of
at least 2 to 12 inches in height from the floor must encase the machine area.
A sump pump must be provided in the diked area for draining or otherwise
removing the solvent in the event of a leak, to a tank of at least 500 gallons
capacity, and the containment provided in this subsection must be able to hold
a liquid volume equal to the maximum quantity of solvent contained in the
system.
         (g)   An interlock system must be provided on the machine to prevent
the loading door from being opened during the normal cycle. This system may be
either electrical and/or mechanical and so connected that in the event of a
power failure the door of machine remains locked.
         (h)   A step by step instruction list must be posted in a conspicuous
location near the machine for customer use. Included should be a list of items
not to be dry cleaned. At least one legible sign shall be maintained in a place
available to customers giving the name, address and phone number of the owner
of the establishment and of the service department or agency responsible for
the proper maintenance of the machines.
         (i)   The machine design must be such that in the normal course of
operation, no odor of solvent or solvent vapor is retained in the cleaned items
upon completion of the dry cleaning cycle.
         (j)   The machines must be inspected daily and kept in good repair.
All maintenance personnel must be familiar with necessary machine repairs and
instructed as to proper methods for handling perchlorethylene.
         (k)   Solvent control is to be such that under normal operation and
use conditions prevailing solvent concentrations in the customer area will not
exceed 100 ppm (part per million).
         (l)   All refuse from the filtered solvent must be stored in metal
containers with fitted lids to prevent the escape of vapors.
      (6)   Ventilation. A supply of make-up air equal to or greater than the
total volume of air exhausted from the plant must be provided in order to
eliminate any negative pressure conditions which might otherwise develop.
      (7)   Location of exhaust ventilation stacks. Exhaust ventilation stacks
from dry cleaning machines should not be located in proximity of less than 15
feet to combustion air intakes on gas fired equipment. Exhaust ventilation
stacks shall be located at least 15 feet from any entrance or exit to or from
the premises.
      (8)   Air intakes. The sales area from which the customers have access to
the machines shall be ventilated so that there shall be a flow of air of 2 cf/
m (cubic feet per minute) for each square foot of sales area. The sales area
shall have 2 air intakes, 1 of which may be located to allow one-half of the
air intake to be drawn through the partition either over or under the machines.
      (9)   Inspections. It shall be the duty of the Building Director to cause
such inspections to be made as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the
provisions of this section.
      (10)   Attendant.
         (a)   There shall be present in every self-service, coin-operated
establishment for dry cleaning an attendant during all operational hours of the
establishment.
         (b)   No person shall act as an attendant in any such dry cleaning
establishment unless he shall be the holder of a current certificate of
fitness, issued by the Village Manager. Before the issuance of any such
certificate, the Village Manager shall examine the applicant as to their
qualifications to fill such position. To receive a certificate of fitness the
applicant must:
            1.   Be a citizen of the United States;
            2.   Be at least 21 years of age;
            3.   Be able to understand and to speak the English language;
            4.   Be of good moral character;
            5.   Be familiar with the provisions of the law and the regulations
governing dry cleaning establishments, particularly those relating to the
service to be performed by the applicant; and
            6.   Be familiar with the risks incident to the service to be
performed by them and be capable of taking necessary precautions.
         (c)   The annual fee for the issuance or renewal of any such
certificate shall be $5 and shall be paid to the Director of Finance.
      (11)   Hours of operation. No self-service, coin-operated establishment
for dry cleaning shall be open or be operated between the hours of 11:30 p.m.
and 6:30 a.m.
(1997 Code, § 32.07) (Ord. 61-9, passed 12-14- 1961; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 111.07 EXCAVATION CONTRACTORS.
   No person licensed as an excavation contractor under Chapter 110 shall make
excavations in the Village unless such person shall procure and file with the
Director of Finance a standard form of public liability and property damage
insurance policy protecting the Village, its officers and agents, against any
and all liability for damages resulting from such excavation within the
corporate limits of the Village. Such insurance policies shall be written by
some one of the companies qualified under the laws of this state to make such
contracts, and each policy shall be in the sum of $50,000 limit for one person
killed or injured in one accident at any one location and $100,000 limit for 2
or more persons killed or injured in any one accident at any one location, and
$10,000 in respect to property damage in any one accident at any one location,
to be kept in force with initial or renewal premiums prepaid in advance of the
periods covered, so long as such excavation work is in progress or exists in an
unfinished or incomplete state.
(1997 Code, § 32.08) (Ord. 55-16, passed 10-19-1955)
§ 111.08 FLEA MARKETS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FLEA MARKET OPERATION. Any facility where activities take place commonly
known as but not limited to swap shops, penny markets, rummage sales, and where
tangible articles are bought, sold, or exchanged, not otherwise regulated in
this Code.
      FLEA MARKET OPERATOR. Any person who owns or controls the premises at
which the activity defined as a flea market operation is conducted.
      FLEA MARKET VENDOR. Any person who engages in or conducts the activity of
buying, selling or exchanging, whether on a casual or regular basis, any
tangible articles, whether new, secondhand or used, in any facility described
above.
   (B)   Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any flea market operator to
operate unless a permit shall be applied for, granted and in existence, all in
compliance with the provisions of this section and with all laws of the state
and the Village.
   (C)   Application for permit. Any person desiring to conduct a flea market
operation shall file a written application with the Village Clerk on a form to
be furnished by the Chief of Police. The applicant shall accompany the
application with a tender of the correct permit fee as hereinafter provided and
shall in addition furnish the following:
      (1)   The type of ownership of the business; for example, whether
individual, partnership, corporation or otherwise;
      (2)   The name, style and designation under which the flea market
operation is to be conducted;
      (3)   The business address and all telephone numbers where the business
is to be conducted;
      (4)   The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of the stock
of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant is a
corporation; and concerning the partners, including limited partners, if the
applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business:
         (a)   Name, complete residence address and residence telephone
numbers;
         (b)   The 2 previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant;
         (c)   Written proof of age;
         (d)   The business experience of the individual, including, but not
limited to whether or not such person has ever had a business permit or license
denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefor;
         (e)   All criminal convictions other than traffic violations, fully
disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted, and the offense for which
convicted and the circumstances thereof;
      (5)   Such other information as shall be deemed necessary by the Chief of
Police to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set
forth in the application;
      (6)   Authorization for the Village, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit;
      (7)   The applicant shall furnish information as may be required by the
Police, Fire, Community Development and Health Departments of the Village
relating to the location where the operation shall be conducted. Such
information shall include the type of construction, arrangement of stalls and
aisles, location of electrical wiring, location of exits, location of fire
equipment, location of parking lot showing the number of usable spaces,
location of sanitary facilities for the use of persons on the premises, as well
as such other relevant information as the Police, Fire, Community Development
and Health Departments may require;
      (8)   Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury,
that the foregoing information contained in the application is true and
correct, said declaration being duly dated and signed in the Village.
   (D)   Application review; examination of applicant.
      (1)   Copies of permit applications shall be submitted to the Police
Department, Fire Department, and Community Development Department. These
Departments shall review applications for a permit to conduct a flea market
operation and shall submit specific findings and recommendations to the Board
of Trustees on the question of whether issuance of a permit to the applicant to
conduct a flea market operation at the proposed location would be injurious to
the public health, safety, morals and welfare. The Fire Department, Police
Department, Community Development Department and Health Department may suggest
that the Board of Trustees impose certain conditions and restrictions upon the
grant of a permit to conduct a flea market operation to safeguard the public
health, safety, morals and welfare.
      (2)   The Board of Trustees may examine any applicant for a permit to
conduct a flea market operation.
   (E)   Issuance of permit. The Board of Trustees shall not issue a permit to
a flea market operator to conduct a flea market operation unless the Board of
Trustees are satisfied from the permit application, the review reports of the
Police Department and Fire Department and from examination of the flea market
operator that the proposed flea market operation will be conducted in such a
manner that it will not injure the public health, safety, morals and welfare.
   (F)   Fees.
      (1)   Every person conducting a flea market operation in the Village
shall pay an annual fee as set forth in §
110.13.
      (2)   In addition to the annual permit fee, every vendor shall pay to the
flea market operator the sum of 50 cents per day for each space occupied by
such vendor. The operator shall forward to the Village Clerk on the tenth of
every month all fees collected from each vendor for the previous month.
   (G)   Inspection. The Police Department shall have the right to thoroughly
inspect all items offered for sale or exchange on the premises where the
activity is being conducted at any time during normal business hours. All
persons in charge of such premises shall render to the Police Department such
assistance as may be reasonably necessary to enable it to complete such
inspection.
   (H)   Operator’s duties and responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every
flea market operator to see that all vendors using the flea market operation
are advised of all provisions of this section. The operator shall not allow any
vendor to sell or exchange articles unless such vendor has obtained the
necessary permit from the Police Department. Failure to perform the above
stated duties and responsibilities by the flea market operator will be grounds
for permit revocation or suspension.
   (I)   Vendor merchandise to be held or impounded. Articles which the Police
Department have reasonable grounds to believe were stolen may be impounded or
left with the vendor under a hold order at the discretion of any member of the
Police Department. An article may be impounded or held under a hold order by
the Police Department for a period of 30 days pending investigation as to
ownership of the article. It shall be unlawful for any flea market vendor to
dispose of any property contrary to any hold order issued by a member of the
Police Department.
   (J)   Vendor receipt of goods from minors. It shall be unlawful for any
person operating as a flea market vendor, or for any employee or agent thereof,
to receive any articles by purchase or otherwise from any minor with the intent
to sell or exchange said articles at a flea market operation.
   (K)   Sanitation. The flea market operation shall be kept in a sanitary
condition, and no person shall deposit or leave any matter, remnants, refuse or
debris upon the premises where the activity is being conducted. The flea market
operator and flea market vendors shall be jointly liable for the cleanliness of
the flea market operation. The flea market operator shall make adequate and
sufficient provisions for sanitary facilities on the premises where the
activity is being conducted. Such sanitary facilities must be approved by the
Health Department.
   (L)   Animals not permitted. No animals except "seeing eye" dogs are
permitted upon the premises where the activity is being conducted.
   (M)   Parking; snow removal; traffic control.
      (1)   No flea market operation may be conducted without a parking
facility located within 100 yards of the flea market operation. The parking
facility shall be paved and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and
shall contain at least 100 usable spaces for cars.
      (2)   If the flea market operation continues to operate between December
1 and March 1, adequate provision shall be made for the removal of snow and ice
from the surface of the parking facility and from all sidewalks adjacent to the
parking facility, leading from the parking facility to the flea market
operation and adjacent to the flea market operation.
      (3)   The flea market operator shall develop and submit to the Board of
Trustees a plan for the control of traffic generated by the flea market
operation adequate and sufficient to facilitate the movement of motor vehicle
traffic and for the protection and conservation of life and property on the
streets proximate to the flea market operation and the parking facility used in
conjunction therewith.
   (N)   General inspection. In addition to the property inspection pursuant to
division (G) of this section, the Police Department, the Fire Department, and
the Community Development Department shall have the right to thoroughly inspect
the flea market operation at any time during normal business hours to check for
the presence of any violations of this Code or of the laws of the state.
   (O)   Evidence of inspection. Before the issuance of a permit the flea
market operator shall furnish the Board of Trustees of the Village evidence of
insurance of a character and amount and in such form as may be determined by
the Board of Trustees to provide for the payment of any claim for personal
injuries, including death, property damage or other suits arising out of or
connected with the flea market operation.
   (P)   Persons and sales excepted. The provisions of this section shall not
apply to or affect the following persons or sales:
      (1)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction;
      (2)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials;
      (3)   Religious, benevolent, charitable and civic organizations operating
as non-profit flea market vendors shall be exempt from the provisions of this
section; or
      (4)   Garage sale, which sale is hereby defined to mean the sale of any
new or used personal property, which sale is conducted on or about the premises
of a private residence in a residential area as defined by the zoning
ordinance, by the owner or occupant or with the permission of the owner or
occupant, and which sale is open to the public.
   (Q)   Revocation. The Board of Trustees of the Village, following notice and
a hearing before the Board of Trustees held pursuant to the procedures set
forth in §
110.17 of this Code, shall have the authority to deny renewal of, revoke or
suspend a permit issued hereunder when it finds that:
      (1)   The flea market operation is being conducted in violation of this
section or of this Code or of the laws of the state; and/or
      (2)   The flea market operation is operating so as to constitute a
nuisance to the community.
(1997 Code, § 32.09) (Ord. 76-11, passed 10-11-1976; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 111.09 FLORISTS.
   (A)   Definition. FLORIST means any building, room, stand, enclosure,
premises, place, establishment or part of establishment in the Village
operated, maintained or conducted by any person for the sale, or offering or
keeping for sale at wholesale or retail, of any flowers, plants, trees or
shrubs, of all varieties and description.
   (B)   License. No person shall manage, conduct, operate or carry on the
business of florist without a license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth
in §
110.13.
   (C)   Application for license. Each application for a license to conduct the
business of florist shall state the name and address of the applicant, a
description of the place where the business is to be conducted and the names
and home addresses of the proprietor, owner and person designated to manage
such place of business.
   (D)   Sanitation and safety. Every establishment where the business of a
florist is conducted, managed or carried on shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. No decayed, decaying, unwholesome, contaminated or diseased
flowers, plants or other things shall be allowed to remain in or about the
establishment, and the establishment shall be kept clear of rubbish and
inflammable matter.
   (E)   Noxious plants. Every florist establishment shall comply with all
state laws governing the sale, possession, growing or disposition of noxious,
diseased or infected plants, trees or shrubs.
(1997 Code, § 32.10)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.10 FOOD ESTABLISHMENT OPERATORS.
   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate
meaning.
   AMBULATORY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT.  Mobile food dispenser vehicles and mobile
catering vehicles.
   APPROVED FOOD SANITATION COURSE.  Any training course that meets the minimum
requirements of the State Department of Public Health.
   CERTIFICATE. The document issued by the state to a person after attending an
approved food sanitation course and successfully passing a written examination
or by successfully passing a special written examination conducted by the
state. This person shall be recognized as a certified operator.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who handles food or drink during preparation,
processing, packaging, storing, handling, transporting or serving, or who comes
in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed in a room in
which food or drink is prepared or served.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where food that is intended for
individual service and consumption is routinely provided completely prepared.
The term includes any such place, regardless of whether consumption is in, on,
or off the premises, and regardless of whether there is a charge for the food.
The term does not include a private home where food is prepared for individual
family consumption, and it does not include the location of food vending
machines. Home kitchen operations, as defined in §
95.04 (Home Kitchen Operation) of the Village Code are excluded from this
definition of FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT.
   FOOD. All articles used for food, drink, confectionery or condiment whether
simple, mixed or compound, and all substances or ingredients used in the
manufacture and preparation thereof.
   MOBILE FOOD DISPENSER VEHICLE. Any ambulatory vehicle other than a mobile
catering vehicle, from which food or other substances for human consumption are
sold, offered for sale, manufactured, stored, dispensed or otherwise handled. A
mobile food dispenser vehicle is a cart, automobile or truck which is used
principally for the retail sale of candy, ice cream, ice milk, ice cream
novelties or similar products.
   MOBILE CATERING VEHICLE. Any ambulatory vehicle, which may contain kitchen
facilities, from which pre-prepared or freshly cooked or prepared food or other
substances for human consumption are sold, offered for sale, manufactured,
prepared, stored, dispensed or otherwise handled and which has been licensed by
the Village as a mobile catering vehicle. A mobile catering vehicle is a cart,
automobile or truck which is used principally for the retail sale of food that
is consumed for breakfast, lunch or dinner. A mobile catering vehicle also
includes any vehicle used for the retail sale of fresh or frozen food in bulk
quantities (e.g., cheese, deli meats, hamburgers, steaks, etc.).
   OPERATOR. Any owner, manager, operator or primary operator who has the
responsibility for the supervision of the food operation and employees during
all or part of the hours of operation. If no individual is the apparent
operator, then any employee present will be considered the operator.
   UTENSILS. Any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, containers or
other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during storage,
transportation, preparation or serving.
   (B)   Certification and licensing.
      (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person who does not possess a
valid license to operate a food service establishment or an ambulatory food
establishment within the Village. Only persons who comply with the requirements
of this section and all other provisions of the laws of the state, and the
Village regarding the operation of food service establishments and ambulatory
food establishments shall be entitled to receive and retain such a license. The
license fee for ambulatory food establishments shall be as set forth in §
110.13 for itinerant vendors. The license fee for food service establishment
shall be as set forth in §
110.13 for restaurants.
         (b)   Any person desiring a license to maintain or operate a food
service establishment or an ambulatory food establishment shall make written
application for a license to do so in the manner hereinafter prescribed. Upon
the completion of all inspections, tests, and examinations required by this
Code, and any other applicable laws, rules and regulations, the Building
Director shall transmit the application to the Village President, or his or her
designee, together with his or her recommendation for a grant or denial of the
license. If the applicant is of good character and reputation, and, in the case
of food service establishments, the premises for which such license is sought
is proper and suitable for the operation of a sanitary and healthful food
service establishment, and, in the case of ambulatory food establishments, if
the vehicle for which such license is sought is suitable for the operation of a
sanitary and healthful ambulatory food establishment, the Village President, or
his or her designee, shall, upon payment of the license fee by the applicant,
upon verification of compliance with all other applicable licensing
requirements, direct that a license be issued by the Village Clerk in
accordance with such application.
      (2)   It is mandatory that at least 1 operator of each food service
establishment hold a valid certificate issued by the state. A certified
operator shall be on the premises for direct supervision of the food service
establishment during the hours of operation. Certification shall be achieved by
successfully completing a food service establishment examination conducted or
monitored by the State Department of Public Health.
      (3)   In food service establishments, both the Village license and the
Illinois Operator's Certificate shall be displayed at all times in a prominent
place readily visible to the public. The village license for ambulatory food
establishments shall be displayed in a prominent place readily visible on the
ambulatory vehicle for which the license has been issued.
      (4)   The Village shall issue separate licenses for mobile catering
vehicles and mobile food dispenser vehicles. There shall be no more than 7
mobile food dispenser licenses issued on an annual basis to operators of mobile
food dispenser vehicles which are used principally for the sale of candy, ice
cream, ice milk, ice cream novelties or similar products. Each operator who
receives a mobile food dispenser license shall be permitted to operate no more
than 2 mobile food dispenser vehicles within the Village, provided that the
required business license fees are paid in full, the vehicles pass inspection
and the required state certification is obtained.
      (5)   There shall be no limitation on the number of mobile catering
vehicle licenses that can be issued by the Village and no limitation on the
number of mobile catering vehicles that can be operated by an owner or operator
holding a Village-issued mobile catering vehicle license, provided that: (a)
the required business license and permit fees are paid in full, the vehicles
pass inspection and the required state certification is obtained; and (b) such
vehicles shall not operate within 200 feet of any restaurant located within the
Village’s corporate boundaries, unless the vehicles are owned or operated by
the restaurant or the vehicles have Village-issued “food truck zone permits”
allowing them to operate within 200 feet of such restaurants. Mobile catering
vehicles may not sell any item while parked or stopped on a Village street or
on a Village-owned property unless the owner or operator of the mobile catering
vehicle obtains and maintains a “food truck zone permit” from the Village and
pays the required permit fee, which shall be in addition to the requirement to
obtain and maintain a mobile catering vehicle license, that allows the mobile
catering vehicle to park within the boundaries of a Village-approved food truck
zone and sell their food items (“food truck zone permit”). The Village Manager
shall set the annual cost of food truck zone permits. The Village-approved food
truck zones shall be located on certain designated Village streets and Village-
owned properties, as determined by the Village Manager, and shall be identified
by posted Village signage. A food truck zone permit may be issued with
conditions related to the operation of the mobile catering vehicles, as
determined by the Village Manager, such as a mobile catering vehicle may only
park in a certain designated Village-approved food truck zone on certain days
of the week. Each owner of a restaurant that is physically located in the
Village and who also owns or operates one or more mobile catering vehicles
shall be given priority in terms of parking its vehicles within the Village-
approved food truck zones. The Village may reserve the parking spaces at any
Village-approved food truck zones as open parking available to any mobile
catering vehicle with a Village-issued food truck zone permit on a first-come,
first serve basis. The hours of operation by mobile catering vehicles within
Village-approved food truck zones shall be set by the Village Manager. In
addition to other typical permit information, the applicant for a food truck
zone permit shall be required to execute a Village-prepared release and
indemnification agreement, and provide general liability insurance naming the
Village as an additional insured. It shall be a violation of this division for:
(a) a mobile catering vehicle to park within a Village-approved food truck zone
and sell food items withouta Village-issued food truck zone permit; and (b) a
mobile catering vehicle to park outside of the boundaries of Village-approved
food truck zones and sell their food items with or without a Village-issued
food truck zone permit. Items may be sold from a mobile catering vehicle
without a Village-issued food truck zone permit only when the vehicle is parked
on privately- owned property in an area of the Village which is zoned for
business, commercial or industrial use. Mobile catering vehicles without a
Village- issued food truck zone permit shall sell items only at those locations
where the owner or tenant of the property on which the mobile catering vehicle
is parked or stopped has given its permission to the owner or operator of the
mobile catering vehicle to sell items from the vehicle. Mobile catering
vehicles must follow a schedule which sets forth the times and locations at
which items will be sold from the vehicle. A current copy of this schedule must
be filed with the Village’s Building and Code Enforcement Department. No items
shall be sold from a mobile catering vehicle while it is within 2 blocks of the
lot line of any primary or secondary school.
(1997 Code, § 32.11) (Ord. 84-32, passed 5-10-1984; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2011-02, passed 2-15-2011; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed
4-1-2014; Am. Ord. CO-2020-26, passed 10-6-2020; Am. Ord. CO-2021-15, passed 7-
13-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021) Penalty, see §
111.99
§ 111.11 FOOD VENDING MACHINES.
   (A)   No person shall install, operate or maintain within the Village any
automatic food vending machines used for the sale of any article of food, the
operation of which is governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token,
without a license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
   (B)   No person shall permit the installation, keeping, maintenance or use
upon his premises of any food vending machine owned or operated by a person who
has not obtained a license as hereinafter provided.
   (C)   Applicant shall set forth information as to the type or types of
machines, the kind or kinds of foods to be dispensed therefrom and the location
thereof before any such license shall issue. Before any license shall issue the
type of vending machine intended to be operated shall be approved by the
Building Director, who shall also cause an inspection to be made of the
premises of the applicant to determine the character and fitness of the
premises from the standpoint of insuring protection of the food from improper
handling, dust, dirt, flies, vermin or other contamination.
   (D)   (1)   The Director of Finance shall deliver with each license a
decalcomania with numerals designating the year for which this license is
issued. The Director shall change annually the predominant background colors of
such license emblem or decal.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the licensee to affix the decalcomania in a
conspicuous place on the licensed automatic food vending machine, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to mutilate or remove the decal from the automatic
food vending machine during the year for where it is so licensed, unless
written application is made to the Director of Finance to transfer the license
or decal to another machine of the same class. The Director shall permit the
transfer of any decal to another machine of the same class during the year
within which the machine has been licensed, and shall make such notation upon
their records and upon the decal as shall be appropriate to reflect this
transfer.
   (E)   (1)   All articles of food purveyed by means of automatic food vending
machines shall be clean, wholesome, free from paint, decay, infection or
contamination and shall contain no poisonous, deleterious or injurious
ingredients in kind and quantities so as to render such articles injurious or
detrimental to health.
      (2)   The Building Director shall have the authority to make periodic
inspections of the place of business, the automatic food vending machines and
the article or articles of food purveyed therefrom for the purpose of
determining the purity and wholesomeness of the products vended and the
preparation, handling and wrapping of same, and to see that the requirements
and intent of this section and the health provisions of this code and rules and
regulations of the Board of Health are complied with, including the operation,
cleanliness, sanitation and use of such machines to guard against improper
handling, distribution and contamination of food purveyed thereby.
   (F)   It shall be the duty of all persons operating any such food vending
machines upon demand of the Building Director to furnish them for their
inspection samples of all such food and drink, which samples may be analyzed by
or under the direction of the Building Director and a record of such analysis
shall be kept and maintained in their office.
(1997 Code, § 32.12) (Ord. 66-7, passed 2-10- 1966; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 111.12 FORESTERS AND LANDSCAPERS.
   (A)   License. No person shall engage in the businesses commonly known as
forestry or landscaping (tree, lawn and shrub planting, trimming and removal)
in the Village without a license therefor, and furnishing a bond. The
provisions of this section shall not apply to any person, by themself, trimming
or removing trees or shrubs owned by them. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
   (B)   Bond. Every person licensed under this section shall, before receiving
the license therein referred to, deposit with the Director of Finance a bond in
the penal sum of $20,000 with surety to be approved by the Board of Trustees to
protect the Village from any and all loss, costs, expense or liability which
the village may suffer, or be put to, or which may be recovered from it by
reason of the issuance of such license or by reason of any act or thing done or
neglected to be done under or by virtue of the authority given in such license.
   (C)   Insurance. No person licensed under this section shall plant, trim or
remove any tree or shrub in the Village unless such person shall procure and
file with the Director of Finance a standard form of public liability and
property damage insurance policy protecting the Village, its officers and
agents against any and all liability for damage resulting from such planting,
trimming or removal within the corporate limits of the Village. Such insurance
policies shall be written by some one of the companies qualified under the laws
of this state to make such contracts and each policy shall be in the sum of
$50,000 limit for 1 person killed or injured in one accident at any 1 location
and $100,000 limit for 2 or more persons killed or injured in any one accident
at any 1 location, and $10,000 in respect to property damage in any 1 accident
at any 1 location to be kept in force with initial or renewable premiums
prepaid in advance of the periods covered so long as such forester or
landscaper shall be engaged in this business in the village.
(1997 Code, § 32.13) (Ord. 55-13, passed 9-22-1955)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.13 HOUSE MOVERS.
   (A)   License. No person shall engage in the occupation of a house mover
without a license therefor. No person, except a licensed house mover, shall
move any house, barn or other building over, across or along any street or
alley within the Village. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
   (B)   Bond. No person shall be issued a license to engage in the occupation
of a house mover until he shall have given a bond in the sum of $5,000 with
good and sufficient sureties, conditioned, among other things, that the person
will pay any and all damages which may occur to any tree, pavement or sidewalk,
or any other property belonging to the Village by reason of such activity;
conditioned also, that the person will immediately pay any judgment that may be
obtained against the Village as well as any costs the Village may incur in
consequence of the granting of such license, and all the acts done thereunder,
and will, in all things, comply with the conditions of their license.
   (C)   Insurance. No person shall be permitted to move any buildings unless
such person shall procure and file with the Director of Finance a standard form
of public liability and property damage insurance policy protecting the
Village, its officers and agents, against any and all liability for damages
resulting from the moving of the building within the Village. Such insurance
policies shall be written by some one of the companies qualified under the laws
of this state to make such contracts, and each policy shall be in the sum of
$50,000 limit for 1 person killed or injured in 1 accident at any 1 location
and $100,000 limit for 2 or more persons killed or injured in any 1 accident at
any 1 location, and $10,000 in respect to property damage in any 1 accident at
any 1 location, to be kept in force with initial or renewal premiums prepaid in
advance of the periods covered, so long as such moving object is in progress.
   (D)   Permit to move buildings. A house mover shall in each instance, before
moving any building, obtain a written permit to do so from the Building
Director and shall pay the requisite fee as prescribed in the Building Code.
The permit may prescribe the route to be taken and limit the time for the
removal. No permit shall be issued for the removal of any building in the
Village except under the provisions of the Building Code.
   (E)   Safety precautions; condition of streets. Every house mover, while
using any portion of the street or sidewalk, shall cause at least one red light
to be placed in a conspicuous place in front and one in the rear of any
building, or any other obstruction placed in the street by them, from sunset to
sunrise of each night. They shall also leave all streets and alleys over which
they have moved any building in as good condition as they were before being so
used by them.
   (F)   Time limit on removal. The owner of any structure or the contractor
for its removal, either or both, shall not suffer the structure to be or remain
in any of the streets or alleys or upon any of the public grounds of the
Village for any time longer than may be specified in the license or permit.
Unless such building is removed within such reasonable time as the Village
President or Village Manager may determine, they may declare the same to be a
nuisance and cause its removal.
(1997 Code, § 32.14) (Ord. 55-15, passed 9-22- 1955; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.14 JUNK DEALERS.
   (A)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
      FENCE. Any place for the purchase, reception, or keeping of stolen goods.
      JUNK. Old iron, chains, brass, copper, tin, lead or other base metals,
old rope, old bags, rags, waste paper, paper clippings, scraps of woolens,
clips, bagging, rubber and glass, old automobile parts and empty bottles of
different kinds and sizes and all articles and things discarded or no longer
used as manufactured articles composed of, or consisting of, any 1 or more of
the materials or articles herein mentioned.
      JUNK DEALER. A person who engages in the business of buying, selling,
bartering or exchanging, or who collects, receives, stores or holds in
possession for sale, barter or exchange any of the things defined herein as
junk, whether dealing at wholesale or at retail or as a junk peddler.
      JUNK PEDDLER. A person who uses a junk wagon as defined herein and
travels from place to place within the Village for the purpose of purchasing
junk or makes a business of purchasing junk from anyone who desires to sell it
and carries it away upon purchasing it.
      JUNK VEHICLE. Every truck, wagon, automobile, pushcart or other vehicle
used by a junk dealer in the collection, disposition or transportation of junk
from one place to another.
      JUNK YARD. Any yard, place or enclosure where junk is bought, sold,
bartered or exchanged, either at wholesale or retail or where junk is
collected, received, stored or held in possession for resale, barter or
exchange, either at wholesale or retail.
   (B)   License. No person shall operate as a junk dealer or engage in the
business of keeping a junk yard nor use a junk vehicle for the purpose of
collecting, transporting or disposing of junk without a license for such
purpose. The fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13.
   (C)   Location. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business
of junk shop keeper at any other place than the one designated in the license.
   (D)   Bond. Every person licensed under this section shall, at or before
receiving such license, execute and deliver to the Director of Finance a bond
to the Village, with good and sufficient sureties to be approved by the Board
of Trustees, in the penal sum of $500, conditioned for the due observance of
the provisions of this section, and all ordinances of the Village respecting
the keeping, conducting or operating of junk businesses or junk vehicles.
   (E)   Place of business. Every applicant for a license under this section
shall state in his application the location of the place of business of such
applicant, and such location shall be designated in any license so granted.
   (F)   Identification of vehicles. Every licensee under this section shall,
before using any vehicle, cause to be painted on the outside thereof, in plain
letters and figures of not less than 2 inches in height, the full name,
together with the street and number of the place of business of the licensee.
   (G)   Change of location. In case any person licensed to keep a junk
business, or to maintain or operate a junk yard, shall remove the shop or place
of business of such licensee from the place designated in any such license,
such licensee shall immediately thereupon give notice to the Director of
Finance of such change and have the same endorsed by the Director of Finance
upon such license and shall cause the location of such place of business to be
changed upon any vehicle used or operated by such licensee in the Village. No
such change in the location of any junk shop or junk yard within the Village
shall be made until the Board of Trustees have granted such licensee permission
to maintain and carry on such junk business in such location.
   (H)   Articles as pledge or pawn. No person licensed or operating under this
section shall receive, in the line of his business, any article or thing by way
of pledge or pawn, or loan or advance any sum of money on the security of any
article or thing.
   (I)   Record of purchases. Every junk dealer engaged in the business of
purchasing at retail any junk shall provide and keep a book, in which shall be
fairly written at the time of each purchase a description of the article so
purchased, the name and residence of the person from whom such purchase was
made, and the day and hour of such purchase, and such book shall at all times
be open to the inspection of the Police Department of the Village.
   (J)   Dealing with minors. No junk dealer shall purchase or receive any
goods, article or thing from any minor without the written consent of his or
her parents or guardian.
   (K)   Hours of operation. No person licensed under this section shall
purchase, in the way of his business, any goods, article or thing from any
person between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 am.
   (L)   Lost or stolen articles. Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in
possession of any goods, articles or things which may have been lost or stolen,
or alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen, shall immediately upon
demand to view the same, exhibit the same to any officer of the Police
Department.
   (M)   Duties of Police. The Chief of Police shall have general supervision
over junk dealers, junk shops and junk yards in the Village and shall have
power to inspect the same and all articles or things kept therein, whenever he
shall deem it necessary to do so.
   (N)   Noise; insanitary premises.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person conducting or maintaining a
junk shop or junkyard within the Village to break up old boilers, iron or other
junk, by means of hammers, sledges or other mechanical devices in such a manner
as to disturb the peace and quietude of the residents in the immediate vicinity
of any such junk shop or junk yard or to do any other act that may disturb the
peace and quietude of any such residents.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any such person to conduct or maintain any
such place of business in such a manner that the premises, or the sidewalks in
front thereof, are put, kept or permitted to remain in an insanitary condition.
   (O)    Operation of a "fence." No person shall keep, maintain or conduct a
place licensed under this section for the purchase, reception or keeping of
stolen goods as a fence.
(1997 Code, § 32.15)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.15 LAUNDRIES.
   (A)   Definition.
      (1)   Any place, building, structure, room, establishment or portion
thereof which is used for the purpose of washing, drying, starching or ironing
wearing apparel, household linens, towels, curtains, draperies or other
washable fabrics, such work being done for the general public, shall be deemed
a laundry and subject to the provisions of this section.
      (2)   The word LAUNDRY as used in this section shall also include any
private laundry maintained or operated in connection with any hotel, restaurant
or public institution, except a hospital or charitable institution where no
charge is made for laundry services.
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to any room or
portion thereof located in an apartment house or other dwelling in which
domestic laundry work is done by or for the occupants of such building
exclusively.
   (B)   Laundry license. No person shall conduct, operate, maintain or carry
on the business of any laundry without a license therefor. The fee shall be as
set forth in §
110.13.
   (C)   Application. The application for a laundry license shall state the
maximum number of persons to be employed therein. The Building Director shall
cause an investigation to be made of the premises named and described in such
application for the purpose of determining whether the sanitary conditions and
the other requirements of this Code are fully complied with.
   (D)   Basis of license fees. The annual license fee for a laundry license
shall be graded upon the basis of the number of persons employed in such
establishment. The number of employees shall be determined by the average daily
number employed during the preceding license year in such establishment,
exclusive of drivers or operators of vehicles. In case of a new business the
number of employees shall be estimated.
(1997 Code, § 32.16) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 111.16 LAUNDRY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Defined. The term LAUNDRY VEHICLE as used in this chapter shall be
construed to mean any vehicle used for the purpose of collecting and delivering
laundry within the Village limits.
   (B)   License. No person shall operate or cause to be operated, on any of
the streets, alleys or other public places of the Village, any laundry vehicle
without a license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
   (C)   Application. The applicant shall state the character of the vehicle
for which the license is applied for. The Building Director shall cause such
investigation to be made as is necessary for the purpose of determining whether
such laundry vehicle complies with the sanitary and health regulations of the
Village.
   (D)   License plate. Every person who shall operate on any of the streets,
alleys or other public places of the Village any laundry vehicle shall obtain
from the Director of Finance at the time the license therefor is issued a
painted metallic plate 8 inches long and 4 inches wide for each vehicle so
licensed. Such plate shall have stamped thereon a number corresponding to the
number of such laundry vehicle license the word “Maywood” and the expiration
date of the license period. Such plates shall be of a different color for each
license period. Every laundry vehicle for which such plate has been furnished
shall have the same securely fastened on the right side of such vehicle in such
manner that the same may be easily seen.
(1997 Code, § 32.17) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 111.17 MACHINE SHOPS.
   (A)   Definition. The term MACHINE SHOP as used in this section means a
workshop in which machines are made or metal parts thereof are repaired, or
where parts of machines or tools, implements, gears, dies, screws or other
metal articles are cut, filed, shaped, punched, stamped or repaired by means of
a lathe or other machinery.
   (B)   License. No person shall conduct or operate a machine shop without a
license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
   (C)   Investigation. The Building Director and the Chief of the Fire
Department shall make separate investigations in order to determine whether the
building or place within which such machine shop is conducted or is to be
conducted complies with all the provisions of this Code relating to health,
safety and sanitation, buildings and fire prevention.
   (D)   Night operation within Residential Districts. No machine shop shall be
operated in the nighttime between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in any
block in which a majority of the buildings on both sides of the street are used
exclusively for residential purposes, or within 100 feet of such block, and it
shall be within the power of the Building Director or Police Department after
reasonable notice to treat such night operation as a public nuisance and to
abate the same.
   (E)   Health and safety regulations. No building or structure used for or in
connection with any machine shop shall be so used as to endanger the health or
property of the shop’s employees or the public. The owner, lessee, tenant,
occupant or manager of any such machine shop shall cause all floors and other
surface around or beneath any machine or work bench to be kept in good order
and repair and shall have suitable and convenient sanitary receptacles for
receiving waste and cloths used in and about the machine shop for the purpose
of cleaning machines or parts thereof or which are intended for any other
necessary use. Such owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or manager shall not permit
any steel cuttings or machine parts to accumulate on or about any machine or
work bench so that the same may become detrimental to the health or safety of
any person therein engaged.
   (F)   Inspection. It shall be the duty of the Building Director to cause an
inspection to be made of the premises used for machine shop purposes and all
buildings used in connection therewith as often as may be necessary to abate or
cause to be removed the nuisance designated in this section.
   (G)   Noise. It shall be unlawful to operate, within 200 feet of any
residence, a machine shop wherein pneumatic hammers or other apparatus are used
which cause loud or unusual noises.
(1997 Code, § 32.18) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.18 COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH INDEPENDENT LIVING CENTERS.
   (A)   Definition.
      (1)   The term COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH INDEPENDENT LIVING CENTER, as used
in this section, is defined as a multiple family dwelling used, owned, leased
or maintained by any person, firm or corporation, whether for profit or not for
profit, providing deinstitutionalized semi- supervised transitional living
experience for persons classified as mentally ill and who are motivated for
independent living. The term includes living centers established under the
Community Mental Health Act (405 ILCS 20) and approved by the Illinois
Department of Mental Health and Developmental Disabilities.
      (2)   The term MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING is defined as a building designed
or altered for occupancy by 3 or more families living independently of each
other.
   (B)   Compliance with section and other Village ordinances. No multiple
family dwelling in the Village shall be used or maintained as a Community
Mental Health Independent Living Center unless such building and every part
thereof shall conform to the requirements of this section and to such other
requirements of the building, zoning, housing and health ordinances of the
Village as may apply.
   (C)   License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct,
keep, manage or operate or cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated a
Community Mental Health Independent Living Center without a license therefor.
The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13 (mental health).
   (D)   Application. Applications for license to operate a Community Mental
Health Independent Living Center in the Village shall be made in writing to the
Director of Finance and shall conform to the requirements set out in
Chapter 110 of this Code.
   (E)   General duties of Director of Finance. Upon receipt of the application
it shall be the duty of the Director of Finance to submit the application to
the Building Director, to the Chief of the Fire Department, to the Chief of the
Police Department, and to the Building Director, who shall each authorize the
proper inspection, and no license shall be issued until they have received the
written approval from each of the officials.
   (F)   General duties of Building Director. The Building Director shall
determine that the requirements of the Building Code, Zoning Ordinance,
Plumbing Code and Electrical Code of the Village are complied with. They shall
also find and determine that all regulations of the Health Department of the
Village, including the Village Housing Code, have been complied with.
   (G)   General duties of Chief of Fire Department. The Chief of the Fire
Department shall find and determine that all fire hazards have been eliminated
from the premises; that the premises have proper and sufficient fire
extinguishing equipment; that the premises comply with all regulations and
recommendations of
Chapter 91 of this Code; and that the occupants of the building have adequate
fire protection.
   (H)   Inspections. At least twice a year after the license required in this
section has been issued or more often if deemed necessary, and before the
renewal of any such license to conduct, keep or operate any Community Mental
Health Independent Living Center, it shall be the duty of the Building
Director, the Fire Chief, and the Police Chief to authorize the inspection of
the premises and determine that the provisions of this Code are being complied
with.
   (I)   Violation of section to constitute nuisance. The maintenance or use of
any Community Mental Health Independent Living Center in violation of the
provisions of this section is declared to be and shall constitute a nuisance
and may be abated accordingly by the Building Director or other officer or
department head of the Village as provided in §§
92.20 et seq. or as provided by law.
   (J)   Resident supervisor, record keeping. A licensee shall have a resident
program supervisor in charge and control of the premises at all times. The
licensee shall require the supervisor to keep and maintain records of the
operation of the living center and the names and history of the residents
therein. The information contained in such records, being deemed confidential,
shall be made available only to Village department heads upon notice and
demand.
(1997 Code, § 32.19) (Ord. 79-7, passed 7-12- 1979; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed
8-17-2021)
§ 111.19 MOTELS AND HOTELS.
   (A)   Definition. The term MOTEL or HOTEL, as used in this section, means a
building or structure kept, used or maintained as, or advertised or held out to
the public to be, an inn, hotel, family hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house,
dormitory or place where sleeping or rooming accommodations are furnished for
hire or rent, whether with or without meals, in which 3 or more sleeping rooms
are used or maintained for the accommodation of guests, lodgers or roomers. The
term MOTEL or HOTEL does not include vacation rentals as defined in this Code.
   (B)   License. No person shall operate a motel or hotel without a license
therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
   (C)   Cleanliness and sanitation generally. Every motel and hotel in the
Village, and every part thereof, shall be kept clean and free from any
accumulation of dirt, filth, garbage or other matter in or on the same, or in
the yard, court passage, area or alley connected with or belonging to the same.
The owner or keeper of any motel or hotel or part thereof shall thoroughly
cleanse all the rooms, passages, stairs, floors, windows, doors, walls,
ceiling, privies, cesspools and drains of the house or part of the house of
which they are the owner, lessee or keeper to the satisfaction of the Building
Director so often as shall be required by or in accordance with any regulation
or order of the Building Director.
   (D)   Annual inspection. Every motel and hotel operated or maintained in the
Village shall be inspected under and by authority of the Building Director at
least once every year. It shall be the duty of every person maintaining or
operating a motel or hotel to pay to the Director of Finance annually in
advance on the first day of January, before the inspection provided for is
made, an annual inspection fee of $5 per room for each sleeping room used for
the accommodation of guests, lodgers or roomers in such motel or hotel.
(1997 Code, § 32.20) (Am. Ord. C0-00-25, passed 12-4-2000; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2019-26, passed 8-20-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 111.20 MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOPS.
   (A)   Definition. The words MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP, as used in this
section, means any wholly enclosed building or structure where the business of
doing repair work on or for motor vehicles or any of the component parts
thereof, replacing of or adding of parts thereto, or the repairing of the body
thereof, painting or refinishing of such vehicle is carried on.
   (B)   License. No person shall engage in the business of a motor vehicle
repair shop without a license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13 (auto repair).
   (C)   License application. Every application shall be approved by the
Director of Sustainability and Innovation and the Chief of the Fire Department
as to compliance of the premises named therein with the provisions of §§
150.001 et seq. and
Chapter 91 before a license shall be issued. The applicant shall also specify
the number of persons to be engaged therein.
   (D)   Rental batteries. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the
following:
      (1)   To retain in their possession for a period longer than 10 days,
without the written consent of the owner, any electric storage battery upon
which the word “rental” or any other word, mark or character is printed,
painted or stamped, or to which any such word, mark or character is attached
for the purpose of identifying the electric storage battery as belonging to or
being the property of any person;
      (2)   To recharge, without the consent of the owner, except in cases of
emergency, any such rental battery;
      (3)   To sell, dispose of, deliver or give, or attempt to sell, dispose
of, deliver or give to any other person other than the owner thereof any such
rental battery;
      (4)   To remove, deface, alter or destroy, or cause to be removed,
defaced, altered or destroyed the word "rental" or similar word on such
battery.
   (E)   Work outside building. All motor vehicle repair work shall be carried
on within the confines of the building or structure approved under the
application for license; the doing of motor vehicle repair work on the outside
of such building or structure is prohibited.
(1997 Code, § 32.21) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12,
passed 6-10-2025)   
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.21 PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Definition. The term PARKING LOT as used in this section shall mean
any premises, enclosures or other places, other than a licensed public garage,
where 4 or more vehicles may be stored or parked and where rent is paid or
compensation is paid to the owner, manager or lessee of such premises for the
storing or parking of vehicles.
   (B)   License. It shall be unlawful to operate a parking lot without a
license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13.
   (C)   Application. Application for licenses to operate a parking lot shall
state, in addition to all other information required, the area of the premises
to be used, which area shall be the total area, including space to be used for
runways and other purposes.
   (D)   Abandoned vehicles. It shall be unlawful to park or store in any
parking lot any vehicle which is not in condition ready for use, or to permit
the parking of any abandoned, junked or partially dismantled vehicle in any
such lot.
   (E)   Sale of vehicles. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any
parking lot for the purpose of displaying it for sale.
   (F)   Use as repair shops. It shall be unlawful to use any parking lot or
portion thereof as an automobile repair shop.
(1997 Code, § 32.22)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.22 PAWNBROKERS.
   (A)   License. No person shall operate the business of a pawnbroker without
a license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13.
   (B)   Application. Applications for a pawnbroker’s license shall state
thereon the name of the applicant; the place of business; and the number of
employees intended to be engaged in such business. The Chief of Police or any
other police officer shall investigate each applicant for such license and
shall report back whether or not such applicant is a person of good character.
No license shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of the offense of
receiving stolen goods or of burglary or robbery.
   (C)   Record of transactions. A pawnbroker shall keep a record of every
article pledged with them or sold to them, and this record shall be open to the
inspection of any police officer at any time during business hours.
   (D)   Minors. No pawnbroker’s license shall be issued to any person who is
not 21 years of age or over, and no pawnbroker shall employ a person of less
than 21 years of age to assist him in his business. No pawnbroker shall have
any business dealings as a pawnbroker with any person less than 21 years of
age, except with the written consent of the parent or guardian of the minor to
each particular transaction.
   (E)   Acting as secondhand dealer. No pawnbroker shall conduct the business
of a secondhand dealer.
(1997 Code, § 32.23)
§ 111.23 PHOTOGRAPHERS.
   (A)   Definition. The word PHOTOGRAPHER as used herein means any person
operating, managing or maintaining a photographic studio, a postcard studio, a
finishing or developing plant, or a portrait-copying business, or engaging in
the business of photography, including commercial, portrait and home portrait
photography, or the business of an itinerant or transient photographer, or the
business of photography for any purpose.
   (B)   License. No person shall engage in the business of a photographer
without a license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13. This
section shall not apply to photographing for or developing of motion picture
films.
   (C)   Health and sanitation. Every building, place or establishment in which
the business of a photographer is carried on shall be kept in a clean and
sanitary condition. All necessary measures shall be taken to safeguard properly
the lives and health of all persons employed in such establishments. All
necessary appliances and devices shall be installed to prevent the emission of
noxious fumes, odors or dust, and provision shall be made to prevent the
occlusion or obstruction of the drains or sewers through which the sewage or
wastes of such establishments are discharged. Adequate and convenient washing
and toilet facilities shall be provided for employees in such establishments.
(1997 Code, § 32.24)
§ 111.24 PUBLIC GARAGES.
   (A)   Definition. The term PUBLIC GARAGE as used in this section means any
premises used for housing or care of more than 4 motor vehicles, or where any
such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for remuneration,
hire or sale, not including exhibition or show rooms for model cars.
   (B)   License. No person shall operate or maintain a public garage without a
license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13 (livery and
garage). Application for license shall state the location of the garage and the
number of cars which can be accommodated therein.
   (C)   Proximity to hospitals, churches and schools.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, build, construct or
maintain any public garage or gasoline service station, the storage of filling
tanks, pumps or devices of which are used for the purpose of storing, drawing
off or discharging gasoline, oil or other volatile inflammable liquid, within
150 feet of any building used as and for a hospital, church or public or
parochial school, measured from the nearest point of such tank or filling or
discharging device used in connection therewith, to the nearest point of any
such building.
      (2)   This section shall not apply to any gasoline service station
existing or built or maintained on the northwest corner of First Avenue and
Madison Street.
   (D)   Floors. The vehicle floors of all garages shall be of concrete or
other fireproof material.
   (E)   Cleanliness; combustible materials. All garages must be kept clean.
Grease, oil, paint-soaked rags, waste or other combustible materials of like
character shall be kept in approved self-closing metallic receptacles having
metallic legs at least 3 inches high and securely braced. One such receptacle
shall be provided for each 2,500 square feet or fractional part thereof of
floor area in stories where workshops are located or vehicles containing
volatile inflammable liquid are housed. Such receptacles shall be safely clear
of all combustible surroundings and their contents shall be safely cleared at
least once each day. Oily and greasy clothing shall be cared for in
noncombustible and well-vented closets, safely located.
   (F)   Heating apparatus. No stove or hot-air furnace shall be used or
allowed in any public garage or gasoline service station. Heating shall be by
means of hot water or steam. Hot water or steam boiler or boilers located in a
public garage shall be enclosed in a room having no opening, except to the
outside of the building. Boiler rooms shall have walls, ceilings and floors of
brick or concrete; walls shall not be less than 8 inches thick. Boiler rooms
located on or above the ground floor in buildings occupied as public garages or
gasoline service stations prior to 1940 may have impervious walls and ceilings
constructed of wire lath on metal framing, plastered on both sides with rock
plaster, or 6 inch hollow tile plastered on both sides, or brick or concrete.
   (G)   Inspections.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to make or cause to be
made such inspections of public garages as may be necessary to insure
compliance with the provisions of this section. Any police officer shall be
permitted at any reasonable hour to view every car stored or kept in any public
garage, and it shall be unlawful to hinder any such inspection or to conceal
any car or motor vehicle from such inspection.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to make or
cause to be made inspections at least every month of all public garages not
equipped with sprinkler, and at least every 2 months of all public garages
equipped with sprinklers within the Village, to keep careful and complete
record of such inspections and all matters relating thereto and to enforce the
regulations prescribed herein.
   (H)   Conformity to Building Code. It shall be unlawful to maintain or
operate any public garage in any building which does not conform to the
requirements of the Building Code.
(1997 Code, § 32.25) (Ord. —, passed 7-22-1993)
§ 111.25 RETAIL HARDWARE STORES.
   (A)   Definition. The term RETAIL HARDWARE STORE, as used in this section,
means any building, room, enclosure, premises, place, establishment or part of
an establishment in the Village operated, maintained or conducted for the sale
or offering for  sale at retail of any of the following articles: hardware;
tinware; aluminumware; enamelware; cutlery; tools; implements; apparatus;
machinery; plumbing; engineers’, janitors’, blacksmiths’, contractors’ or
electrical supplies; gas, plumbing or electrical fixtures; other articles or
wares made largely of metals; kerosene; rifles, shotguns and loaded shot shells
or cartridges; provided, however, that dealers or establishments or parts of
establishments of a similar nature specifically defined and licensed elsewhere
in this Code shall be exempt from the provisions licensing retail hardware
stores.
   (B)   License. No person shall engage in the business of a retail hardware
store without a license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13
(retail store).
   (C)   Application; investigation.
      (1)   The applicant for a retail hardware store license shall describe
the premises to be licensed and state the location of the same.
      (2)   The Building Director shall cause an investigation to be made of
the premises named and described in the application for a license to conduct a
retail hardware store, for the purpose of determining the fitness and
suitability of such premises for such business from a sanitary standpoint, and
determining whether or not the premises comply with all the provisions of this
Code and the laws of the state regulating health, safety and sanitation so as
to safeguard properly the lives and health of the employees engaged therein.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall investigate such premises to determine
whether the fire regulations of this Code applicable thereto have been complied
with.
   (D)   Additional privileges. Every licensed retail hardware store shall have
the privilege of engaging in the business of a retail paint store within the
same building, room, enclosure, premises, place, establishment or part of an
establishment without the necessity of obtaining an additional license.
(1997 Code, § 32.26) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 111.26 RETAIL PAINT STORES.
   (A)   Definition. The term RETAIL PAINT STORE, as used in this section,
means any building, room, enclosure, premises, place, establishment or part of
an establishment in the Village operated or conducted for the sale or offering
for sale at retail of any paints, dry colors, wallpaper, varnishes, calcimine,
white or red lead, raw or boiled linseed oil, turpentine, dryer, benzine,
naphtha or painters’ tools, supplies and equipment. Dealers, establishments or
parts of establishments of a similar nature specifically defined and licensed
by other provisions of this Code shall be exempt from the provisions of that
part of this section dealing with paint store licenses.
   (B)   License. No person shall engage in the business of a retail paint
store without a license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
   (C)   Application; investigation.
      (1)   The applicant for a retail paint store license shall describe the
premises, as well as the location of the same.
      (2)   Every such application shall be approved by the Chief of the Fire
Department before a license shall be issued.
      (3)   The Building Director shall cause an investigation to be made of
the premises named and described in the application for a license to conduct a
retail paint store for the purpose of determining the fitness and suitability
of such premises for such business from a sanitary standpoint and of
determining whether or not the premises comply with all the provisions of this
Code and the laws of the state regulating health, safety and sanitation so as
to safeguard properly the lives and health of the employees engaged therein.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall also cause an investigation to be made
of such premises for the purpose of determining whether the same comply with
all the fire regulations of this Code applicable thereto.
(1997 Code, § 32.27) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 111.27 SECONDHAND DEALERS.
   (A)   Definitions and classes of "secondhand dealers.” 
      (1)   There shall be the following classes of “secondhand dealers:”
         (a)   “Class A Secondhand Dealer;”
         (b)   “Class B Secondhand Dealer;”
         (c)   “Class C Secondhand Dealer;”
         (d)   “Class D Secondhand Dealer;” and
         (e)   “Class E Secondhand Dealer.”
      (2)   (a)   The term SECONDHAND DEALER, as used in defining a "Class A
secondhand dealer" or a "Class B secondhand dealer" and as further defined in
the subsections below, means an owner or operator of a business where any
previously owned item of personal property is sold, bartered, exchanged or held
on consignment for sale, barter, or exchange, including but not limited to
furniture, clothing, jewelry, radios, televisions, electronic music equipment,
and musical instruments, the prior owner of which is not either:
            1.   A merchant as defined by Uniform Commercial Code, 810 ILCS 5/
2-104; or
            2.   The manufacturer of the item.
         (b)   The term CLASS A SECONDHAND DEALER, as used in this section,
means a secondhand dealer, as defined above, whose inventory of merchandise is
donated.
         (c)   The term CLASS B SECONDHAND DEALER, as used in this section,
means all secondhand dealers other than Class A secondhand dealers, Class C
secondhand dealers, Class D secondhand dealers, and Class E secondhand dealers.
      (3)   The term CLASS C SECONDHAND DEALER means a secondhand dealer, as
defined above, who is operating on a temporary license, the duration of which
shall not exceed 6 months.
      (4)   The term SECONDHAND DEALER as used in defining a CLASS D SECONDHAND
DEALER means an owner or operator of a business where any previously owned item
of personal property, including but not limited to furniture, clothing,
jewelry, radios, televisions, electronic music equipment, and musical
instruments is sold, bartered, exchanged, or held on consignment for sale,
barter or exchange and who obtains all such items solely from persons who are
merchants as defined in Uniform Commercial Code, 810 ILCS 5/2-104.
      (5)   The term CLASS E SECONDHAND DEALER means a secondhand dealer as
defined for Class D licenses above, who is operating on a temporary basis, the
duration of which shall not exceed 6 months.
      (6)   The term SECONDHAND DEALER as used in this section shall not
include pawnbrokers as defined by statute and ordinance or junk dealers as
defined by statute and ordinance.
      (7)   Whenever the term SECONDHAND DEALER is used in this section, it
shall refer to all classes of secondhand dealers unless otherwise specified.
   (B)   License. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business
of a secondhand dealer without a license therefor for each separate place,
premises or location where such business is to be carried on. The fee shall be
as set forth in §
110.13 of this Code.
   (C)   Application; investigation. The Chief of Police shall cause an
investigation to be made to ascertain whether all applicants for licenses to
engage in the business of a secondhand dealer have complied with the state laws
and the provisions of this Code applicable to such businesses and whether the
applicants have been convicted of any crime in the last 5 years of any felony
or of a misdemeanor which involves conduct that constitutes a violation of any
provision contained in the Illinois Criminal Code, Articles 16 through 19
inclusive, as now or hereafter amended.
   (D)   Restriction on issuance of licenses.
      (1)   No more than 2 licenses to engage in the business of Class A
secondhand dealer shall be issued at any one time.
      (2)   No more than 4 licenses to engage in the business of Class B
secondhand dealer shall be issued at any one time.
      (3)   No more than 1 license to engage in the business of Class D
secondhand dealer shall be issued at any one time.
      (4)   No Class C or Class E secondhand dealer’s license shall be issued
for a period of more than 6 months. Class C and Class E secondhand dealer’s
licenses shall not be renewable. No more than 2 Class C secondhand dealer
licenses shall be issued at any one time. No more than 1 Class E secondhand
dealer licenses shall be issued at any one time.
      (5)   No secondhand dealer’s license shall be issued to:
         (a)   Any person who has been convicted in the past 5 years of a
felony or of a misdemeanor which involves conduct that constitutes a violation
of any provision contained in Illinois Criminal Code, Articles 16 through 19
inclusive, as now or hereafter amended;
         (b)   Any partnership or corporation or limited liability company, if
1 or more of the members of such partnership or company or shareholders of such
corporation owning more than 5% of the stock have been convicted of a felony in
the past 5 years, or of any other crime, including in its essential elements
the possession of stolen property;
         (c)   A person, partnership or corporation or limited liability
company which, at the time of application for renewal of a license, would not
be eligible for such license upon first application;
         (d)   A person, partnership or corporation or limited liability
company whose business is conducted by a manager or agent who does not possess
the same qualifications required of the licensee;
         (e)   A person, partnership or corporation or limited liability
company which does not beneficially own the premises for which such a license
is sought, or which does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which
the license is to be issued;
         (f)   A person, partnership or corporation or limited liability
company which is not the beneficial owner of the business to be operated by the
licensee;
         (g)   A person, partnership or corporation or limited liability
company which has had its secondhand dealer license revoked by the Village
within the last 5 years.
   (E)   Disclosures. Each application for a secondhand dealer's license shall
disclose the name of the beneficial owner of a sole proprietorship, the names
of all partners in a partnership, the names of all members of the limited
liability company and the names of all officers and shareholders of a
corporation owning more than 5% of the stock. Each application shall disclose
the name of an individual who shall be designated as the manager of the
business.
   (F)   Record of transactions.
      (1)   Every Class A secondhand dealer shall keep a book in which there
shall be made, at the time of the transaction, a record in English of every
article received, donated, sold, bartered or exchanged by him or her setting
forth the name and residence of the purchaser or donor and a brief description
of the article involved, including identification numbers thereon.
      (2)   Every Class B secondhand dealer and Class C secondhand dealer shall
keep a book in which there shall be made, at the time of the transaction, a
record in English of every article received, purchased, sold or exchanged by
him or her, setting forth the following: the date of the transaction, the name
and residence of the purchaser, seller or consignee, a photograph of each
seller or consignee, if the seller or consignee is an individual, a brief
description of the article sold or purchased, including identification numbers
thereon, and a photograph of each article purchased or consigned.
      (3)   Every Class D secondhand dealer and Class E secondhand dealer shall
keep a book in which there shall be made, at the time of the transaction, a
record in English of every article received, purchased, sold or exchanged by
him or her, setting forth the following: the date of the transaction, the name
and residence of the purchaser, seller or consignee and a brief description of
the article sold or purchased, including identification numbers thereon.
      (4)   In addition, each seller or donor to a Class A, Class B and Class C
licensee shall be required by the licensee to produce 2 pieces of
identification establishing his or her identity and the types of pieces of
identification shall be noted in the record.
      (5)   Such records shall, at all reasonable times, be open to the
inspection of any member of the Maywood Police Department.
   (G)   Repeated transactions. It shall be the duty of every Class B
secondhand dealer and Class C secondhand dealer to notify the Chief of Police
of the Village, informing him or her of the name and address of any person,
entity, or agent of an entity, who has either sold or brought in for
consignment any article to that dealer on more than 1 occasion within a 6-month
period.
   (H)   Changing identity of articles purchased or received. No secondhand
dealer shall take apart or melt down any secondhand article. This section shall
not preclude a secondhand dealer from making necessary repairs to items so long
as the repairs do not alter or disguise the appearance of the items. No
secondhand dealer shall, for any reason, remove any serial number, model number
or other identification device.
   (I)   Storage of articles. No secondhand dealer shall make use of any
property, private or public, not included within the licensed premises, for the
storage, handling or display of any secondhand articles.
   (J)   Weapons. No secondhand dealer shall purchase or receive any revolver,
pistol, sawed off shotgun, switchblade knife, blackjack, or any other weapon.
No secondhand dealer shall display, in his or her window or shop, any such
weapons.
   (K)   Dealings with persons under 21 years of age. No secondhand dealer
shall employ anyone under the age of 21 years. No secondhand dealer shall
purchase or receive any article from, or sell or donate any article to, persons
under 21 years of age.
   (L)   Prohibition against possession of stolen property. No secondhand
dealer shall possess any item on the licensed premises which constitutes STOLEN
PROPERTY as defined in 720 ILCS 5/15-6.
   (M)   Nuisances. It shall be declared to be a public nuisance, and it shall
be unlawful for any secondhand dealer:
      (1)   To permit any debris, rubbish, dirt or refuse to be accumulated on
his or her licensed premises;
      (2)   To permit any dense smoke, cinders, dust, gas or odor to escape
from his or her premises in such concentrations as to be detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety, comfort or welfare, or cause injury or
damage to other property or business;
      (3)   To make use of any public property for the storage, handling, or
display of any items.
   (N)   Penalties. If at any time after receiving a secondhand dealer’s
license a licensee shall violate any of the provisions of this section, any
section of the Village Code, or any state or federal statute, the Village
President may suspend or revoke the license pursuant to §
110.10 following notice and a hearing pursuant to §
110.17 of this Code. This remedy shall not preclude the Village from taking any
other action against the licensee which may be deemed appropriate, including
the imposition of penalties as set forth in §
10.99 of this Code.
   (O)   Hearing. Any person aggrieved by the action of any Village official in
denying or revoking a secondhand dealer’s license shall have the right to a
hearing before the Board of Trustees on any such action, provided a written
request therefor is filed with the Village Clerk within 10 days after receipt
of the notice of such denial or revocation of a secondhand dealer’s license.
The action taken by the Board after a hearing shall be final.
   (P)   Reduction of number of licenses.
      (1)   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as limiting or
defeating in any way the lawful right of the corporate authorities of the
Village to decrease the number of secondhand dealer licenses to be issued or to
decrease the number of secondhand dealer licenses from time to time
outstanding.
      (2)   If a Class A, B, or D secondhand dealer license which has
previously been issued is revoked, is not renewed, or is abandoned, the number
of licenses authorized to be issued under division (D) of this section for the
class of license which was abandoned, revoked or not renewed shall be reduced
by 1. For purposes of this section, a secondhand dealer license shall be
considered to have been abandoned if a secondhand dealer does not operate its
business on the premises for which the license is issued for a period of 3
consecutive months.
(1997 Code, § 32.28) (Ord. 81-3, passed 3-12-1981; Am. Ord. 85-0, passed 4-25-
1985; Am. Ord. 85-9, passed 4-25-1985; Am. Ord. 85-38, passed 9-12-1985; Am.
Ord. 85-40, passed 9-26-1985; Am. Ord. C0-05-31, passed 9-20-2005; Am. Ord. CO-
2010-18, passed 10-5-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2012-14, passed 4-30-2012; Am. Ord. CO-
2014-14, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 111.28 SELF-SERVICE AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRIES.
   (A)   Definition. For purposes of this section, the term SELF-SERVICE
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY shall mean any facility for the coin-operated or self-
service washing of motor vehicles.
   (B)   Duties of owner or operator. The owner or operator of any self-service
automobile laundry shall:
      (1)   Keep the premises free of debris and litter;
      (2)   Prevent loitering, excessive noise and rowdiness on the premises;
and
      (3)   Maintain peace, order and safety on the premises.
   (C)   Attendant. There shall be present on the premises of every self-
service automobile laundry an attendant during all operational hours.
   (D)   Hours of operation. No self-service automobile laundry shall be open
or be operated between the hours beginning at 6:30 p.m. and ending at 6:30 a.m.
   (E)   Compliance required. It shall be unlawful to operate any self-service
automobile laundry except in compliance with the provisions of this section.
(1997 Code, § 32.28A) (Ord. 83-8, passed 5-12-1983; Am. Ord. 84-45, passed 11-
20-1984)
§ 111.29 SERVICE STATIONS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Definition. The words SERVICE STATION, as used in this section,
mean any building, structure, premises, enclosure or other place within the
Village where a container or tank, either portable or stationary, and
containing any gasoline or other inflammable liquids, having a flash point
below 187 degrees Fahrenheit, are kept or located for the purpose of selling,
offering for sale or distributing any such liquids from such containers or
tanks primarily for use in motor vehicles.
      (2)   License. No person shall operate the business of service station
without a license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13.
      (3)   Application. The application for the license shall specify the
location of the building, structure, premises, enclosure or other place in
which it is proposed to keep such service station and the capacity in gallons
of the containers or tanks. Every such application shall be approved by the
Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire Department before a license shall be
issued. No license shall be assigned or transferred to any person other than
the licensee named therein to do business or act under such license.
      (4)   Fire prevention inspections. All service stations shall be
conducted and maintained in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 91 of
this Code with regard to fire prevention and shall be inspected by the Chief of
the Fire Department or his authorized representative at least once every year.
      (5)   Change of location. If any person licensed under this section
shall, before the expiration of such license, desire to change the location of
the business conducted thereunder, the licensee shall notify the Director of
Finance and shall furnish all of the information which is required to be
furnished on an original application for license. Every application for change
of location shall be approved by the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire
Department before a change in location shall be authorized.
      (6)   Parking vehicles for sale. It shall be unlawful for any person to
park in any service station any vehicle displayed "For Sale," unless a license
is first obtained for operating an outdoor secondhand motor vehicle sales lot.
      (7)   Parking trucks. It shall be unlawful for any person to store or
park any motor vehicle used for pulling or carrying freight or designed for the
carrying of more than 9 persons on the premises of any filling station for a
period of time longer than 2 hours unless such motor vehicle is stored or
parked completely within the confines of a building or structure on such
premises.
      (8)   Repair of motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to
carry on the business of a motor vehicle repair shop on the premises of any
filling station unless:
         (a)   Such motor vehicle repair work is done within the confines of a
completely enclosed building or structure on such premises;
         (b)   A license is first obtained for the carrying on of the business
of a motor vehicle repair shop.
(1997 Code, § 32.29)
   (B)   Service stations, self service.
      (1)   Definition. As used in this section, SELF-SERVICE STATION means
property where flammable and combustible liquids used as motor fuels are stored
and subsequently dispensed from fixed, approved dispensing equipment into the
fuel tanks of motor vehicles by persons other than the service station
attendant.
      (2)   Dispensing devices. Approved self-service dispensing devices are
permitted subject to the provisions of this section at service stations,
provided that all dispensing of motor fuels, except LPG, by a person other than
the service station attendant is under the supervision and control of a
qualified attendant and the dispensing nozzle is a listed automatic-closing
type without a latch-open device.
      (3)   Self-service station permit. Application for a self-service station
permit shall be made in conformity with the general requirements set forth in
Chapter 110 relating to application for licenses. The application shall also be
accompanied by:
         (a)   Complete detailed plans in triplicate for each service station
sought to be used for self-service;
         (b)   An accurate description of the location of the property for
which a permit is being sought;
         (c)   A permit issued by the State Fire Marshal of the state
authorizing the operation of a self-service station at the location for which
the permit is being sought;
         (d)   The name, address and phone number of the individual who owns
and/or will operate the self-service station and the name, address and phone
number of the individual owning the property on which the self-service station
is located;
         (e)   A non-refundable annual permit fee as set forth in § 110.13.
      (4)   Investigation. Every such application shall be investigated by the
Bureau of Fire Prevention to determine whether the applicable provisions of
this section and the other ordinances of the Village are being complied with.
The approval of the Bureau of Fire Prevention must be noted on the application
before a permit shall be issued. No permit may be issued unless the applicant
has been issued a service station license in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 110. No self-service station shall be open for business without a
permit therefor, which permit must be displayed prominently at all times at
such self-service station.
      (5)   Rules. The following rules shall be followed and observed at all
self-service stations.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful to provide for or use live-in facilities or
accommodations for the benefit of any owner, operator or employee of a self-
service station on the premises of such station.
         (b)   A self-service station shall have at least one attendant on duty
while the station is open to the public; the attendant’s primary function shall
be to supervise, observe and control the dispensing of Class I liquids while
said liquids are actually being dispensed. This shall not be interpreted as
prohibiting split island type of operations.
         (c)   The dispensing area shall at all times be in clear view of the
attendant and the placing or allowing of any obstacle to come between the
dispensing area and the attendant control area shall be prohibited. The
attendant shall at all times be able to communicate with persons in the
dispensing area.
         (d)   The attendant shall have immediate access to emergency cut-off
switches, provided at a location remote from the dispensing devices, which
location shall be subject to approval by the Bureau of Fire Prevention.
         (e)   The attendant shall refuse service to any person:
            1.   Who is less than 16 years old; or
            2.   Who is smoking; or
            3.   Who appears for any reason to be unable to dispense the motor
fuel safely;
         (f)   The attendant shall shut off the dispensing unit if a patron
fails to follow instructions in compliance with this section.
         (g)   All attendants and other employees shall be thoroughly
instructed in the operation and the use of the communications system, the
control station, the fire extinguishing equipment, the operation of the
dispensing units and safety regulations for the dispensing of motor fuels. No
person shall be employed as an attendant, or in any other capacity, to work in
a self-service station who is less than 16 years old.
         (h)   Gasoline dispensing nozzles shall not be of the "latch-open"
type.
         (i)   Conspicuous and legible signs, prohibiting smoking, prohibiting
persons less than 16 years from pumping gas, and directing customers to turn
off ignitions while dispensing motor fuel, shall be posted and maintained. The
lettering on such signs shall be red on white background and not less than 4
inches in height. The sign shall be made of an all- weather rigid material. The
wording, lettering, size, design, material, mounting and location of such signs
shall be subject to the approval of the Bureau of Fire Prevention;
         (j)   Dispensing units shall be mounted either on a concrete island or
protected against collision damage by suitable means in a manner approved by
the Bureau of Fire Prevention;
         (k)   No portable containers of more than 6 gallons shall be filled
with gasoline, except as dispensed directly into the fuel tanks attached to a
motor vehicle. All portable receptacles for gasoline shall be red and shall be
labeled in letters of a contrasting color which have a height of not less than
one-half inch. It shall be unlawful to put any other liquids or oils except
gasoline in such receptacles so long as such receptacles are so painted red and
labeled "gasoline." In all circumstances, the container shall be metal.
      (6)   State regulations adopted.
         (a)   A certain document, 3 copies of which, in accordance with 50
ILCS 220/2, have been available for public use, inspection and examination for
30 days in the office of the Village Clerk, being marked and designated as
"Rule 15 of the Rules and Regulations Relating to Service Stations as issued by
State Fire Marshal of the State of Illinois," is adopted as additional
regulations which govern the operation of self-service stations within the
Village. Each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, terms and
offenses thereunder of Rule 15 of the Rules and Regulations Relating to Service
Stations as issued by the State Fire Marshal, are referred to, adopted and made
a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section subject to the provisions of
division (B) of this section.
         (b)   If the provisions of Rule 15 of the Rules and Regulations
Relating to Service Stations as issued by the State Fire Marshal are in
conflict with any provision of this section or any other ordinance of the
Village, the provisions of this section and the other ordinances of the Village
shall govern.
(1997 Code, § 32.30)
(Ord. 78-1, passed 1-12-1978)
§ 111.30 SEWER AND CATCH BASIN CLEANERS.
   (A)   License. No person shall engage in the business of removing or
transporting the contents of catch basins or sewers or refuse of like nature,
or in any manner engage in the business of cleaning catch basins, which shall
mean cleaning only, and not repairing of sewers, within the Village, without a
license from the Village so to do. The fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13.
   (B)   Bond. Each cleaner of catch basins shall, before engaging in such
business, furnish a bond in the sum of $5,000 to the Village, conditioned upon
the payment of damages that may be caused in carrying on such business.
(1997 Code, § 32.31)
§ 111.31 TOBACCO DEALERS.
   (A)   Retail. Retailers of tobacco products are subject to the licensing
requirements and procedure set forth in
Chapter 116 of this Code.
(1997 Code, § 32.32)
   (B)   Wholesale.
      (1)   Definition. The term WHOLESALE TOBACCO DEALER  means any person
making, manufacturing or jobbing cigars, or selling, offering for sale,
exposing for sale or keeping with the intention of selling or exchanging, at
wholesale, any tobacco, snuff, cigars, cigarettes or cigarette papers,
including leaf tobacco, or any preparations containing tobacco.
      (2)   License. No person shall engage in the business of a wholesale
tobacco dealer without a license therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
      (3)   Application; investigation.
         (a)   An application for a wholesale tobacco dealer's license shall
give the location and a description of the premises.
         (b)   The Building Director shall investigate or cause an
investigation to be made of the premises named and described in the application
for the purpose of determining the fitness and suitability of such premises for
such business from a sanitary standpoint and for determining whether or not the
premises comply with all the provisions of this Code and laws of the state
regulating health, safety and sanitation, so as properly to safeguard the lives
and health of the employees engaged therein.
         (c)   The Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be made to
determine the character and fitness of the applicant and to determine whether
the premises named in the application comply with the police regulations of
this Code.
      (4)   Sanitary requirements; inspections.
         (a)   All places or establishments where tobacco, snuff, cigars or
cigarettes are sold or kept with the intention of selling at wholesale shall at
all times be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. No tobacco, snuff, cigars
or cigarettes shall be kept or stored in any barn or stable or any place where
the same are liable or subject to contamination. All appliances, cutters,
receptacles or cases used by any wholesale tobacco dealer in the handling of
products authorized to be sold under the terms of such license shall be kept in
a clean and sanitary condition.
         (b)   It shall be the duty of the Building Director and they are
authorized and empowered from time to time to inspect and examine all places
where tobacco, snuff, cigars or cigarettes are licensed to be sold within the
Village, with a view of ascertaining whether the laws of the state and the
provisions of this Code in relation to the adulteration of and handling and
sale of such commodities are being complied with at such places, and it shall
be their duty to cause all such laws and provisions of this Code to be
rigorously enforced.
         (c)   It shall be the duty of all persons licensed hereunder, upon the
demand of the Director, to furnish for their inspection, samples of all
cigarettes sold or offered for sale, which samples of cigarettes shall be
analyzed by and under the direction of the Director.
(1997 Code, § 32.33) (Am. Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 111.32 UNDERTAKERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an undertaking establishment
or to operate as an undertaker or mortician in the Village without a license
therefor. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
(1997 Code, § 32.34) Penalty, see
10.99
§ 111.33 WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   License. No person operating as a waste disposal firm, or otherwise,
unless contracting directly with the Village as its waste disposal contractor,
or except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall remove waste from any
premises in the Village or transport waste through the streets, alleys or
public ways of the Village or dump, incinerate or in any other manner dispose
of waste originating in the limits of the Village or contract for or permit
themself to be employed or engaged for any such removal, transportation or
disposal without first having secured a license for performing such waste
disposal service from the Village. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
   (B)   Application for license. Before issuing the license, the Director of
Finance shall require the execution of an application form to be furnished by
them, showing the name of the person to be licensed, or in the case of a
corporation, the names of the principal officers, together with the business
and home addresses and telephone numbers of each such person; description of
the equipment to be used in such collection, transportation and disposal; the
list by name and address of person for whom such removal is made; the
specifications of the vehicle in which it is transported; the site location of
and the manner in which the ultimate disposition of the waste is to be
accomplished. The application shall then be submitted by the Director of
Finance to, and shall be approved by, the Director of Public Works and the
Building Director. Any change in the data required in the license application
shall be filed with the Village monthly.
(1997 Code, § 32.35) (Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 111.34 FIREARMS AND WEAPONS SALE.
   (A)   Firearm dealers prohibited. No person shall engage in the business of
a dealer in firearms or ammunition in the Village, including exchange, loan,
rental or other transfer for consideration.
   (B)   License.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
selling or to otherwise sell or give away any dagger, stiletto, blackjack,
billy club, derringer, bowie knife, dirk or any other deadly weapon without
first obtaining all required federal and state licenses and a license from the
Village. The fee for the Village license shall be as set forth in §
110.13 (Fees).
      (2)   The Chief of Police shall approve the application before a license
shall be issued.
   (C)   Reports of sales or transfers of weapons. Every person dealing in
weapons shall make out and deliver to the Chief of Police every day before the
hour of 12:00 noon a legible and correct report of every sale or gift made
under authority of their license during the preceding 24 hours, which report
shall contain the date of such sale or gift, the name of the purchaser or donee
with his or her address and age, the number, kind, description, and price of
such weapon, the number of the purchaser’s permit, and the purpose given by
such person for the purchase of such weapon, which report shall be
substantially in the following form:
      Number of permit
      Number of weapon
      Name of purchaser
      Address of purchaser
      Age of purchaser
      Kind or description of weapon
      For what purpose purchased    
      Price
   (D)   Reports of sale or transfers of firearms. Whenever a person residing
in the Village of Maywood or a non-resident, who engages in an activity within
the Village that is governed by this Code, sells or transfers a firearm, the
seller must obtain and retain a copy of a valid FOID card from the buyer. Prior
to selling or transferring a firearm, the seller must contact the Maywood
Police Department or Illinois State Police to confirm that the buyer’s FOID
card is valid and the seller must retain proof of the conversation with the MPD
or ISP or retain other documentation that verifies the validity of the buyer’s
FOID card. The seller shall deliver to the Chief of Police within 24 hours of
the sale a legible and correct written statement of any sale or transfer of a
firearm that contains the following information: names and current addresses of
the seller and buyer; age of buyer and seller; the serial number on the
firearm; the make/model and description of the firearm.
   (E)   Register of weapon sales.
      (1)   Every person dealing in the aforementioned weapons at retail,
within the Village, shall keep a register of all such weapons sold, loaned,
rented, or given away by him. Such register shall contain the date of the sale,
loaning, renting, or gift, the number of the permit, the number of the weapon,
the name and age of the person to whom the weapon is sold, loaned, rented, or
given, the price of such weapon, and the purpose for which it is purchased or
obtained. The register shall be in the following form:
   Date of sale
   Number of Chief of Police Permit
   Number of weapon
   To whom sold, loaned, rented, or given
   Age of purchaser or person obtaining weapon
   Kind and description of weapon
   For what purpose purchased or obtained
   Price of weapon
      (2)   Such register shall be kept open for the inspection by any law
enforcement officer at all reasonable times during business hours.
   (F)   Display. It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit for sale in
show cases or show windows, on counters or in any other public manner, any
weapon, or to display any signs, posters, cartoons, or display cards suggesting
the sale of any such weapons.
   (G)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any air rifle, as air rifle is
defined in §
130.82 of this Code, within the Village, and no business license shall be
granted by the Village for a purpose which includes selling air rifles.
   (H)   Revocation. In case the Village President, or his or her designee,
shall determine after notice and a hearing pursuant to §
110.17 of this Code that such applicant has violated any provision of this
section or Code, he or she may suspend or revoke the license to such person for
the selling of such weapons, and the money paid for such license shall be
forfeited to the Village. In the case of revocation, no other such license
shall be issued to such licensee for a period of 3 years thereafter.
   (I)   Reporting lost or stolen firearms. Any person who loses, destroys,
transfers, or has their firearm stolen, is required to report the loss or
destruction to the Maywood Police Department within 48 hours after he or she
knew or reasonably should have known that the firearm had been transferred,
stolen, lost, destroyed or otherwise misplaced. The report must include the
make, model, and serial number of the firearm, along with the date and location
of purchase. Individuals who fail to comply will be subject to a $1,000 fine
for the first violation. The fine will be $1,500 for each firearm on the second
offense and $2,000 for each subsequent violation.
(1997 Code, § 32.36) (Ord. 58-24, passed 11-13-1958; Am. Ord. CO-00-25, passed
12-4-2000; Am. Ord. CO-06-45, passed 12-19-2006; Am. Res. R-2013-08, passed 3-
13-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 111.35 GUNSMITHS AND GUN SHOPS.
   Gunsmiths and gun shops prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the business of repairing any pistol, revolver, derringer, or other
firearm.
(1997 Code, § 32.27) (Ord. 58-24, passed 11-13-1958; Am. Ord. CO-06-45, passed
12-19- 2006; Am. Res. R-2013-08, passed 3-13-2013)
Penalty, see § 111.99
§ 111.36 LIVE ENTERTAINMENT LICENSE.
   (A)   Purpose and definition. It is recognized that noise generated by live
music or similar live entertainment events, whatever the duration, may
negatively impact and create a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare
of nearby residents, businesses and the general public, and that it is
therefore necessary to place reasonable regulations on such entertainment
events through adoption of a licensing system that balances the interests of
all parties. For purposes of this chapter, LIVE ENTERTAINMENT shall mean a
musical, DJ, theatrical, dance, cabaret, comedy or similar act performed live
(or in the case of a DJ, playing recorded music), by 1 or more persons for the
purpose of entertaining customers. A live entertainment license is secondary to
the principal business uses of a location, including a restaurant or special
event space. A charge or fee may or may not be charged at the business with a
secondary license for live entertainment.
   (B)   Eligibility. Live entertainment licenses may be issued accessory to
the operation of a restaurant, special event space or other establishment
within the Village’s business districts in conjunction with the requirements
and regulations set forth in this section,
Chapter 110 of this Code, and the Village’s zoning code.
   (C)   General regulations.
      (1)   Any restaurant, special event space or other establishment desiring
to hold live entertainment events as part of its operations shall apply for and
obtain an accessory live entertainment license from the Village. Except as part
of a special event approved by the Village, no live entertainment events may be
held at a restaurant, special event space or other establishment within the
business districts of the Village except upon issuance of an accessory live
entertainment license and in full compliance with this section.
      (2)   All live entertainment events, regardless of whether an accessory
live entertainment license is issued or required, must comply with state law
and this Code, including, but not limited to, the regulations set forth in this
chapter, and the noise regulations set forth in §§
92.30 and
130.21 of this Code.
      (3)   Live entertainment events must end no later than 1 hour prior to
closing each day or, where the licensed establishment holds a liquor license, 1
hour prior to the time liquor can no longer be served each day, whichever is
earlier, or as otherwise specified in a license issued.
      (4)   Live entertainment events must be conducted in a manner that
respects the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of nearby
residents, businesses and/or the general public.
      (5)   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the Village, live
entertainment events shall occur indoors, and, with the exception of persons
entering or leaving the premises, the doors and windows of the establishment
must remain closed at all times while live entertainment events are taking
place.
      (6)   Unless otherwise specifically approved by the Village, no speakers
for listening to live entertainment events taking place inside may be placed in
the outdoor area or on the exterior of the premises.
      (7)   The fee for a live entertainment license shall be as set forth in §
110.13 of this Code.
      (8)   The Director of Code Enforcement and the Fire Chief may cause such
investigation to be made as in their judgment is deemed necessary for the
purpose of determining whether the premises occupied by the applicant for a
license under this section comply with the Village ordinances relating to
health, safety and sanitation so as to properly safeguard the lives and health
of the employees engaged and patrons enjoying live entertainment therein; and
if from such investigation, they find that such applicant has failed to comply
with the fire prevention, sanitary and health regulations of the Village, or
with the general ordinances thereof relating to such business, they shall
immediately report the same in writing to the Village President who shall
refuse to issue such license.
      (9)   The performance area(s), stage(s) and equipment staging areas used
for live entertainment events shall not block fire exits or fire exit access
paths nor block pedestrian access to those portions of Village streets,
sidewalks or rights-of-way that are open for public use.
      (10)   All live entertainment events must comply with the state laws and
this Code, including but not limited to, the regulations set forth in this
chapter.
      (11)   Any conditions required by the corporate authorities of the
Village as part of the approval of an ordinance granting or renewing a liquor
license associated with the establishment or event where the live entertainment
is taking place.
   (D)   Procedure.
      (1)   Applications. Applicants for accessory live entertainment licenses
are required to submit the following:
         (a)   A completed application on a form provided by the Village, which
shall include the anticipated number of live entertainment events per year, the
hours during which live entertainment will generally take place, and a
description of the nature of the live entertainment generally proposed to be
provided;
         (b)   An accessory live entertainment license fee as determined by the
Village from time to time and as set forth in §
110.13 of this Code;
         (c)   A site plan drawn to accurately illustrate the stage or other
area where live entertainment will take place on the premises and the location
of any amplifiers or speakers; and
         (d)   Any other information or materials required to be provided by
the Village.
      (2)   Review. Once a completed application has been received by the
Village, the application shall be reviewed by the Village Manager and, if
deemed necessary, the applicant may be required to consult with the Village
Manager, Building Department, the Village’s Fire Chief and/or Fire Inspector,
or other officials or designees regarding appropriate plans for the live
entertainment.
      (3)   Decisions. License decisions shall be made within 5 business days
of submittal or receipt of any additional items requested by the Village and/or
the completion of any consultations with staff deemed necessary by the Village.
      (4)   Fire prevention and health requirements. The Director of Code
Enforcement and the Fire Chief may cause such investigation to be made as in
their judgment is deemed necessary for the purpose of determining whether the
premises occupied by the applicant for a license under this section comply with
the Village ordinances relating to health, safety and sanitation so as to
properly safeguard the lives and health of the employees engaged and patrons
enjoying live entertainment therein; and if from such investigation, they find
that such applicant has failed to comply with the fire prevention, sanitary and
health regulations of the Village, or with the general ordinances thereof
relating to such business, they shall immediately report the same in writing to
the Village Manager who shall refuse to issue such license.
      (5)   Denial. License applications may be denied by the Village Manager
in cases where:
         (a)   The application is incomplete or otherwise deficient;
         (b)   The property or business owner is delinquent on any fees, fines,
penalties or delinquencies he or she owes to the Village (and no appeal has
been filed); or
         (c)   The Village Manager makes a determination, based on tangible
evidence, that allowing the live music or entertainment would adversely affect
the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of nearby residents,
businesses and/or the general public. Factors that the Village Manager may
consider in making a determination under this division (H)(5)(c) include:
            1.   The anticipated volume of the live entertainment;
            2.   The proposed times during which the proposed live
entertainment shall be provided;
            3.   The location of the establishment in relation to residential
areas and other commercial establishments;
            4.   A history of complaints, citations and/or violations of the
Village’s noise regulations or other code violations relative to the requesting
establishment; and/or
            5.   Other factors associated with public health and welfare,
security and safety of the event participants, nearby residents or businesses,
and the general public, including, but not limited to, parking, traffic
congestion, and security and public safety.
      (6)   Conditions. In addition to all conditions and requirements set
forth in this chapter, the Village Manager may attach such conditions to a live
music or entertainment license as are deemed necessary to balance the interests
of the public with the holding of live music or entertainment events within the
Village. Failure to comply with all conditions set forth in a live music or
entertainment license is a violation of this section.
      (7)   Appeal. The Village Manager’s decision on a license application or
imposition of particular conditions may be appealed by the applicant to the
Village Board of Trustees by submitting a written request to appeal to the
office of the Village Clerk within 5 days of notification of the denial or
license conditions. An appeal shall be considered at the next regular meeting
of the Board of Trustees or at such other time deemed appropriate by the Board
of Trustees. On appeal, the Board of Trustees may affirm, reverse or modify the
ruling of the Village Manager.
      (8)   Renewals. Annual license renewals, provided no or minimal changes
are requested and there has been no history of violations of the noise
regulations or other Village codes and ordinances during the preceding year,
may be approved upon request for renewal on a form provided by the Village and
payment of the annual license fee.
      (9)   Modifications, suspensions and revocations.
         (a)   Licenses issued under this chapter are subject to suspension,
modification or revocation at any time after issuance by the Village Manager.
Notice of a possible license suspension, modification or revocation and the
basis therefor shall be mailed to the licensee, addressed to them at their last
known place of business. A licensee shall have 10 days from the date of the
notice to request a hearing before the Village Manager or their designee.
         (b)   If the licensee fails to request a hearing, or requests a
hearing and the Village Manager determines after a hearing that either: a) the
holding of live music and entertainment events at a licensed establishment has
been consistently detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of
persons residing or working near the establishment holding the live
entertainment events; b) there are violations of any license conditions or the
requirements of this chapter: c) the licensed establishment has failed to
timely pay any fees, fines, penalties or delinquencies owed to the Village; or
d) other good cause for suspension, modification or revocation of a license
exists, they may, in their discretion and without further notice, take action
to suspend the license for a specified period of time, modify any conditions of
the license or impose new conditions, including imposition of a probationary
period, or revoke the license. Any 3 findings of guilt in a 12- month period on
citations issued for violations of the Village’s noise regulations set forth in
§§
92.30 and
130.21 of this Code shall constitute prima facie evidence that the holding of
live entertainment events at said licensed establishment is detrimental to the
health, safety or general welfare of persons residing or working near the
establishment.
         (c)   The decision of the Village Manager following a hearing is
appealable to the Board of Trustees by the licensee in the same manner as an
initial license decision by the Village Manager. No appeal on the substance of
a decision may be taken from a decision of the Village Manager where a licensee
failed to request or attend a hearing.
   (E)   Penalties.
      (1)   Any person or entity violating or found liable under any of the
provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, a failure to obtain
a live entertainment license, or a violation of any conditions set forth in a
live entertainment license, shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $75
nor more than $750 for a first violation within the past 12 months, not less
than $150 nor more than $750 for a second violation within the past 12 months,
and not less than $300 nor more than $750 for a third or subsequent offense
within the past 12 months. A separate offense shall be deemed committed with
each recurrence of a violation of the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   In addition, the appropriate authorities of the Village may take
such other action as they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions of
this chapter, including, without limitation, an action in equity to compel
compliance with its terms.
(Ord. CO-2023-36, passed 6-20-2023)
§ 111.37 REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate
meaning.
      DEED. Any instrument effectuating or memorializing the transfer of title
to real estate located within the Village or the assignment of a beneficial
interest in a land trust which holds title to real estate located within the
Village. Such instruments include, but are not limited to, quit claim deeds,
warranty deeds, assignments of title and assignments of beneficial interests.
      PERSON. Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor,
conservator, assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, copartnership,
joint venture, club, company, joint stock company, business trust, domestic or
foreign corporation, association, syndicate, society, and any group of
individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal,
nonprofit, or otherwise. Whenever the term PERSON is used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations shall
mean the owners or part owners thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.
      RECORDATION. The recording of deeds with the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Cook County, or the registration of deeds with the Registrar of
Torrens Titles of Cook County, Illinois.
      VALUE. The amount of the full actual consideration for any transfer
covered hereunder, including the amount of any lien or liens assumed by the
grantee, assignee, or purchaser.
   (B)   Imposition of tax.
      (1)   A tax at the rate of $4 for every $1,000 of value or fraction
thereof is imposed on the transfer of the title to real estate located within
the Village and on the assignment of a beneficial interest in a land trust
which holds title to real estate located within the Village, as evidenced by
the recordation of a deed. The real estate transfer tax imposed by this section
shall be levied and paid in addition to any other taxes which may be imposed on
the transfer of real estate. The real estate transfer tax imposed by this
section shall be paid by the grantor, seller or assignor prior to the
recordation of the deed.
      (2)   Nothing in this section prohibits the purchaser, grantee or
assignee in a real estate transaction from agreeing with a seller, grantor, or
assignor, either:
         (a)   That the seller, grantor or assignor shall reimburse the
purchaser, grantee or assignee for the amount of the real estate transfer tax
that must be paid pursuant to this section; or
         (b)   That the seller, grantor or assignor shall satisfy the
purchaser’s, grantee’s or assignee’s obligation to pay the tax imposed by this
section.
   (C)   Lien for nonpayment. If the real estate transfer tax is not paid in
accordance with this section, then the grantee’s, purchaser’s or assignee’s
title shall be subject to the lien provided in division (I) of this section.
   (D)   Declaration of consideration paid. At the time the real estate
transfer tax is paid, there shall also be presented to the Director of Finance,
on a form prescribed by them, a declaration signed by at least 1 of the
sellers, assignors, or grantors and also signed by at least 1 of the
purchasers, grantees or assignees involved in the transaction, or by their
attorneys or agents, which declaration shall state the full consideration for
the properties transferred in the transaction.
   (E)   General exceptions. The real estate transfer tax imposed by this
section shall not apply to the following transactions, provided that there is
filed with the Director of Finance on a form prescribed by them a certificate
which sets forth sufficient facts to establish that the transaction is not
subject to the real estate transfer tax:
      (1)   Transactions involving property acquired by or from any
governmental body;
      (2)   Transactions which encumber, but do not convey title to real estate
or assign the beneficial interest in a land trust;
      (3)   Transactions in which the deed without additional consideration,
confirms, corrects, modifies or supplements a deed previously recorded;
      (4)   Transactions in which the deed is a tax deed;
      (5)   Transactions in which the deed constitutes a release of an
encumbrance;
      (6)   Transactions in which the conveyance is made pursuant to a court
decree. However, any person named as the grantee in any type of court-ordered
deed that is otherwise exempt under this division (E)(6) is required to file
the deed with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds Office within 14 days of the
date set forth in the deed and failure to file the deed during said 14-day time
period will subject the person to a $500 penalty, to be paid to the Village
prior to the Village placing an exempt stamp on the deed or, if the stamp has
already been given, upon demand by the Village. In the event that a person
records a deed in violation of this division (E)(6), and fails to pay to the
Village the penalty imposed herein within 21 days of the issuance of a written
demand by the Village, the Village may, in its discretion, declare a lien
against the real property that is the subject of the deed in the amount of the
penalty. The lien may be enforced by a proceeding to foreclose as in the case
of a mortgage lien. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing the Village
from bringing a civil action to collect the penalty imposed pursuant to this
division (E)(6) from any person who has the ultimate liability for payment of
same, including interest and penalties and payment of reasonable attorneys’
fees and costs;
      (7)   Transactions made pursuant to mergers, consolidations, or transfers
or sales of substantially all of the assets of a corporation pursuant to a plan
of re-organization;
      (8)   Transactions between a subsidiary corporation and its parent
corporation which do not involve any consideration other than the cancellation
or surrender of the subsidiary corporation’s stock.
   (F)   Exception for transfer upon death of owner. The real estate transfer
tax imposed by this section shall not be imposed on a transfer of an interest
in real estate by an executor or administrator to a legatee, heir, or
distributee, where the transfer is being made pursuant to will or by intestacy.
The real estate transfer tax imposed by this section shall not be collected
where the transaction is affected by operation of law, or where the transaction
involves a transfer:
      (1)   From a decedent to their executor or administrator; or
      (2)   From a minor to their guardian, or from a guardian to their ward
upon obtaining majority;
      (3)   From an incompetent to their conservator, or similar legal
representative, or from a conservator or similar legal representative to a
former incompetent upon removal of disabilities; or
      (4)   From a bank, trust company, financial institution, insurance
company, or other similar entity, or nominee, custodian, or trustee therefor to
a public officer or commission, or person designated by such officer or
commission or by a court in the taking over of its assets, in whole or in part,
under state or federal law regulating or supervising such institutions, nor
upon redelivery or retransfer by any such transferee or successor thereto;
      (5)   From a bankrupt or person in receivership due to insolvency to the
trustee in bankruptcy or receiver, from such receiver to such trustee, or from
such trustee to such receiver, nor upon redelivery or retransfer by any such
transferee or successor thereto;
      (6)   From a transferee under division (F)(1) through (F)(5), inclusive,
to their successor acting in the same capacity, or from one such successor to
another;
      (7)   From a foreign country or national thereof to the United States or
any agency thereof, or to the government of any foreign country directed
pursuant to the authority vested in the President of the United States by the
Trading With The Enemy Act, § 5(d), as amended by the First War Powers Act;
      (8)   From trustees to surviving, substitute, succeeding or additional
trustees of the same trust, or upon the death of a joint tenant to the survivor
or survivors.
   (G)   Procedure for collection of tax, certificate of compliance required.
The real estate transfer tax imposed by this section shall be collected by the
Director of Finance. Upon payment of the real estate transfer tax, any
outstanding water bill, and any other debt due and owing to the Village, the
deed involved in the transaction shall be stamped with a stamp which states
that the Village real estate transfer tax has been paid, the amount of tax paid
and the date of payment. The absence of such a stamp on a deed shall be prima
facie evidence that the real estate transfer tax imposed by this section has
not been paid. The Director of Finance shall not accept payment of the real
estate transfer tax and shall not issue the transfer stamp until they are
presented with a statement from the Director of Sustainability and Innovation
which states that an occupancy affidavit has been received from the purchaser,
grantee or assignee pursuant to §
150.098(N) of this Code, and either that a conditional certificate of
compliance or certificate of compliance has been issued with respect to the
real estate being transferred in accordance with §
150.098, that the property is uninspected property pursuant to §
150.098, or that a certificate of compliance is not required by §
150.098. A copy of the completed, fully executed, occupancy affidavit shall
accompany the statement from the Director of Sustainability and Innovation. If
the Director of Sustainability and Innovation states that a certificate of
compliance is not required, then the Director of Finance shall not accept
payment of the real estate transfer tax and shall not issue the transfer stamp
until they are presented with a statement from the Water Department that there
are no delinquent unpaid bills for water the Village provided to the real
estate being transferred and a statement from the Director of Sustainability
and Innovation that there are no outstanding Village liens or judgments against
the property.
   (H)   A signed copy of the real estate transfer declaration filed pursuant
to the Real Estate Transfer Tax Law, 35 ILCS 200/31-25, shall be filed with the
Director of Finance by the purchaser, grantee, or assignee within 10 days after
delivery of a deed, or at the time of payment of the real estate transfer tax
imposed by this section, whichever occurs first.
   (I)   Lien created; enforcement. In the event a deed is filed for
recordation without payment of the real estate transfer tax imposed by this
section, a lien is declared against the real estate involved in the transfer in
the amount of the tax. The fact that the deed does not contain the stamp
described in division (K) of this section shall constitute constructive notice
of the lien. The lien may be enforced by proceedings to foreclose as in the
case of mortgages or mechanics liens. Suit to foreclose the lien must be
commenced within 3 years after the date of recording the deed. Nothing herein
shall be construed as preventing the Village from bringing a civil action to
collect the tax imposed in this section from any person who has the ultimate
liability for payment of the same, including interest and penalties as herein
provided.
   (J)   Enforcement; suit for collection. Whenever any person shall fail to
pay the real estate transfer tax imposed by this section in accordance with
this section, the Village Attorney shall, upon request of the Village Manager,
bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment of said tax,
including interest and penalties as specified in division (K) of this section,
on behalf of the Village and any court of competent jurisdiction.
   (K)   Interest and penalties. In the event of the failure by any person to
the Director of Finance the tax required hereunder when the same shall be due,
interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax at the rate of 1.5% per
month commencing as of the first day following the day when the tax became due.
In addition, a penalty of 10% of the tax and interest due shall be assessed and
collected against any person who shall fail to pay the tax imposed by this
section when due.
   (L)   Proceeds of tax. All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the
real estate transfer tax under this section, including interests and penalties,
shall be deposited into the Treasury of the Village and shall be credited to
and deposited in the General Fund of the Village.
   (M)   (1)   The applicable real estate transfer tax rate for transfers
involving charitable organizations whose primary mission focuses on providing
or building affordable housing within the Village shall be reduced by 50% in
accordance with the provisions of this division. To be eligible for a reduction
under this division, either the buyer or seller must:
         (a)   Be an organization that has been found by the Internal Revenue
Service to be an "exempt organization" within the meaning of Section 501(c)(3)
of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (b)   Provide proof (e.g., corporate documents) to the Village's
Finance Department that its primary mission focuses on the provision of
affordable housing; and
         (c)   Provide proof (e.g., building plans) that the real estate being
conveyed shall be improved
with affordable housing by the purchaser for resale to the public or the real
estate has been improved with affordable housing by the seller.
      (2)   The definition of AFFORDABLE HOUSING as contained in this division
shall be the same as used in the Illinois Affordable Housing Act (310 ILCS 65/
1 et seq.). In the event that a person acquires real estate for purposes of
building or providing affordable housing and the seller or purchaser receives a
50% reduction in the applicable real estate transfer tax for the transaction
under this division, the person who then seeks to sell or convey the real
estate shall be responsible at the time of sale or conveyance for paying to the
Village the dollar amount equal to the 50% reduction in the real estate
transfer tax applied to the prior real estate transaction plus the applicable
real estate transfer tax on the sale or conveyance of the real estate if the
person does not build or offer affordable housing on the real estate.
   (N)   Penalty. In addition to any other penalties imposed by this section,
any person found guilty in a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any
provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not
less than $200 nor more than $1,000 for each violation.
   (O)   Release of lien. The Village may authorize the preparation and filing
of liens against title to real estate as well as the preparation and filing of
releases of any lien imposed under this section and this Code. Any person
liable under this section shall be obligated to pay to the Village the amount
of the real estate transfer tax plus any incurred interest or penalties or any
lien amounts filed against the real estate imposed under this chapter and all
expenses and costs incurred by the Village with respect to collection of the
debt, subject to adjustment by the Village Manager, or their designee. In order
to obtain a release of a Village lien, the following payment to the Village is
required: (a) $50 for the preparation, handling and filing costs of the Village
lien or the actual costs, if greater: and (b) $50 for the preparation, handling
and filing costs of the release of Village lien or the actual costs, if
greater.
(1997 Code, § 32.39) (Ord. 80-9, passed 6-12- 1980; Am. Ord. 81-2, passed 3-12-
1981; Am. Ord. 91-2, passed 5-9-1991; Am. Ord. C0-07-49, passed 12-6-2007; Am.
Ord. C0-08-01, passed 1- 15-2008; Am. Ord. C0-09-03, passed 2-3-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2012-30, passed 8-21-2012; Am. Ord. CO-
2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 111.38 AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the business of renting
automobiles in the Village at the rate of 1% of the gross receipts from such
rentals made in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in
accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-7.
   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the Village shall file
all reports as required by 35 ILCS 120/2 and 3, as amended.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax imposed on account of the renting of
automobiles during the preceding month.
   (D)   The Village Clerk is directed to transmit to the State Department of
Revenue a certified copy of this section not later than 5 days after the
effective date of this section.
(1997 Code, § 32.40) (Ord. 82-1, passed 1-14-1982)
§ 111.39 AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX.
   (A)   A tax is imposed upon the privilege of using in the Village an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois, and which is titled
or registered with an agency of the government of the state in the Village at
the rate of 1% of the rental price of such automobile, while this section is in
effect, in accordance with the provisions of 65 ILCS 5/8-11-8.
   (B)   The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the
persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as
being in the Village.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois
Department of Revenue.
   (D)   The Clerk of the Village is directed to transmit to the State
Department of Revenue a certified copy of this section not later than 5 days
after the effective date of this section.
(1997 Code, § 32.41) (Ord. 87-2, passed 1-14-1982)
§ 111.40 (RESERVED).
§ 111.41 TEMPORARY USE OF TRAILER FOR OFFICE.
   (A)   Where any trailer is being used temporarily as an office, during the
construction of any building within the Village or during the relocation of any
existing business operating in the Village to another location within the
Village, an application must be filed with the Community Development
Department, designating the length of time such structure is to be used for
construction purposes or as a business office during the relocation.
   (B)   Upon an application being filed for temporary use of a trailer as an
office during construction of a building within the Village, the Community
Development Department may issue a temporary license, permitting the parking of
such trailer on the construction site at a location approved by the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation for the period of construction. Thirty days after
completion of construction, as determined by the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, such trailer must be removed.
   (C)   Upon an application being filed for temporary use of a trailer as an
office during the relocation of any existing business operating in the Village
to another location within the Village, the Community Development Department
may issue a temporary license, permitting the parking of such trailer on
private property that is zoned for commercial or industrial uses at a location
approved by the Director of Sustainability and Innovation for a maximum period
of 6 months from the date of issuance, which period may be extended, for good
cause shown, once in any 12 month period for up to an additional 3 months. Such
trailer must be removed within 5 days of issuance of an occupancy permit at the
new business location.
   (D)   Whenever a temporary license is issued for the use of a trailer as an
office, the license fee shall be $50 per month, which shall be paid to the
Village, and a temporary license shall be issued by the Community Development
Department. All applicants for a temporary license under this section shall be
required to sign a temporary license agreement prepared by the Village.
(Ord. C0-06-27, passed 9-7-2006; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 111.42 UNOBSTRUCTED VIEW OF INTERIOR PREMISES.
   For all commercial uses situated on the first or ground floor, no screen,
blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows
or doors facing the street or inside the premises which shall prevent a clear
view into the interior of the premises from the street, road, sidewalk or
public right-of-way at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other
obstruction nor any arrangement of lights or lighting shall be permitted in or
about the interior of such premises which shall prevent a full view of the
entire interior of such premises from the street, road, sidewalk or public
right-of-way. This prohibition does not apply to temporary backdrops in
buildings owned by the Village or to structures that are under construction or
are being rehabilitated so long as a valid building permit has been obtained
and is displayed.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 111.43 MOTOR FUEL TAX.
   (A)   General - definitions. "Motor fuel" means all volatile and inflammable
liquids produced, blended or compounded for the purpose of, or which are
suitable or practicable for, operating motor vehicles. Among other things,
"motor fuel" includes "special fuel" as defined in Section 1.13 of the Illinois
Motor Fuel Tax Law, 35 ILCS 505/1.13.
   (B)   Imposition of tax. A tax is imposed upon all persons engaged in the
Village of Maywood in the business of selling motor fuel, as defined in the
Motor Fuel Tax Law, 35 ILCS 505/1 et seq., as amended, at retail for the
operation of motor vehicles upon public highways, or for the operation of
recreational watercraft upon waterways, at the rate of $0.03 per gallon of
motor fuel sold at retail within the Village of Maywood for the purpose of use
or consumption and not for the purpose of resale. This tax is not imposed on
aviation fuel, as defined in Section 3 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act, 35
ILCS 120/3, as amended. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the
provisions of Section 8-11-2.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code, 65 ILCS 5/8-11-
2.3, as amended, which is incorporated as though fully set forth herein. The
tax levied herein is in addition to any and all other taxes and charges.
   (C)   Collection and administration of tax. The tax imposed by this chapter,
and the civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto, shall be
administered, collected and enforced by the Illinois Department of Revenue in
accordance with the provisions of Section 8-11-2.3 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.3) and the Motor Fuel Tax Law (35 ILCS 505/1 et seq.),
as amended. The Department of Revenue shall have the full power to administer
and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Reimbursement of tax liability. Persons subject to any tax imposed
under this section may reimburse themselves for their seller's tax liability
hereunder by separately stating that tax as an additional charge, which charge
may be stated in combination, in a single amount, with state tax which sellers
are required to collect under the Use Tax Act, 35 ILCS 105/1 et seq., as
amended, pursuant to such bracket schedules as the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois may prescribe.
(Ord. CO-2020-04, passed 2-19-2020; Am. Ord. CO-2020-09, passed 4-21-2020)
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §
110.10 shall be subject to the penalties set forth in §
10.99 in addition to such other penalties as may be specified in this title.
Additionally, the Village Present may, following notice and a hearing pursuant
to §
110.17, suspend or revoke any such license as provided in
Chapter 110 for violations of the provisions of this Code.
(1997 Code, § 32.11) (Ord. 77-5, passed 4-14-1977; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed 4-1-2014)
CHAPTER 112: ROOMING HOUSES
Section
   
112.01   Definition
   
112.02   Compliance
   
112.03   Licenses
   
112.04   Posting regulations
   
112.05   Inspections
   
112.06   Register
   
112.98   Violation
§ 112.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   ROOMING HOUSE. Every building or portion of a building other than a hotel,
motel, apartment hotel or residential hotel in which sleeping accommodations
not constituting an apartment are furnished at a fee for 4 or more persons
ordinarily renting such accommodation at a specified rate for a specified time
and occupying the premises as a permanent place of abode rather than on a
transient basis for a short term period of occupancy.
   APARTMENT. A self contained unit with private bath and cooking facilities.
(1997 Code, § 17.01) (Ord. 62-15, passed 12-13-1962)
§ 112.02 COMPLIANCE.
   No house or building or portion thereof other than those being used as a
legal rooming house as of January 30, 2010, and possessing a valid license to
operate as a rooming house on January 30, 2010, may be converted into, used as
or leased as a rooming house after January 30, 2010.
(1997 Code, § 17.02) (Ord. 62-15, passed 12-13-1962; Am. Ord. CO-2010-006,
passed 4-15-2010)
§ 112.03 LICENSES.
   (A)   Required; term; fee. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct,
keep, manage or operate, or cause to be conducted, kept, managed or operated a
rooming house without a license therefor. Such license shall be issued only to
persons of good moral character and shall not be transferable. All such
licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 after the same
shall be issued and shall be renewed annually, subject to the same conditions
as the original license.
      (1)   Such license shall be issued by the Director of Finance and the fee
for such license shall be as follows:
         (a)   Accommodations for 4 persons, $25 per year;
         (b)   Accommodations for 5 to 6 persons, $45 per year;
         (c)   Accommodations for 7 to 11 persons, $45 per year plus $5 per
person;
         (d)   Accommodations for 12 or more persons, $75 per year plus $5 per
person.
      (2)   Such fee shall accompany the application therefor.
   (B)   Application. A written application upon blank forms furnished by the
Director of Finance shall be filed with the Director of Finance each year and
shall accurately state the full name and address of the applicant and the
person in whose name such license is to be issued, the full name and address of
the owner of the building and premises where such rooming house use is proposed
to be carried on; the name of the manager of the premises, if any; and the
number of rooms in the building. Yearly application for the license shall be
made on or before January 1.
   (C)   Floor plan. The applicant shall file with the application a plan of
each floor of the building, which plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less
than one-quarter inch to a foot showing all fire escapes, stairs, halls,
location and size of all windows, all the bedrooms and exits of each floor, and
a statement in writing showing the number of persons proposed to be
accommodated on each floor, and the intended use of every room and space in the
building must be shown on the plan submitted.
   (D)   Approval.
      (1)   Upon receipt of the application and plan, the Director of Finance
shall submit the application and plan to the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation, the Building Director, and the Chief of the Fire Department, and no
license shall be issued until the application has received the written approval
from each of the officials.
      (2)   The Director of Sustainability and Innovation and Building Director
shall determine that all the requirements of the Building Code, the zoning
ordinance, the Plumbing Code, the Electrical Code and the Housing Code of the
Village are complied with and that the premises are safe and habitable and are
provided with adequate facilities for heat, light and ventilation, and that all
pertinent state and Village health regulations have been complied with. The
Chief of the Fire Department shall determine that all fire hazards have been
eliminated from the premises; that the premises have proper and sufficient fire
extinguishing equipment; that the premises comply with the Village fire
regulations; and that the occupants of the building have adequate fire
protection.
(1997 Code, § 17.03) (Ord. 62-15, passed 12-13-1962; Am. Ord. C0-00-18, passed
11-20- 2000; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed
8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 112.04 POSTING REGULATIONS.
   The Building Director shall have printed such portions of this chapter as
they may deem requisite and cause the same to be displayed in each room of a
rooming house.
(1997 Code, § 17.04) (Ord. 62-15, passed 12-13-1962; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 112.05 INSPECTIONS.
   At least twice a year after a license has been issued, and before the
renewal of the license, the Building Director and the Chief of the Fire
Department shall authorize the inspection of the premises to determine that all
pertinent regulations are being complied with.
(1997 Code, § 17.05) (Ord. 62-15, passed 12-13-1962; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 112.06 REGISTER.
   (A)   A licensee of a rooming house shall keep a register in which shall be
entered the name and residence of every person who becomes a roomer therein.
Such register shall show the number or location of the room occupied by such
person, the date of their arrival, and the period for which they engaged a
room.
   (B)   The register shall be accessible, without charge, to any police
officer or authorized agent of the Village.
(1997 Code, § 17.06) (Ord. 62-15, passed 12-13-1962)
§ 112.98 VIOLATION.
   The maintenance or use of any rooming house in violation of the provisions
of this chapter is unlawful and the owner and/or operator of an unlawful
rooming house may be cited and fined up to $1,000 per day that such unlawful
maintenance or use continues, with each day of unlawful maintenance or use
constituting a separate offense. Additionally, the Village President may,
following notice and a hearing pursuant to §
110.17, suspend or revoke any rooming house license as provided in
Chapter 110 for violations of the provisions of this chapter or Code.
Additionally, unlawful maintenance or use of any rooming house in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or Code is a nuisance and may be abated by the
Director of Code Enforcement as provided by §§
92.20 through
92.32 or by such other legal action as is deemed necessary by the Village.
(1997 Code, § 17.08) (Ord. 62-15, passed 12-13-1962; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed
4-1-2014)
CHAPTER 113: NURSING HOMES
Section
   
113.01   Title
   
113.02   Definitions
   
113.03   Minimum standards
   
113.04   Cooperation with Building Director in control of communicable disease
   
113.05   Compliance with the Cook County Medical Examiner ordinance
   
113.06   Records
   
113.07   Daily reports
   
113.08   Inspections
   
113.09   Patients relying on prayer and spiritual treatment
   
113.10   Qualifications for personnel
   
113.11   Fire emergency techniques, compulsory training
   
113.12   Location
   
113.13   License required
   
113.14   Application; contents; accompanying documents
   
113.15   Fee
   
113.16   Investigation of premises, applicant; issuance
   
113.17   Display; transfer
   
113.18   Grounds for denial
   
113.19   Revocation; denial of renewal
   
113.20   Petition for review of denial
   
113.21   Hearings
   
113.22   (Reserved)
   
113.23   Village records and reports
§ 113.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as “An Ordinance in Relation to the Licensing
and Regulation of Nursing Homes, Sheltered Care Homes and Homes for the Aged.”
(1997 Code, § 18.01) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978)
§ 113.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person making application for a license.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A substance defined as such by the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act (720 ILCS 570).
   COOK COUNTY MEDICAL EXAMINER ORDINANCE. That ordinance enacted by the Cook
County Board, effective December 6, 1976, establishing the office of Cook
County Medical Examiner, and the regulations promulgated by the Cook County
Medical Examiner pursuant to such ordinance, dated April 6, 1977, and entitled
“Guidelines for Hospitals and Physicians.”
   HOME ADMINISTRATOR. A person licensed as a nursing home administrator by the
Illinois Department of Registration and Education, pursuant to the Nursing Home
Administrators Licensing and Disciplinary Act (225 ILCS 70), and licensed by
the Village to operate and manage a nursing home, sheltered care home, or home
for the aged.
   HOME FOR THE AGED. Any private home, institution, building, residence, or
any other place, whether operated for profit or not, which through its
ownership or management, and as its principal objective, provides maintenance,
personal care, nursing or sheltered care to aged persons, and in the conduct of
which provides such service or services to not less than 3 persons over 60
years of age.
   HOME REGULATED BY THIS CHAPTER. Every nursing home, sheltered care home and
home for the aged, as such terms are defined by this chapter, located within
the Village.
   MAINTENANCE. Food, shelter and laundry.
   NURSE. A person licensed to practice nursing in the state.
   NURSING . Professional nursing or practical nursing, as these terms are
defined in Illinois Nursing and Advanced Practice Nursing Act, 225 ILCS 65/50-
10), for sick or infirm persons who are under the care and supervision of
licensed medical practitioners.
   NURSING HOME. Private home, institution, building, residence or other place,
whether operated for profit or not, for the infirm or chronically ill, which
provides through its ownership or management, maintenance, personal care or
nursing for 3 or more persons, not related to the applicant or owner by blood
or marriage; or any similar facility in which maintenance is provided to 3 or
more persons who, by reason of illness or physical infirmity, require personal
care or nursing.
   OWNER. In the case of a licensee who is an individual, OWNER means the
licensee; and in the case of a licensee that is a firm, partnership,
association, corporation, municipality, political subdivision, trust or estate,
or any other entity whatsoever, OWNER means each member thereof, or the
governing body thereof, whichever is applicable.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, firm, corporation,
municipality, political subdivision, trust or estate, or any other entity
whatsoever.
   PERSONAL CARE. Assistance with meals, dressing, transportation, movement,
bathing, or other personal needs; or general oversight of the physical and
mental well-being of the residents, exclusive of nursing, as may be required by
their condition.
   PHYSICIAN. A person licensed to practice medicine in all its branches in the
state.
   RESIDENT. Any person admitted as a patient to a nursing, sheltered care
home, or home for the aged for care.
   SHELTERED CARE. Maintenance and personal care.
   SHELTERED CARE HOME. A private boarding home, institution, building,
residence or other place, whether operated for profit or not, which, through
its ownership or management, provides sheltered care to 3 or more persons who
are not related to the applicant or owner by blood or marriage; or any similar
facility in which maintenance is provided to 3 or more persons who, by reason
of physical infirmity, require personal care.
(1997 Code, § 18.02) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978; Am. Ord. 80-23, passed 9-25-
1980)
§ 113.03 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   (A)   Village regulations. Each home regulated by this chapter shall have a
fire alarm system, an automatic sprinkler system throughout the structure, and
at least 1 standard fire extinguisher on every floor and basement and shall, in
all respects, comply with the building and zoning provisions and fire
regulations of the Village.
   (B)   Isolation rooms. Each home regulated by this chapter shall be provided
with a suitable room or rooms, approved by the county and state health
departments, to be used for cases of serious illness, terminal cases, and for
the isolation of cases of contagious, infectious, epidemic or communicable
diseases. Each room thus provided shall have a stationary washstand with a
supply of hot and cold running water.
   (C)   Holding rooms or areas. Each home regulated by this chapter shall be
provided with a suitable room or area, approved by the county and state health
departments, for the proper care of deceased residents pending their removal,
after the resident has been pronounced dead by a physician.
   (D)   Storage of narcotics and drugs. Each home regulated by this chapter
shall be provided with secure storage, under lock and key, for all controlled
substances in the possession of the home. Each such storage area shall have at
least 2 keys to be held by the shift supervisor.
   (E)   State health regulations. Each home regulated by this chapter shall
comply with the minimum standards, rules, and regulations prescribed by the
State Department of Public Health pursuant to its authority under the Nursing
Home Care Act (210 ILCS 45).
      (1)   The following rules and regulations which were published by the
Department pursuant to this authority are incorporated herein by reference:
         (a)   Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for License of
Community Living Facilities, dated December 28, 1976;
         (b)   Minimum Standards, Rules and Regulations for License of
Intermediate Care Facilities for the Developmentally Disabled, dated August 28,
1975;
         (c)   Long-Term Care Facilities - Minimum Standards, Rules and
Regulations, dated December 28, 1976.
      (2)   Three copies of such rules and regulations have been made available
for public inspection at the Village Hall for at least 30 days prior to the
enactment of this chapter.
   (F)   Controlled substances. No person who operates, manages or is employed
by a home regulated by this chapter shall manufacture, distribute, or dispense
any controlled substance unless such person is registered by the Illinois
Department of Registration and Education pursuant to the provisions of Illinois
Controlled Substances Act, § 302 (720 ILCS 570/302).
(1997 Code, § 18.03) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978)
§ 113.04 COOPERATION WITH BUILDING DIRECTOR IN CONTROL OF COMMUNICABLE DISEASE.
   It shall be the duty of every person conducting, operating, or employed by
any home regulated by this chapter to cooperate with the Building Director
Officer to minimize the danger of the transmission of communicable diseases, in
accordance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the County Health
Department.
(1997 Code, § 18.04) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11- 1978; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 113.05 COMPLIANCE WITH THE COOK COUNTY MEDICAL EXAMINER ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Notification of Cook County Medical Examiner when resident dies. Upon
the death of a resident who was not attended by a physician within the 30-day
period immediately prior to death, or upon the death of a resident who was
attended by a physician, but the death was due to unnatural causes, the home
administrator shall notify the office of the Cook County Medical Examiner
immediately. If the decedent was attended by a physician within the 30 day
period immediately prior to death, and the death was not due to unnatural
causes, and such physician agrees to sign the death certificate, the home
administrator need not notify the office of the Cook County Medical Examiner.
   (B)   Removal of dead in medical examiner cases. In the event that a
resident dies in a home regulated by this chapter, under circumstances that
require notification to be given to the Cook County Medical Examiner as
provided in division (A) of this section, no person shall disturb the scene
where the death of resident takes place, nor shall any person in any way
disturb the body from the position in which it is found until expressly
authorized to do so by the Medical Examiner or his appointed representative,
unless the movement of the deceased or of his personal property is required for
the purpose of preventing damage to or destruction of the decedent’s body or
his personal property, or is necessary to protect life, safety or health.
Whenever the Medical Examiner has lawfully assumed jurisdiction of a body, such
body shall not be removed or released from his jurisdiction without his express
consent. If the Medical Examiner consents to the moving of the body, it may be
moved from the place of death only to a mortuary within Cook County.
   (C)   Removal of dead in nonmedical examiner cases.
      (1)   Written permission for removal. In the event that a resident dies
in a home regulated by this chapter, under circumstances that do not require
notification to be given to the Cook County Medical Examiner as provided in
division (A) of this section, no person acting as superintendent or manager, or
who is otherwise in charge or control of any home regulated by this chapter,
nor any person connected with any such home in any capacity whatsoever as
nurse, physician, employee, or attendant shall order, permit or allow the body
of any resident who has died therein to be removed therefrom at any time within
16 hours after the hour of death, unless the removal of such body has been
authorized in writing by some member of the immediate family of the deceased
person, or by some other person legally authorized to order or permit such
removal, or unless such removal is necessary to protect life, safety or health.
      (2)   Compliance with county regulations. No body of a deceased person
shall be removed otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of the County
Health Department concerning the removal of dead bodies.
      (3)   Permission of county required to keep bodies over 24 hours. No body
of a deceased person shall be kept in any home regulated by this chapter longer
than 24 hours after the hour of death without permission from the County Health
Department.
(1997 Code, § 18.05) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978)
§ 113.06 RECORDS.
   (A)   Resident’s records.
      (1)   Individual records. Each home regulated by this chapter shall
maintain individual records for each resident and shall include the resident’s
admission record (which record shall show the name, address, age, sex, marital
status, information required for the filling in of a death certificate, the
date of admission and discharge or disposition of each resident in the home), a
medical record, a physician’s order record, nursing notes, and a list of the
resident’s belongings.
      (2)   Permanent residents’ registry. Each home regulated by this chapter
shall maintain a permanent residents’ registry book in which the name of each
resident shall be entered in the chronological order of admission, with the
date and number of entry.
      (3)   Financial transactions with resident’s funds. Each home regulated
by this chapter shall maintain accurate records of financial transactions
involving the use of each resident’s funds.
      (4)   Death records. Each home regulated by this chapter shall maintain a
record showing the name of each person who dies while a resident therein, the
date of death, the name and address of the person to whom the body is released,
the date of removal from the home, or if finally disposed of by the home, the
date, place and manner of disposition.
   (B)   Personnel files. Each home regulated by this chapter shall maintain
accurate personnel files for all employees which shall include records of
education, experience, findings of medical examinations as to physical and
mental fitness, and showing freedom from any communicable disease. Daily work
and time schedules of employees shall be maintained as part of such personnel
files.
   (C)   Inventory of controlled substances. Each home regulated by this
chapter which dispenses, administers or distributes any controlled substances
shall maintain an inventory of such controlled substances in accordance with
the laws of the United States and the state and rules promulgated by the
Illinois Department of Registration and Education.
   (D)   Open to Building Director. All records shall be open at all reasonable
times to the inspection of the Building Director or his or her duly authorized
representative.
(1997 Code, § 18.06) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11- 1978; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 113.07 DAILY REPORTS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating any home
regulated by this chapter to make a report to the Building Director daily, by
telephone and confirmed in writing immediately thereafter, of all epidemic,
communicable or contagious diseases. Such daily reports shall contain the names
and residences of all persons suffering from any such diseases, together with
such other information as may be required by the Building Director. A copy of
all such reports shall also be mailed to the county and state health
departments.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating any home
regulated by this chapter to report to the Village Police Department by
telephone any unusual occurrences, such as unaccounted for disappearance of
controlled substances and syringes, accidents resulting in severe personal
injury or death, attempted suicides, suicides, and sudden unexplained deaths.
(1997 Code, § 18.07) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11- 1978; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 113.08 INSPECTIONS.
   Every home regulated by this chapter shall be open at all reasonable times
to inspection by the Community Development Department, Police Department, and
Fire Department, as often as is deemed necessary.
(1997 Code, § 18.08) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009)
§ 113.09 PATIENTS RELYING ON PRAYER AND SPIRITUAL TREATMENT.
   Nothing in the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing
the medical supervision, regulation or control of the remedial care or
treatment of residents or patients in any such home or institution conducted
for those who rely upon treatment by prayer or spiritual means in accordance
with the creed or tenets of any well-recognized church or religious
denomination; provided, however, a license shall be required and all rules,
regulations and minimum standards of this chapter shall apply thereto.
(1997 Code, § 18.09) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978)
§ 113.10 QUALIFICATIONS FOR PERSONNEL.
   (A)   No person shall act as a nurse’s aide, orderly, or nurse technician in
a home regulated by this chapter, nor shall any person, under any other title,
not otherwise licensed by the state or the Village, assist with the care of
patients in a home regulated by this chapter, unless said person meets the
following requirements:
      (1)   Be at least 16 years of age, temperate habits, good moral
character, honest, reliable and trustworthy;
      (2)   Be able to speak and understand the English language;
      (3)   Provide evidence of their employment or occupation and residence
for 2 years prior to their present employment;
      (4)   Have completed at least 8 years of grade school or provide proof of
equivalent knowledge;
      (5)   Successfully complete a course of training for nurse’s aides,
orderlies, and nurse technicians approved by the Illinois Department of Public
Health; and
      (6)   Be familiar with and have general skills related to patient care in
such areas as the bathing, grooming and feeding of patients; the making of
beds; the giving of enemas; and taking of patients’ temperatures.
   (B)   Persons subject to the provisions of this section shall perform their
duties under the direct supervision of a registered nurse or a licensed
practical nurse.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a nurse’s aide, orderly,
or nurse technician, or under any other title, not licensed by the state, to
assist in the care of patients in a home regulated by this chapter, unless such
person has complied with the provisions of this section.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any home regulated by this chapter to employ
any person in the capacity of nurse’s aide, orderly, or nurse technician or
under any other title, not licensed by the state to assist in the care of
patients in such home regulated by this chapter, unless such person has
complied with the provisions of this section.
   (E)   Proof of compliance by each such employee with the requirements set
out above shall be maintained for each such employee by each home regulated by
this chapter in the individual personnel folder of each such employee.
   (F)   Each home regulated by this chapter shall certify to the Health
Department on a form provided by the Department, the name and residence address
of each employee and that each such employee subject to the provisions of this
section meets all requirements of this section.
(1997 Code, § 18.10) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.11 FIRE EMERGENCY TECHNIQUES, COMPULSORY TRAINING.
   The licensee of a home regulated by this chapter shall cause all employees
of such home to be trained in fire emergency techniques under the supervision
of the Fire Department.
(1997 Code, § 18.11) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978)
§ 113.12 LOCATION.
   (A)   No person shall hereafter construct a home regulated by this chapter
in any block in which two- thirds of the buildings fronting on both sides of
the street or streets on or along which the proposed home may face are devoted
exclusively to residence purposes, unless the owners of a majority of the
frontage in such block and the owners of a majority of the frontage on the
opposite side or sides of the street or streets on or along which said building
faces, consent in writing to the construction of any such home in such block.
Such written consents of the majority of said property owners shall be filed
with the Health Department before a permit shall be granted for the
construction of any such home.
   (B)   No such home shall hereafter be located on a lot or plot of ground the
nearest lot line of which is within 200 feet of the nearest boundary of any lot
or plot of ground used for a school.
(1997 Code, § 18.12) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978)
§ 113.13 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the regularly constituted
authorities of the United States, the state, the county or the Village to
conduct or operate any home regulated by this chapter within the Village
without first obtaining a license therefor.
(1997 Code, § 18.13) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 113.14 APPLICATION; CONTENTS; ACCOMPANYING DOCUMENTS.
   (A)   The application for a license to conduct and operate a home regulated
by this chapter shall be made in conformity with the general requirements of
the Maywood Municipal Code relating to applications for licenses. The
application shall be under oath and shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant, if an individual; if a firm,
partnership or association, the name and address of every member thereof; and
if a corporation, the names and addresses of its officers;
      (2)   The location of the proposed home for which a license is sought;
      (3)   The name of the person under whose management or supervision the
home will be conducted and proof that such person is licensed as a nursing home
administrator by the Illinois Department of Registration and Education;
      (4)   The number and type of residents for which maintenance, personal
care or nursing will be provided; and
      (5)   Such information relating to the number, experience and training of
the employees of the home, and of the moral character of the applicant and
employees as the Building Director may deem necessary.
   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by a statement relative to the
financial status of the applicant.
   (C)   As a condition of the issuance or renewal of a license, the applicant
shall file with the Village a statement of ownership which the applicant or
licensee shall update every 6 months. The statement of ownership shall include:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number, occupation or business
activity, business address and business telephone number regarding every person
who has entered into a contract to manage or operate or who owns or controls,
directly or indirectly, any of the shares of stock of, or any other financial
interest in, the facility which is the subject of the application or license,
and the value and percentage of such interest; and
      (2)   The address of any facility, wherever located, in which any
financial interest is owned or controlled, directly or indirectly, by the
applicant, if the facility is required to be licensed as if it were located in
the state.
   (D)   The statement of ownership shall be forwarded to the Illinois
Department of Public Health after the issuance of the Village license.
(1997 Code, § 18.14) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 113.15 FEE.
   The annual fee for a license to conduct a home regulated by this chapter
shall be $100.
(1997 Code, § 18.15) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978; Am. Ord. C0-00-17, passed
11-20-2000)
§ 113.16 INVESTIGATION OF PREMISES, APPLICANT; ISSUANCE.
   The Director of Finance, upon the receipt of an application for a license
pursuant to this chapter, shall cause the Community Development Department and
the Fire Department to make a thorough investigation of the premises proposed
to be licensed, and if satisfied that the required standards of §
113.03 of this chapter are met, and that the applicant is otherwise qualified,
the Director of Finance, pursuant to a favorable written report of findings
from the above, shall issue a license to the applicant for a period of 1 year
to conduct such a home of the class designated at the location specified. The
license shall state the maximum number of residents that may be accommodated at
any 1 time. The Director of Finance shall advise the applicant of the necessity
of obtaining a license from the Illinois Department of Public Health.
(1997 Code, § 18.16) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009)
§ 113.17 DISPLAY; TRANSFER.
   A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place in the hall or near the main entrance inside the home. Such
license shall be valid only in the hands of the person to whom it is issued and
it shall not be subject to sale, assignment or other transfer, voluntary or
involuntary, nor shall it be valid for any premises other than those for which
originally issued.
(1997 Code, § 18.17) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978)
§ 113.18 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.
   An application for a license required by this chapter shall be denied for
any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Failure to meet the minimum standards prescribed in this chapter;
   (B)   Conviction of the applicant, or if the applicant is a firm,
partnership or association, of any of its members, or if a corporation, of any
of its officers or directors, or of the person designated to manage or
supervise the home, of a felony or of 2 or more misdemeanors involving moral
turpitude as shown by a certified copy of the record of conviction, or in the
case of a conviction of a misdemeanor by a court not of record, as shown by
evidence, or other satisfactory evidence that the moral character of the
applicant, manager or supervisor of the home is not reputable;
   (C)   Personnel insufficient in number or unqualified by training or
experience to provide proper and adequate care for the number and type of
residents;
   (D)   Insufficient financial or other resources to operate and conduct the
home in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the minimum
standards, rules and regulations promulgated thereunder; and
   (E)   Any grounds upon which an application for a license may be denied as
prescribed in this title.
(1997 Code, § 18.18) (Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 113.19 REVOCATION; DENIAL OF RENEWAL.
   A license may be revoked, or a renewal thereof denied, for any of the
following reasons:
   (A)   Cruelty or indifference to the welfare of a resident;
   (B)   Misappropriation of the property of a resident;
   (C)   Conversion of the property of a resident;
   (D)   Violation of any section of the Nursing Home Care Act, 210 ILCS 45/
1 et seq., including but not limited to Section 3-119 of the Nursing Home Care
Act, 210 ILCS 45/3-119;
   (E)   Violation of any provision of this chapter or of the minimum
standards, rules and regulations promulgated thereunder; and
   (F)   Any grounds upon which an application for a license may be suspended,
revoked or denied as prescribed by §
110.10.
(1997 Code, § 18.19) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed
4-1-2014)
§ 113.20 PETITION FOR REVIEW OF DENIAL.
   In the event the application for a license required by this chapter is
denied, within 10 calendar days thereafter, the applicant may file a petition
for review of the action denying said application, which petition shall be
under oath and shall be filed with the Village Clerk as provided in §
110.17(I).
(1997 Code, § 18.20) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed
4-1-2014)
§ 113.21 HEARINGS.
   Hearings on application denials, or in actions to revoke or suspend a
license issued pursuant to this chapter due to violations of this chapter or
any other section of this title or Code, shall be heard by the Village
President and held in conformance with §
110.17.
(1997 Code, § 18.21) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed 4-1-2014)
§ 113.22 (RESERVED).
§ 113.23 VILLAGE RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   The Village shall maintain a list of all licensed homes regulated by this
chapter located within the Village. The Village Clerk shall forward yearly a
copy of this list to the State Department of Public Health.
(1997 Code, § 18.23) (Ord. 78-8, passed 5-11-1978)
CHAPTER 114: AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Prerequisites to operation
   
114.03   Licenses; fees
   
114.04   Motion pictures and theatricals
   
114.05   Carnivals, street shows
   
114.06   Athletic exhibitions
   
114.07   Coin and non-coin operated amusement devices
   
114.08   Music devices
   
114.09   Enforcement
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   AMUSEMENT. Any theatrical, exhibition, show and any other entertainment
offered, operated, presented or exhibited for admission of the public.
   PUBLIC PLACE OF AMUSEMENT. Any building, hall, room or enclosure to which
the general public may be admitted with or without the payment of an admission
fee or charge, where they may engage in or witness the performance of any
amateur theatrical entertainment, any exhibition, show, amusement,
entertainment, whether musical or otherwise, or any dancing or skating, either
by the patrons or other persons.
(1997 Code, § 33.01)
§ 114.02 PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION.
   No person shall locate, conduct, operate or manage any place of amusement
without obtaining the written consent of property owners within a radius of 400
feet of such place of amusement, representing a majority of the foot frontage
within such radius.
(1997 Code, § 33.02)
§ 114.03 LICENSES; FEES.
   It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate any amusement which is open to
the public and for admission to which a fee is charged without a license
therefor. The license fee shall be as set forth in § 110.13.
(1997 Code, § 33.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.04 MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS.
   (A)   License. It shall be unlawful to give, present or conduct any motion
picture or theatrical for admittance to which a fee is charged, except a
performance given solely for the benefit of and under the supervision and
auspices of a religious, educational or charitable organization, without a
license therefor.
   (B)   Crowding of theaters. It shall be unlawful to permit any person,
excepting ushers or other theater employees, to remain standing in a hall or
room in which a motion picture is presented during the time of such
performance. It shall be unlawful to admit into any such hall more persons than
can be accommodated by the seating arrangements for the premises.
   (C)   Flammable scenery. It shall be unlawful to use any scenery in any
theater other than noninflammable scenery or such as shall have been rendered
noninflammable by application of fire- preventive coatings.
   (D)   Exits. It shall be unlawful to present any public motion picture in
any building or structure which does not contain the number of exits required
by the Building Code or by statute.
   (E)   Blocking of aisles, corridors or exits. It shall be unlawful to
obstruct or permit the obstruction of any aisles, corridors or exits leading
from any room or enclosure in which a motion picture performance is being given
or in which an audience for such a performance is gathered.
(1997 Code, § 33.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.05 CARNIVALS, STREET SHOWS.
   No permit shall be granted for any carnival, circus, exhibition, show or
other amusement to be given on any public street or sidewalk in such a place
that the only main accommodation for the public or audience will be in a public
place, except on order of the Board of Trustees.
(1997 Code, § 33.06)
§ 114.06 ATHLETIC EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to conduct, operate or exhibit any race between
persons, animals or vehicles, or any baseball games, boxing or wrestling
matches or any other athletic contest or exhibition for admission to which a
fee is charged without having procured a license therefor.
   (B)   The proprietor of such exhibition shall submit to the Director of
Finance a statement verified under oath of the gross receipts of each game,
contest or race, within 1 week after such exhibition. At the same time, such
proprietor or person exhibiting or operating such exhibition shall pay to the
Director of Finance a sum equal to 3% of the gross receipts.
(1997 Code, § 33.07)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 114.07 COIN AND NON-COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   The term COIN AND NON-COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE means any
fortune telling machine, palm reading machine, pinball machine, or any other
machine or device for a game of skill or science which does or does not return
to the player of the device money or property or the right to receive money or
property and which is governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token
in a coin slot affixed to the machine, game or device or which is activated,
governed, or controlled by a remote control switch, key, pushbutton or other
mechanism or means, or activated in any other fashion.
      (2)   The term coin and non- coin operated amusement device does not
include pool tables, billiard tables or other similar types of game tables
which are controlled by a coin operated locking device, or any device lawfully
licensed and operated as authorized by
Chapter 125 of this Code and pursuant to the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et
seq.
   (B)   Possession, operation or maintenance of coin and non-coin operated
amusement devices in the Village is prohibited except as set forth below.
   (C)   Coin and non-coin operated amusement devices may be located,
maintained and operated within the Village upon premises for which an
organization has obtained and holds: (a) a valid Class D liquor license
properly issued pursuant to Chapter 116 of this Code; or (b) a valid Class N
liquor license, a coin and non- coin operated amusement device license as
herein provided. A separate coin and non-coin operated amusement device license
shall be required for each individual coin and non-coin operated amusement
device.
   (D)   Application for a coin and non-coin operated amusement device license
shall be made in conformity with Chapter 110 of this Code except as otherwise
may be provided in this section. The application shall set forth:
      (1)   The location of the premises where the coin or non-coin amusement
device is to be located, maintained, or operated; and
      (2)   The charge to be made to the player for operating the device.
   (E)   No more than 4 coin or non-coin operated amusement devices may be
located, maintained or operated in any one establishment.
   (F)   The fee for each license to locate, maintain or operate a coin or non-
coin operated amusement device shall be as set forth in §
110.13. The Village Clerk shall issue a decal or sticker to each organization
that obtains a license to locate, maintain or operate such an amusement device.
This decal or sticker must be affixed by the applicant to the licensed
amusement device in a conspicuous place and must be kept on the device during
all times the device is in use.
   (G)   No license issued under this section shall be transferable.
   (H)   No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of a coin or
non-coin operated amusement device in a manner which will disturb the peace of
persons otherwise properly within or without the premises where the amusement
device is located. No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of
such an amusement device where the operation amounts to a nuisance in fact. The
operation of such a device which provides a return of money or property is
prohibited, and no license issued hereunder shall be deemed to permit the
operation of any such device in such a manner.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as prohibiting the
possession, maintenance and operation of a coin or non-coin operated amusement
device in private residence for the use and enjoyment of the lawful occupants
thereof and their guests. Nothing herein shall prohibit the manufacture or sale
and possession incidental thereto of such coin or non-coin operated amusement
devices.
   (J)   Any person having obtained a license to locate, maintain or operate a
coin operated amusement device issued prior to July 31, 1979, may continue to
enjoy the privileges of said license until such time as said license expires.
No new license for the location, operation and maintenance of a coin operated
amusement device in the Village shall be issued except as provided in this
section.
(1997 Code, § 33.08) (Ord. 80-13, passed 7-24- 1980; Am. Ord. CO-2013-37,
passed 6-4-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2020-08, passed 3-17-2020)
§ 114.08 MUSIC DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a music device without a license therefor, nor
operate the same between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., except that
an establishment that holds a valid Class N liquor license may operate a music
device during the permitted hours of operation for a Class N liquor license as
set forth in §
117.41 (Hours of Operation) of this Code. The fee shall be as set forth in §
110.13 (vending machines).
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a MUSIC DEVICE shall be a mechanical
instrument, device or thing which is used or operated or which may be used or
operated by insertion of any coin, slug or token.
(1997 Code, § 33.09) (Am. Ord. CO-2020-08, passed 3-17-2020
§ 114.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the Chief of the Fire
Department to see that every exhibition, amusement, theatrical or other public
show or amusement is inspected by a member of the Police and Fire Departments
and to insure conformity with the provisions of this chapter concerning such
amusements.
   (B)   Police protection shall be provided at gatherings for athletic
contests and amusements as directed by the Chief of Police and at the expense
of the licensee.
(1997 Code, § 33.11)
CHAPTER 115: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, ITINERANT VENDORS AND CANVASSERS
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   Registration
   
115.03   Fraud, misrepresentation
   
115.04   Sunday peddling
   
115.05   Identification card
   
115.06   Entry upon private residence
   
115.07   Licenses for peddlers and itinerant vendors
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   CANVASSER. A person engaged in the occupation of going from place to place
in the Village on the public ways, in commercial establishments, or in or on
residence property to contact residents of the Village or other persons in the
Village where there is no request, invitation or appointment for such contact.
   ITINERANT VENDOR. A person engaged in business for profit who conducts a
temporary or transient business in the Village of selling commodities, articles
or services with the intention of continuing such business in the Village for
not more than 120 days and who, in such business, uses, leases or occupies all
or part of any structure in the Village for the display of such commodities or
articles or in connection with the offering of such services.
   PEDDLER. A person engaged in business for profit, who sells or offers for
sale any commodity or article, traveling from place to place in the Village, or
who sells or offers for sale and delivery from any vehicle going from place to
place in the Village, any commodity or article, and who carries such commodity
or article with him for delivery at the time of sale.
   SOLICITOR. A person engaged in business for profit going from place to place
in the Village, soliciting subscriptions for books, magazines, newspapers or
other periodicals or publications, or selling or offering for sale any
commodity or article when delivery is not made at the time such sale or
subscription is made or entered into, or going from place to place in the
Village soliciting orders for photographs, or going from place to place in the
Village offering to furnish services or inviting orders for services.
(1997 Code, § 34.01)
§ 115.02 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Required. Every peddler, solicitor, itinerant vendor and canvasser
shall, prior to engaging in such activity, register with the Police Department
and furnish in writing the following information and subscribe his name
thereto:
      (1)   His name and address;
      (2)   The name and address of the person by whom he is employed or with
whom he is associated;
      (3)   The length of such employment or association;
      (4)   The place of residence and nature of employment of registrant
during the preceding 12 months;
      (5)   The nature of the commodities, articles or services registrant is
selling or offering for sale or the purpose for which such registrant proposes
to canvass in the Village;
      (6)   An estimate of the length of time and a statement of the part of
the Village in which registrant will pursue his activities;
      (7)   The names and addresses of 3 persons who have known registrant for
at least 1 year and from whom registrant is willing that inquiry be made to
verify the facts stated by registrant;
      (8)   A personal description of registrant, including fingerprints and
other marks of physical identification.
   (B)   Verification of registration. The Police Department shall promptly
make such verification of the facts stated by the registrant as the
circumstances require and shall complete such verification in not more than 14
days after the filing of the registration statement.
   (C)   Waiting period after registration. It shall be unlawful for any person
to engage as a peddler, solicitor, itinerant vendor or canvasser within the
Village until a period of 14 days has elapsed from the date on which he has
registered and furnished the information required by this chapter, unless prior
to the expiration of that 14-day period a representative of the Police
Department advises the registrant that the facts stated by him in compliance
with the registration requirement have been sufficiently verified.
   (D)   Falsification of information. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage as a peddler, solicitor, itinerant vendor or canvasser within the
Village if any of the information furnished by him as required by this chapter,
which is material to his character and responsibility or to the activity he
proposes to engage in, has been falsely stated.
   (E)   Diseased persons. No person afflicted with or a carrier of any
epidemic or contagious disease shall act as peddler, solicitor, itinerant
vendor or canvasser within the Village.
(1997 Code, § 34.02)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.03 FRAUD, MISREPRESENTATION.
   No peddler, solicitor, itinerant vendor or canvasser shall perpetrate any
fraud, cheat or misrepresent.
(1997 Code, § 34.03)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.04 SUNDAY PEDDLING.
   No licensed peddler shall carry on his trade in the Village on Sundays.
(1997 Code, § 34.04)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 115.05 IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   (A)   Every peddler, solicitor, itinerant vendor, itinerant dealer in
secondhand clothes, canvasser and helper of a peddler, solicitor, itinerant
vendor, itinerant dealer in secondhand clothes, or canvasser shall, prior to
engaging in such activity in the Village, secure an official Village
identification card through the Police Department by the following procedure:
      (1)   Pay $5 for the cost of the identification card;
      (2)   Give the following information to the police desk officer who shall
type it on a master identification card: the name and address of the firm
represented by the applicant, the name of the individual issued the permit, the
address of the individual issued the permit, and the article or types of
articles handled by the applicant;
      (3)   Sign his name to the master identification card;
      (4)   Affix his right thumbprint to the master identification card;
      (5)   The master identification card shall be completed by the Police
Department as follows:
         (a)   A number shall be placed on each master identification card,
chronologically, beginning with the number 1,001;
         (b)   Fill in an expiration date, not more than 1 year later than the
date of the application, after the prefix “expires;”
         (c)   Affix the initials of the Police Chief or his designated
representative after the above information and thumbprint is filled in and
made;
      (6)   Appear at the place indicated by the Police Department for a
photograph and completion of the identification card.
   (B)   As a condition of receiving such identification card and to guarantee
its return, such person shall deposit with the Village the sum of $15. Every
peddler, solicitor, itinerant vendor, itinerant dealer in secondhand clothes,
canvasser or helper shall, on completing his activity as such in the Village,
surrender his identification card to the Police Department within 90 days and
upon doing so the Village shall refund to him his deposit of $15. In case any
such identification card is lost, stolen or mutilated, it is the duty of such
person to report such fact to the Police Department with his statement of the
circumstances. The Police Department shall conduct such investigation as is
necessary, and upon payment by the applicant of $10, a duplicate card shall be
issued, marked "duplicate" in the manner described above. It shall be the duty
of the Police Department, not more than 14 days after such person has furnished
the information required of him in this chapter, and upon the deposit of $15 as
provided in this section, to issue such person his identification card and keep
a record of the number of each identification card issued and the name and
address of the person to whom it has been issued, provided the applicant has no
criminal or subversive record of arrest.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of any such person to wear in a conspicuous place
on his outer garment the identification card issued to him by the Police
Department as provided in this section. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage as a peddler, solicitor, itinerant vendor, itinerant dealer in
secondhand clothes, canvasser or helper within the Village without so wearing
and displaying his identification card.
(1997 Code, § 34.05) (Ord. 55-5, passed 7-20-1955; Am. Ord. C0-00-26, passed
12-4-2000)
§ 115.06 ENTRY UPON PRIVATE RESIDENCE.
   (A)   No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall go on or upon any private
residence in the Village having been requested or invited to do so by the owner
or occupant of the private residence for the purpose of pursuing his business
of peddling or soliciting if there is posted at a place that can be readily
seen by one approaching the front door of the residence a sign in letters not
less than 1 inch high the legend “No Peddlers,” “No Solicitors,” or “No
Canvassers,” or words of similar import.
   (B)   No peddler, solicitor or canvasser shall go on or upon any private
residence in the Village for the purpose of canvassing or of pursuing his
business of peddling or soliciting, without having been requested or invited to
do so by the owner or occupant of the private residence, before the time of
sunrise or after the time of sunset.
(1997 Code, § 34.06)
§ 115.07 LICENSES FOR PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT VENDORS.
   (A)   Required. No person shall engage in or conduct the business of a
peddler or itinerant vendor without a license from the Village. The fee shall
be as set forth in § 110.13.
   (B)   Application. Application for the license required by this section
shall be accompanied by a copy of the applicant’s registration statement filed
with the Police Department. It shall state what commodities or articles the
applicant proposes to sell or deal in. In case of an itinerant vendor, it shall
state the address at which he intends to conduct his business. In the case of a
peddler, it shall state whether he proposes to peddle from a vehicle or from a
pack carried by him. The applicant shall exhibit his certificate of
registration under the Retailers Occupation Tax Act of Illinois and shall write
such certificate number on his application. An applicant for a license as an
itinerant vendor shall also produce his state license as an itinerant vendor
and the Director of Finance shall, at the time he delivers the Village license,
endorse on such state license the words "local license fees paid" over his
signature and the date of the endorsement.
   (C)   Issuance. Upon receipt of the application required by this section and
the payment by such applicant of the license fee, the Director of Finance shall
cause the appropriate license to be issued.
(1997 Code, § 34.07)
CHAPTER 116: TOBACCO
Section
   
116.01   Legislative findings and declaration
   
116.02   Definitions
   
116.03   License required
   
116.04   License application
   
116.05   License fee; license limitations
   
116.06   Sale of tobacco products other than in sealed packages
   
116.07   Display and storage of tobacco products
   
116.08   Regulations on sales or distribution of tobacco products
   
116.09   Minimum age to sell tobacco products
   
116.10   Purchase or possession by minors prohibited
   
116.11   Responsibility for agents and employees
   
116.12   Enforcement; administration
   
116.13   Post-enforcement matters
 
   
116.99   Penalty
§ 116.01 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS.
   The Village President and Board of Trustees expressly find and declare that:
   (A)   (1)   Cigarette smoking is dangerous to human health;
      (2)   There exists substantial scientific evidence that the use of
tobacco products causes cancer, heart disease and various other medical
disorders;
      (3)   The Surgeon General of the United States has declared that nicotine
addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to cocaine, and is the most
widespread example of drug dependence in this country;
      (4)   The Director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse concluded that
the majority of Americans who die each year from cigarette smoking became
addicted to nicotine as adolescents before the age of legal consent;
      (5)   The National Institute on Drug Abuse found that cigarette smoking
precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit drug use; and
      (6)   The Village finds that establishing a minimum sales age of 21 for
the legal purchase and sale of tobacco products will reduce smoking and tobacco
use among youth and young adults, and decrease the likelihood that persons
under the age of 21 will become smokers or electronic cigarette users later in
life.
   (B)   The enactment of this chapter directly pertains to and is in
furtherance of the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Village,
particularly those residents under 21 years of age.
(Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord. CO-2017-15, passed 5-2-2017)
§ 116.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISTRIBUTE.  To give, sell, deliver, dispense or issue or offer to give,
sell, deliver, dispense or issue, or cause or hire any person to give, sell,
deliver, dispense, issue or offer to give, sell, deliver, dispense or issue.
   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE. Any electronically actuated device which, in
operation, causes the user to exhale any smoke, vapor or other substance other
than those produced by unenhanced human exhalation. ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE
includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold
as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an
electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, a “vape,” “vaping device,” “vaping
product,” or under any other product name or descriptor. The term ELECTRONIC
CIGARETTE does not include any asthma inhaler or other device that has been
specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration.
   FLAVORED LIQUID NICOTINE PRODUCT. Any liquid nicotine product that contains
a constituent that imparts a characterizing flavor. As used in this definition,
the term CHARACTERIZING FLAVOR means a distinguishable taste or aroma, other
than the taste or aroma of tobacco, imparted either prior to or during
consumption of a liquid nicotine product including, but not limited to, tastes
or aromas of menthol, mint, wintergreen, chocolate, vanilla, honey, cocoa, any
candy, any dessert, any alcoholic beverage, any fruit, any herb or any spice.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a
circuit court of the state but does not include a person appointed guardian or
given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court Act.
   LICENSEE.  Any person (as defined herein) holding a license to sell tobacco
products at retail under this chapter and § 111.31(A).
   LIQUID NICOTINE PRODUCT. 
      (1)   Any electronic cigarette:
         (a)   Containing liquid, gel, salt-based nicotine liquid, or other
solution that contains nicotine; or
         (b)   Packaged with a liquid, gel, salt-based nicotine liquid, or
other solution that contains nicotine; and
      (2)   Any other container of liquid, gel, salt, salt-based nicotine
liquid, or other solution where the liquid, gel, salt-based nicotine liquid, or
other solution contains nicotine and is intended to be utilized in an
electronic cigarette. The term LIQUID NICOTINE PRODUCT does not include any
product regulated by the United States Food and Drug Administration under
Chapter V of the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, 21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq.
   MINOR.  A person who has not yet reached 18 years of age.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, limited liability company, partnership, joint
venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, trustee, or any other group
or combination acting as a unit, excepting the United States of America, the
State of Illinois, and any political subdivision thereof.
   PHOTOGRAPHIC IDENTIFICATION. Any officially issued card containing the
bearer's date of birth that includes a photograph of the person seeking to
purchase tobacco products and that is accepted as proof of age under Illinois
law.
   POINT OF SALE. A store, building, structure, or any other separate place of
business maintained by a seller from which tobacco products are made available
for sale or distribution to consumers. POINT OF SALE does not include separate
cash registers or service counters within a store or other place of business.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any area to which the public is invited or permitted.
   RETAILER. Any person who sells tobacco products to individuals for personal
consumption. This definition includes the owner of the business and any
employees of the business.
   SMOKE OR TOBACCO SHOP. See definition in § 17.4 (Generic Use Definitions) of
the Zoning Ordinance.
   SMOKING LOUNGE. See definition in § 17.4 (Generic Use Definitions) of the
Zoning Ordinance.
   SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA. Any equipment, device, or instrument that is
primarily designed or manufactured for smoking, chewing, absorbing, dissolving,
inhaling, snorting, sniffing or ingesting by any other means into the body of
tobacco/hemp products as defined herein. Items or devices classified as SMOKING
PARAPHERNALIA include, but are not limited to, pipes, bongs, punctured metal
bowls, electric pipes, e-cigarettes, e-cigarette juice, buzz bombs, vaporizers,
hookahs, and devices for holding burning material. Lighters and matches are
excluded from the definition of SMOKING PARAPHERNALIA.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT SAMPLE. A tobacco product distributed to members of the
general public at no cost or at nominal cost for purposes of promoting the
product.
   TOBACCO/HEMP PRODUCTS. Any product in leave, flake, plug, liquid, or any
other form, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, snuff, smoking
tobacco, any liquid nicotine product including but not limited to any flavored
liquid nicotine product and/or smokeless tobacco, containing nicotine,
tetrahydrocannabinol, or other products derived from the tobacco or hemp plant.
The term TOBACCO/HEMP PRODUCTS also includes electronic cigarettes, also known
as “E-Cigarettes” even if certain e-cigarettes do not contain any tobacco. This
does not include medical or recreational cannabis. The term TOBACCO/HEMP
PRODUCTS also includes electronic cigarette devices known as “vapes,” “vaping
devices,” or “vaping products.”
   VENDING MACHINE. Any mechanical, electronic or self-service device which
upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, automatically
dispenses tobacco products.
(Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord. CO-2019-35, passed 12-17-2019; Am.
Ord. CO-2023-36, passed 6-20-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2023-49, passed 12-5-2023)
§ 116.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   License. It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to
give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving
away or delivering tobacco products within the Village without having first
obtained a tobacco dealer's license therefor pursuant to this chapter and §
111.31(A).
   (B)   License–point of sale. A separate license must be obtained for each
point of sale maintained by the retailer. The license to sell tobacco products
shall be displayed prominently at the point of sale for which it is issued. A
license to sell tobacco products is a privilege, not a property right, and the
issuance or renewal of such a license is within the discretion of the
Commissioner of Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation based on the criteria of the
public health, welfare and safety of the Village, its residents and the public.
Such license shall be in addition to any other license required by this Code.
   (C)   License–administration. The Building and Code Enforcement Department,
along with the Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and
Licensing shall administer the licensing of retailers of tobacco products and
shall recommend to the Commissioner of Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation approval
or denial of all applications for licenses, as prescribed in Chapter 129B of
this Code. Applications for renewals need not be reviewed by the Joint
Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing.
   (D)   License–transfer prohibited. The transfer of any license issued under
this chapter is prohibited. Any such purported transfer is void.
   (E)   Duration. A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid
from the first day of each year and shall expire on December 31 following the
date of issuance, unless suspended or revoked.
(Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO- 2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 116.04 LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application. An application for a tobacco retailer’s license hereunder
shall be made in writing to the Director of the Building and Code Enforcement
Department on a form provided by the Village and shall be processed in
accordance with provisions of this chapter and the provisions of
Chapter 110 (Business Licenses). When found to be complete, the application
shall be forwarded to the Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation
and Licensing for review and consideration and a recommendation to the
Commissioner of Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation. In the event of a conflict
between the licensing procedure set forth in this chapter and the procedure set
forth in
Chapter 110, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
   (B)   Each application for a license shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
      (1)   The applicant’s full name, the address and telephone number where
the applicant is engaged in the business of the retail sale of tobacco products
and the name, address and telephone number of the person authorized to receive
notices issued pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   If the applicant is a corporation or a limited liability company:
the legal corporate or company name; the business or “assumed” name; the
address and telephone number of the principal place of business; the date and
state of incorporation or organization; the names of all officers, directors,
shareholders and members; and the name, address, and telephone number of the
person authorized to receive notices issued pursuant to this chapter.
      (3)   If the applicant is a partnership: the name, address and telephone
number of the principal place of business; the names of all partners; and the
name, address and telephone number of a person authorized to receive notices
issued pursuant to the chapter.
      (4)   If the applicant is incorporated or organized in the State of
Illinois or in a state other than the State of Illinois, they must provide to
the Village the document pursuant to which the company is qualified under
Illinois law to transact business in Illinois and further provide a copy of the
articles of incorporation and shareholders agreement, or the articles of
organization and operating agreement, or a partnership agreement.
(Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 116.05 LICENSE FEE; LICENSE LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   The annual license fee for a retail tobacco dealer’s license, tobacco
shop and smoking lounge shall be as set forth in §
110.13 (cigarettes/tobacco dealer, tobacco shop and smoking lounge) of this
Code.
   (B)   The licensing period relative to the annual license fee shall commence
on the first day of each year and shall expire on December 31 following the
date of issuance.
   (C)   The number of licenses for certain types of businesses shall be capped
as follows:
      (1)   No more than 2 licenses to engage in the business of a tobacco shop
shall be active at any 1 time; and
      (2)   No more than 6 licenses to engage in the business of a smoking
lounge shall be active at any 1 time.
   (D)   After September 10, 2024, no new retail tobacco dealer’s license shall
be issued except to retail goods establishments, as defined in the Maywood
Zoning Ordinance, occupying a minimum of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area
(GFA) (GFA means the total building footprint including retail sales area,
interior bathrooms, storage areas and cashier areas). Retail tobacco dealer’s
licenses held by retail goods establishments in effect on September 10, 2024
that do not meet the square footage requirements set forth in this section may
only be renewed by the current licensee provided that the licensee and the
licensed premises comply with all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules
and regulations relative to operation of the licensed establishment, except for
the square footage requirements set forth in this section.
(Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord. O-2023-36, passed 6-20-2023; Am.
Ord. CO-2024-41, passed 10-1-2024)
§ 116.06 SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS OTHER THAN IN SEALED PACKAGES.
   No retailer of tobacco products, as licensed by the Village under this
chapter and §
111.31(A) of this Code, shall break or otherwise open any cigarette, cigar or
smokeless tobacco package, or sell, distribute or give away individual
cigarettes or a number of unpackaged cigarettes that is smaller than the
minimum cigarette package size of 20 cigarettes, unpackaged cigars in a number
that is smaller than the original, unbroken package intended by the
manufacturer for retail sale, or any quantity of cigarette tobacco or smokeless
tobacco that is smaller than the smallest package distributed by the
manufacturer for individual consumer use. In the case of cigars only, it shall
be a defense to a violation of this section that applicable taxes were paid by
the retailer on the unopened package at the time of initial purchase by the
retailer, that the cigars in the package were individually packaged in a manner
that indicates they were intended for individual retail sale following such
initial purchase by the retailer, and that the retailer is collecting tax on
each sale of such individually packaged cigars. While on the licensed premises
no retailer of tobacco products shall sell, distribute or give away individual
cigarettes, cigars or any quantity of cigarette tobacco or smokeless tobacco or
other tobacco products that are the personal property of the retailer and used
for retailer's private use. No retailer of tobacco products shall be in
possession of individual cigarettes, cigars or open packages of cigarettes,
cigars or any quantity of cigarette tobacco or smokeless tobacco or other
tobacco products that are the personal property of the retailer and used for
retailer's private use while working at or standing within a 10-foot radius of
the retail sales counter where tobacco products are made available for sale or
distribution to customers. No individual cigarettes or open packages of
cigarettes, cigars, cigarette tobacco or smokeless tobacco or other tobacco
products that are the personal property of the retailer and used for retailer's
private use shall be maintained or located within a 10-foot radius of the
retail sales counter where tobacco products are made available for sale or
distribution to customers.
(Ord. C0-03-21, passed 8-20-2003; Am. Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord.
CO- 2016-14, passed 7-26-2016) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.07 DISPLAY AND STORAGE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   No cigarettes, smokeless tobacco products or other tobacco products to be
sold by a retailer of tobacco products, as licensed by the Village under this
chapter and §
111.31(A) of this Code, may be displayed for sale or stored other than in a
secure area. For purposes of this section, a SECURE AREA shall mean an area
behind the register counter of the retail establishment that is not accessible
to consumers. See § 11.3 (Generic Use Standards) of the Zoning Ordinance at
subsection J. for certain tobacco product display limitations specific to gas
stations.
(Ord. C0-03-21, passed 8-20-2004; Am. Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord.
CO-2023-36, passed 6-20-2023) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.08 REGULATIONS ON SALES OR DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   (A)   Age restriction. It shall be unlawful for any person, including any
licensee or retailer, to sell, offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco
products, including but not limited to vaping products or devices, to any
person under the age of 21 years.
   (B)   Proof of identification. Each licensee shall request and examine the
photographic identification of any person purchasing tobacco products so as to
verify that the purchaser is 21 years of age or older.
   (C)   Required signs. Signs informing the public of the age restrictions
provided for herein shall be posted by every licensee at every display of
tobacco products which offers tobacco products for sale or which is visible by
any customer. Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state:
"THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE IS
PROHIBITED BY LAW."
The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least 1- inch high.
   (D)   Vending machines prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person,
licensee or retailer to sell or offer for sale, give away, deliver or to keep
with the intention of selling, giving away or delivering tobacco products by
use of a vending machine.
   (E)   Prohibited locations. Except as otherwise indiciated in this division,
it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or
deliver tobacco products within 500 feet of any school, child care facility or
other building or location used for educational or recreational programs or
activities for persons under the age of 18 years, including but not limited to
parks and dedicated open spaces, forest preserves, and the Illinois Prairie
Path. The distance requirement in this division (E) shall be measured from the
center of the person's business location to the:
      (1)   Center of the school building, educational or recreational building
or child care facility;
      (2)   Center of the lot used or maintained for educational or
recreational programs; or
      (3)   Closest edge of the park, dedicated open space, forest preserve or
Illinois Prairie Path.
This prohibition shall not apply to those businesses engaged in the retail sale
of tobacco products at a location that would otherwise be prohibited by this
division that were in existence prior to the enactment of this division. This
exemption shall apply to any new owner at the same location providing the same
service. This prohibition shall not apply to establishments meeting the
definition of smoking lounges in Section 17.4 (Generic Use Definitions) of the
Zoning Ordinance.
   (F)   Distribution of tobacco product samples prohibited. No person shall
give away, barter, exchange, distribute or in any way dispense free of charge
or at nominal cost any tobacco product samples, including but not limited to
vapid products, flavored liquid nicotine product samples, and/or any coupon
redeemable for any tobacco products, on any public street, alley, right-of-way,
sidewalk, or in any public park, playground, or other property owned by the
Village, any school district, library district or park district, including
without limitation, areas open to the public in any publicly owned or operated
building or at any place located within 500 feet of the lot line of any
building or other location used primarily as a school, child care facility, or
for the education or recreation of persons under 18 years of age.
   (G)   Compliance with laws. Licensees must comply at all times with all
Federal, State, County, Village and other local laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations relating to the license, the sale of cigarettes and other tobacco
products, and the licensed premises, including, but not limited to, compliance
with all provisions of the State Tobacco Products Tax (35 ILCS 143/10-1 et
seq.) and the Cook County Tobacco Tax Ordinance (Cook County Code, Article XI,
Section 74-430 et seq.). Findings of liability or guilt for Federal, State,
County or other local laws, ordinances, rules or regulations shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this division.
(Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord. CO-2016-14, passed 7-26-2016; Am.
Ord. CO-2017-15, passed 5-2-2017; Am. Ord. CO-2023-36, passed 6-20-2023; Am.
Ord. CO-2023-49, passed 12-5-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2025-20, passed 7-1-2025)
Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.09 MINIMUM AGE TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee, to engage, employ or permit
any person under 21 years of age to sell tobacco products, including but not
limited to vaping products, in any licensed premises.
(Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord. CO-2017-15, passed 5-2-2017; Am.
Ord. CO-2023-49, passed 12-5-2023) Penalty, see §
116.99
§ 116.10 PURCHASE OR POSSESSION BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Purchase prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age
of 21 years to purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or
age, or to use any false or altered identification for the purpose of
purchasing tobacco products, as such products are defined in §
116.02 of this Code. This includes, but is not limited to, vaping products,
vaping devices, and flavored liquid nicotine products.
   (B)   Possession prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under the
age of 21 years to possess any tobacco products, as such products are defined
in §
116.02 of this Code. This includes, but is not limited to, vaping products,
vaping devices, and flavored liquid nicotine products.
   (C)   Any law enforcement officer who finds a person under 21 years of age
to be in possession of a tobacco product is authorized to seize and destroy the
tobacco product.
(Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord. CO-2017-15, passed 5-2-2017; Am.
Ord. CO-2023-49, passed 12-5-2023) Penalty see §
116.99
§ 116.11 RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter by any officer, director, manager or other
agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of
such licensee, and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if
such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally.
(Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005)
§ 116.12 ENFORCEMENT; ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Duties of Building and Code Enforcement Department and Joint
Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing.
      (1)   The Building and Code Enforcement Department and Joint Commission
for Tobacco and Cannabis, created under Chapter 129B of this Code, acting in
conjunction with the Village Manager and the Police Department, shall be
responsible for the enforcement and administration of this chapter.
      (2)   The Building and Code Enforcement Department and the Police
Department shall conduct random, unannounced inspections at locations where
tobacco products are sold to ensure compliance with this chapter and with state
law. Furthermore, it shall be the duty of all persons licensed to sell
cigarettes at retail within the Village, upon the demand of the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation to furnish for inspection samples of all
cigarettes sold or offered for sale by them, which samples of cigarettes shall
be analyzed by or under the direction of the Director, and a record of such
analysis shall be made and kept in their office for the inspection by the
public.
      (3)   The Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and
Licensing shall promulgate reasonable rules and regulations consistent with
this chapter to provide for the enforcement and administration of this Chapter.
The rules and regulations shall establish procedures for administrative action
against those who violate the chapter and for a method of administrative
adjudication of the violation or violations.
      (4)   Any rules or regulations promulgated under this chapter shall be
filed in the Building and Code Enforcement Departments’s principal office and
with the Village Clerk. A copy of said rules and regulations shall be made
available for public inspection upon request.
(Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022; Am. Ord.
CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 116.13 POST-ENFORCEMENT MATTERS.
   During a 12-month period following the revocation of a tobacco dealer’s
license for a business operating at a location within the Village, the Village
shall not consider or approve any applicant for a new tobacco dealer’s license
at that same location.
(Ord. CO-2017-15, passed 5-2-2017)
§ 116.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates §
116.10 shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750 for each such
offense.
   (B)   The Commissioner of Tobacco and Cannabis, their designee, may suspend
or revoke any license issued under the provisions of this chapter, if they
determine that the licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter
or other related provisions of the Maywood Code. In lieu of suspension or
revocation of a license or in addition to such penalties, the Commissioner of
Tobacco and Cannabis, or their designee, may levy a fine on the licensee. The
fines imposed shall be in accordance with the fine schedule set forth below for
each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. Penalties and fines imposed shall include, but do not have
to be limited to, the following:
      (1)   For a first violation, an administrative penalty/fine of $1,000;
      (2)   For a second violation, occurring after a final determination of
liability for a first violation, and within a 12-month period of the first
violation, an administrative penalty/fine of $2,000 and a suspension of the
license of the retail tobacco dealer for 30 days; and
      (3)   For a third violation, occurring after a final determination of
liability for a second violation and within a 12-month period of the second
violation, an administrative penalty/fine of $3,000 and a revocation of the
license of the retail tobacco dealer for 1 year.
   (C)   No such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be
fined except after notice and a hearing by the Commissioner of Tobacco and
Cannabis, or their designee, conducted in conformance with §
110.17. At the discretion of the Commissioner of Tobacco and Cannabis, the
hearing may be conducted before the Commission of Tobacco and Cannabis
Regulation and Licensing, who shall provide an advisory opinion on the matter
to the Commissioner.
   (D)   The Commissioner of Tobacco and Cannabis, or their designee, shall,
within 7 business days after such hearing, if they determines after such
hearing that the license should be revoked or suspended, or that the licensee
should be fined, state the reason for such determination in a written order and
further state the amount of the fine, the period of suspension or that the
license has been revoked. An executed copy of such order shall be served by the
Village within 7 calendar days upon the licensee.
   (E)   Any licensee determined by the Commissioner of Tobacco and Cannabis,
or their designee, to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall
pay to the Village the costs of the hearing on such violation. The Commissioner
of Tobacco and Cannabis, or their designee shalldetermine the costs incurred by
the Village for said hearing, including, but not limited to: court reporters,
fees, the costs of the transcripts or records, attorneys’ fees, the cost of
preparing and mailing notices and orders, any and all additional fines imposed
and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Village or such lesser sum
as the Commissioner of Tobacco and Cannabis, or their designee may allow.
   (F)   The licensee shall pay the costs to the Village within 30 days of
notification of the costs by the Commissioner of Tobacco and Cannabis, or their
designee. Failure to pay the costs within 30 days of notification is a
violation of this chapter and may be cause of license suspension or revocation,
or the levy of a fine.
   (G)   Any retailer, or owner(s) of the retailer, whose license is revoked
for violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be prohibited from
applying for a tobacco retailer’s license for a 1-year period from the date of
the revocation order.
   (H)   In addition to imposing the fines and other penalties provided by this
chapter, the Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and
Licensing, Building and Code Enforcement Department or Village Manager may
initiate and/or file legal or administrative action against any licensee for an
injunction requiring compliance with the provisions of this chapter or for such
order as the court may deem necessary or appropriate to secure such compliance.
   (I)   A person may seek a writ of certiorari from the Chancery Division of
the Circuit Court of Cook County according to applicable law, appealing any
final determination of liability or decision of the Commissioner of Tobacco and
Cannabis, or their designee under this chapter.
(Ord. C0-03-21, passed 8-20-2003; Am. Ord. C0-05-35, passed 10-4-2005; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed 4-1-2014; Am. Ord. CO-
2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
CHAPTER 117: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Local Liquor Control Commissioner
   
117.03   Local Liquor Control Commission
   
117.04   Civil rights in licensed premises
License Requirements
   
117.20   License required
   
117.21   Applications for license
   
117.22   Restrictions on issuance of licenses
   
117.23   Classifications; fees; number of licenses
   
117.24   Termination of license
   
117.25   License period
   
117.26   Initial application fees, payment of fees, renewal
   
117.27   Transfer of license
   
117.28   BASSET training
   
117.29   Reports in relation to, and annual review of, liquor licenses
Regulations
   
117.40   Violation of Retailers’ Occupation Tax Act
   
117.41   Hours of operation
   
117.42   Sanitary conditions
   
117.43   Employees
   
117.44   Location restrictions
   
117.45   Class B liquor licensees prohibited from selling alcoholic liquor,
other than spirits, except in the manufacturer’s original case or carton
   
117.46   Access from licensed premises to dwelling quarters
   
117.47   Sales to and by persons under age 21, drunkards, spendthrifts
   
117.48   Purchase or acceptance of gift of liquor by person of nonage;
identification cards
   
117.49   Refilling original packages, dispensing paper cups
   
117.50   Displaying license
   
117.51   Word “saloon” forbidden
   
117.52   Soliciting
   
117.53   Outside licensed premises
   
117.54   Renewal of license
   
117.55   Change of location
   
117.56   Warning, minors, parents
   
117.57   Insurance and indemnification requirements
   
117.58   Bond
   
117.59   Liquor in public places; vehicles; no loitering
   
117.60   Happy hours prohibited
   
117.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Maywood Liquor Tax, see §§
36.20 et seq.
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   All words and phrases used in this chapter which are defined in an act
entitled “An Act Relating to Alcoholic Liquors,” approved January 31, 1934, as
amended (235 ILCS 5), except as hereinafter modified or supplemented, shall
have the meaning accorded to such words and phrases in said Act.
   BAR/BAR AREA. The area of a restaurant set aside from the traditional
restaurant dining area for the preparation, service of and consumption of
alcoholic liquor. The BAR/BAR AREA includes any patron seating area and the
counter and the behind the counter storage area (coolers, a display mantle,
etc.) at which a bartender or other person authorized to sell or offer to sell
at retail any alcoholic liquor for purposes of consumption in the licensed
premises shall prepare and serve alcoholic liquor. Subject to the restrictions
imposed by the applicable liquor license class, the area of the restaurant
immediately adjacent to the counter may be devoted to a patron seating area for
the purpose of consumption of alcoholic liquor and food while waiting for other
seating within the restaurant or as a place to consume a meal. Alcoholic
liquor, without food, may be purchased by, served to and consumed by patrons
within the related bar/bar area, provided that the kitchen is open and food
service is being offered.
   BAR, PATRON. A counter at which patrons of a restaurant may purchase
alcoholic liquor from a bartender or other person authorized to sell or offer
to sell at retail any alcoholic liquor for purposes of consumption in the
licensed premises. Alcoholic liquor, without food, may be purchased by, served
to and consumed by patrons at said counter or within the related bar/bar area,
provided that the kitchen is open and food service is being offered.
   BAR, SERVICE.  A counter at which a bartender or other person authorized to
sell or offer to sell at retail any alcoholic liquor for purposes of
consumption in the licensed premises, shall prepare alcoholic liquor for
delivery to the restaurant’s waitstaff who shall serve said beverages to
patrons in the restaurant or within the related bar/bar area. No alcoholic
liquor or food shall be purchased by, served to or consumed by patrons at said
counter.
   CONVENIENCE STORE. A retail establishment of 6,000 square feet or less of
gross floor area (GFA) at which the primary goods offered for sale consist of
merchandise for the convenience of customers purchasing consumer and household
items, including the following types of food, article and other products:
bread, milk, cheese, sliced or pre- packaged meats, pre-packaged canned and
bottled foods and drinks, tobacco products, beer or wine, candy, papers and
magazines, sandwiches for off-premises consumption, and various other consumer
and household items. These stores may be part of a gas station or an
independent facility. As used in this definition, GFA means the total building
footprint including retail sales area, interior bathrooms, storage areas and
cashier areas.
   FULFILLMENT CENTER. A warehousing or other storage facility of 25,000 square
feet or more where no direct physical retail sales are made to consumers on
premises, and where alcoholic liquor is stored prior to being delivered to
paying customers inits original packaging pursuant to a Class Q  Fulfillment
Center Alcoholic Liquor Package Sales and Delivery License.
   GROCERY STORE. A retail establishment of 6,001 square feet or more of gross
floor area (GFA) offering a full line of groceries, fresh meats, dairy
products, vegetables, fruits and packaged frozen goods, and various other
consumer and household items and products. As used in this definition, GFA
means the total building footprint including retail sales area, interior
bathrooms, storage areas and cashier areas.
   HOTEL. Any building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised
and held out to the public to be a place where a restaurant is located and
sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests,
whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used
for the sleeping accommodations for transients.
   LICENSEE. Any person receiving a license under this chapter.
   OUTDOOR CAFÉ. An outdoor dining area, as defined by Section 17.4 of the
Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Maywood, operated by a restaurant in
accordance with subsection 11.3(P) of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of
Maywood.
   OUTDOOR LIQUOR CAFÉ.  An outdoor dining area, as defined by Section 17.4 of
the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Maywood, operated by a restaurant that
already maintains a Village issued restaurant related liquor license and which
serves complete meals and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, to patrons
in the outdoor dining area. The outdoor liquor café shall be located adjacent
to the building that contains the operating restaurant. The Village Board and
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall approve the operating rules,
location and layout of the outdoor liquor café (outdoor dining area) as part of
the approval of an ordinance creating the Class J (outdoor liquor café) liquor
license for issue to an applicant. In addition, the operation of an outdoor
liquor café shall be subject to the provisions applicable to outdoor dining
areas set forth in subsection 11.3(P) of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of
Maywood.
   OWNER. Shall include all persons who are owners or lessees or otherwise who
are in control of any place where the sale of alcoholic liquor is carried on,
whether they be individuals, a partnership including all partners thereof, or a
corporationincluding the shareholders, directors and officers thereof.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation.
   PREMISES/LICENSED PREMISES.  The term premises or licensed premises, as used
in this chapter, shall refer only to the interior area of the building located
at the address indicated on the liquor license, and shall not include any area
at said address located outside of the building, such as, but not limited to,
sidewalks, parking areas, driveway areas, deck areas, patio areas or any other
outdoor areas that are part of the real property or the building identified by
the address on the liquor license, unless consumption of alcoholic liquor in a
particular outdoor area is specifically authorized by a particular liquor
license class.
   RECREATIONAL FACILITY. Any public or private arena, building or facility,
open to the public and used by patrons for the primary purpose of conducting
athletic or recreational sports activities such as bowling alleys, golf
courses, golf driving ranges, fitness clubs, swimming, tennis or other sports
and other types of indoor and outdoor arenas or other sports fields. This
definition does not include pool halls.
   RESTAURANT. Any public place which has a dining area for patrons to eat
meals and that is kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public
as a place where complete meals are served, and where such meals are actually
and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being
provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and
capacity and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees
to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. The term COMPLETE
MEALS, as used in this chapter, shall mean the wide variety of foods from all
major food groups, including the availability of multiple, distinct types of
entrees, side dishes and desserts, that are customarily listed on banquet,
buffet, breakfast, brunch, lunch and/or dinner menus. The mere availability and
service at any premises of hot dogs, hamburgers, sandwiches, hors d’oeuvres,
snacks such as ice cream, chips, pretzels or other similar foods will not,
standing alone, constitute the service of complete meals and shall not be
deemed sufficient to constitute such premises as a restaurant within the
meaning of this chapter. It is the intent of this chapter that the sole
business conducted on premises to be licensed as special event spaces, outdoor
liquor cafes or restaurants under this chapter shall be the service of complete
meals, as the term is commonly understood, with such meals being listed in
banquet, buffet, breakfast, brunch, lunch and/or dinner menus and as further
defined herein. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the service
of complete meals does not include service of food by luncheonettes, ice cream
shops, pubs, coffee shops, drive-ins, or self-service and/or carryout
establishments. A fast food restaurant is not a premises to be licensed as a
restaurant hereunder. On its premises, a restaurant owner may also operate a
SPECIAL EVENT SPACE operation as defined in §
117.01 (Definitions), but in order to serve alcoholic liquor as part of the
SPECIAL EVENT SPACE operation, the restaurant owner shall be required to apply
for, receive and maintain a Class "F" (SPECIAL EVENT SPACE) liquor license and
a Subclass F-l (SPECIAL EVENT SPACE/LIMITED RESTAURANT) Liquor License
Designation as set forth in this chapter.
   RESTAURANT, FULL SERVICE. A full service restaurant shall have a dining area
for patrons to eat meals and patrons are attended by a full service waitstaff
and/or through technology that simulates full service waitstaff. This type of
restaurant is further defined as any public place kept, used, maintained,
advertised, and held out to the public as a place where complete meals are
actually and regularly served, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining
room equipment and with adequate staff to take orders, prepare food, and serve
the food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages, in a full service
operation rather than a fast food service operation. The principal business of
a full service restaurant is the service of complete meals, and said service of
such meals shall constitute at least 60% of the gross income of the
establishment as distinguished from theprincipal business being the service of
food as a supplement to the service of alcoholic liquor. The restaurant design
shall reflect the character of an establishment that is a restaurant rather
than an establishment set up to serve alcoholic liquor as its  principal
activity. A fast food restaurant is not a premises to be licensed as a full
service restaurant hereunder.
   RESTAURANT LIMITED FOOD SERVICE. A limited food service restaurant may have
a full kitchen for preparation of full meals or a limited kitchen (e.g., hot
plates, small ovens, small deep fryers, microwaves, refrigerators and coolers.
etc.) for preparation of a limited food menu (e.g., appetizers, salads,
sandwiches, hamburgers, chicken wings, tacosand other casual dining fare) or
may have a limited kitchen with a limited food menu, but also has established,
active business relationships with local and regional restaurants and food
delivery services so that patrons can order and eat food from the menu or
delivered to the restaurant. The limited food service restaurant shall have a
dining area for patrons to consume food and beverages and may have a patron bar
where food and alcoholic beverages can be  consumed. The food and beverages can
be ordered either at a counter or from wait staff or directly from local and
regional restaurants and food delivery services. Retail sale, service and on-
site consumption of alcohol beverages shall only occur while the kitchen is
open and the patron has ordered and is waiting for food or is in the process of
consuming food. This type of restaurant is further defined as any public place
kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a place where
complete meals or a food from a limited food menu are actually and regularly
served, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and with
adequate staff to take orders, prepare food, and serve the food and beverages,
including alcoholic beverages, in a limited food service operation rather than
a fast food service operation. The principal business of a limited food service
restaurant is the service of food and beverages, including alcoholic beverages,
and said service of such food shall constitute at least 60% of the gross income
of the establishment as distinguished from the principal business being the
service of food as a supplement to the service of alcoholic liquor. The
restaurant design shall reflect the character of an establishment that is a
restaurant rather than an establishment set up to serve alcoholic liquor as its
principal activity. A fast food restaurant is not a premises to be licensed as
a limited food service restaurant hereunder.
   RETAILER. A person who sells, or offers for sale, alcoholic liquor for use
or consumption and not for resale in any form.
   SALE. Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner, or by any means
whatsoever, including the transfer of alcoholic liquors by and through the
transfer or negotiation of warehouse receipts or certificates, and includes and
means all sales made by any person, whether principal, proprietor, agent,
servant or employee.
   SELL AT RETAIL AND SALE AT RETAIL. The sale for use or consumption and not
for resale in any form.
   SPECIAL EVENT RETAILER (NOT FOR PROFIT ORGANIZATION). A qualified
educational, fraternal, political, civic, religious, charitable or other not
for profit organization which sells or offers for sale alcoholic beverages only
for consumption at the location and on the dates designated by the special
event retail liquor license. A qualified not for profit organization means a
corporation that is recognized as a tax exempt entity as defined under the
applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, or a
not for profit corporation as defined under the applicable provisions of the
general Not For Profit Corporation Act of 19861, as amended. To the extent the
not for profit organization has received written certification from the
internal revenue service regarding its tax exempt status or has registered with
the Illinois attorney general as a charitable organization, that certification
or proof of registration shall be required to be filed with the village as part
of the liquor license application.
   SPECIAL EVENT SPACE. An establishment which is rented by individuals or
groups to accommodate private functions and events such as fundraisers,
banquets, weddings, anniversaries, and other similar celebrations. SPECIAL
EVENT SPACES shall have on- premises a full kitchen for preparation of complete
meals or a limited kitchen (e.g., hot plates, small ovens, small deep fryers,
microwaves, refrigerators and coolers, and the like) for preparation of a
limited food menu (e.g., appetizers, salads, sandwiches, hamburgers, chicken
wings, tacos and other casual dining fare). For its private breakfast/lunch/
dinner service, buffets, brunches or holiday meal events, parties, weddings,
live entertainment events and other similar functions, SPECIAL EVENT SPACE
owners, who hold a valid Class F liquor license, may offer and serve meals
prepared on- site for consumption or may arrange for meals to be prepared off-
site by other restaurants or food trucks or caterers and served and consumed on
premises. No alcoholic liquor can be sold, served or consumed on the licensed
premises as part of the special event space operation, if the on-site kitchen
is not open and serving complete meals or if meals are not otherwise being
served or available to be served on the licensed premises by a restaurant or a
food truck or a caterer. Consumption of alcoholic liquor shall only be allowed
where the patron has ordered and is waiting for food or is in the process of
consuming food.
   SPECIAL EVENT SPACE/OUTDOOR LIQUOR CAFÉ. SPECIAL EVENT SPACE owners, who
hold a valid Class F liquor license, may apply for and hold a Subclass F-2
(Special Event Space/Outdoor Liquor Café) Liquor License Designation, as
regulated in §
117.23(F) below, for purposes of operating an outdoor liquor café at the
special event space location and may offer within the outdoor liquor café
premises breakfast/lunch/dinner service, buffets, brunches or holiday meal
events, parties, music performance events and other similar functions that are
either closed to the public or open to the public and where a per-patron food
and beverage fee, an entry fee or a donation may be charged to attend, provided
that the fee charged does not violate the provisions of §
117.60 (Happy Hours Prohibited) below. No alcoholic liquor can be sold, served
or consumed on the licensed premises as part of the outdoor liquor café
operation, if the on-site kitchen is not open and serving complete meals or if
meals are not otherwise being served or available to be served on the licensed
premises by another restaurant or a  food truck or a caterer. Consumption of
alcohol liquorshall only be allowed where the patron has ordered and is waiting
for food or is in the process of consuming food.
   SPECIAL EVENT SPACE/RESTAURANT. SPECIAL EVENT SPACE owners, who hold a valid
Class F liquor license, may apply for and hold a Subclass F-1 (Special Event
Space/Restaurant) Liquor License Designation, as regulated in §
117.23(F) below, for the purpose of operating any type of restaurant defined in
§
117.01 at the special event space location and may offer breakfast/lunch/dinner
service, buffets, brunches or holiday meal events, parties, music performance
events and other similar functions that are either closed to the public or open
to the public and where a per-patron food and beverage fee, an entry fee or a
donation may be charged to attend, provided that the fee charged does not
violate the provisions of §
117.60 (Happy Hours Prohibited) below. No alcoholic liquor can be sold, served
or consumed on the licensed premises as part of the restaurant operation, if
the on-site kitchen is not open and serving complete meals or if meals are not
otherwise being served or available to be served on the licensed premises by
another restaurant or a food truck or a caterer. Consumption of alcohol liquor
shall only be allowed where the patron has ordered and is waiting for food or
is in the process of consuming food.
   VIDEO GAMING CAFE/BISTRO. A specialized type of restaurant where a variety
of light appetizers, sandwiches, wraps, salads and bakery products
(collectively, "café fare") are prepared on site or provided by a caterer, a
restaurant or a bakery, and made available for retail sale and consumption by
patrons during the hours that retail sale, service and consumption of beer and
wine is permitted, but whose business model focuses on providing video gaming
for its customers. A VIDEO GAMING CAFE/BISTRO may, but does not have to,
provide an on-site kitchen, but shall maintain, at a minimum, a refrigerator,
coolers, microwave oven, heating lamps, and other food-related equipment
necessary to offer and maintain fresh café fare during hours of operation.
Convenience stores and gas stations do not qualify as video gaming cafes/
bistros.
(1997 Code, § 35.01) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25- 1978; Am. Ord. CO-2010-25,
passed 12-21- 2010; Am. Ord. CO-2015-30, passed 12-15- 2015; Am. Ord. CO-2016-
32, passed 12-21- 2016; Am. Ord. 2018-38, passed 9-4-2018; Am. Ord. CO-2020-08,
passed 3-17-2020; Am. Ord. CO-2020-29, passed 10-20-2020; Am. Ord. CO-2023-36,
passed 6-20-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2023-31, passed 7-11-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2023-43,
passed 10-10-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2024-05, passed 2-6-2024)
§ 117.02 LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   Designation. The President of the Board of Trustees is designated the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, for and on behalf of the Village.
   (B)   Functions; state law adopted. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner
shall be charged with the administration of the appropriate provisions of the
Illinois Liquor Control Act (235 ILCS 5/1-2 et seq.), which Act is made a part
hereof and incorporated by reference with the exception of Articles III, V, VII
(A), VIII and IX, and of such ordinances and resolutions relating to alcoholic
liquor as may be enacted by the Board of Trustees.
   (C)   Compensation of Liquor Commissioner. Effective June 1, 2009, the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner shall receive the sum of $10,000 per year payable
in bi-weekly installments for his or her services as Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
   (D)   Powers and duties. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall have
the following powers, functions, and duties with respect to local liquor
licenses:
      (1)   To grant and/or suspend for not more than 30 days or revoke for
cause all local licenses issued to persons or entities for premises within the
Village if they determine that the licensee has violated any of the provisions
of the Illinois Liquor Control Act or of any ordinance or resolution enacted by
the Board of Trustees, or any applicable rule or regulation established by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the State Commission which is not
inconsistent with law;
      (2)   To enter or authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed hereunder to determine whether any of the
provisions of the state law or Village ordinances or any rules or regulations
adopted by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or by the State Commission
have been or are being violated, and at such time to examine the premises of
the licensee in connection therewith;
      (3)   To notify the Secretary of State where a club incorporated under
the General Not For Profit Corporation Act of 1986 (805 ILCS 105/101.01 et.
seq.) or a foreign corporation functioning as a club in this state under a
certificate of authority issued under that Act has violated the Liquor Control
Act of 1934 by selling or offering for sale at retail alcoholic liquors without
a retailer’s license;
      (4)   To receive complaints from any citizen within the Village that any
of the provisions of the state law or Village ordinances have been or are being
violated and to act upon such complaints in the manner provided by law; and
      (5)   To receive local license fees and pay same to the Village
Treasurer.
   (E)   Examination of licensees and applicants. The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall have the right:
      (1)   To examine, or cause to be examined, under oath, any applicant for
a local license or for a renewal thereof, or any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation or suspension has been served, or anylicensee against whom a
citation or other disciplinary or enforcement proceeding has been instituted by
the Village, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or the State of Illinois
Liquor Control Commission;
      (2)   To examine, or cause to be examined, the books and records of any
such applicant or licensee or respondent;
      (3)   To hear testimony and take proof for their information in the
performance of their duties; and for such purposes to issue subpoenas which
shall be effective in any part of this state; and
      (4)   To order, upon the issuance of a written order, the licensed
premises closed for not more than 7 days, giving the licensee an opportunity to
be heard during that period, if the Local Liquor Control Commissioner has
reason to believe that any continued operation of a particular licensed
premises will immediately threaten the welfare of the community; except that if
such licensee shall also be engaged in the conduct of another business or
businesses on the licensed premises, such order shall not be applicable to such
other business or businesses.
      (5)   For the purposes of obtaining any of the information desired by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner under this section, they may authorize an
agent to act on their behalf.
   (F)   Records. The Village Clerk shall keep or cause to be kept a complete
record of all licenses issued by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner under
this chapter, and shall furnish the Chief of Police and Building Director with
a copy. Upon the issuance of any new license, or the revocation of any old
license, the Clerk shall give written notice of such action to the Chief of
Police and Building Director within 48 hours of being notified by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner of such action. The Village Clerk shall act as
custodian of all records for the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and shall
keep a record of all proceedings, transactions, communications and official
acts of the Commissioner, and shall perform such other duties as they may
prescribe.
   (G)   Commissioner of the Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis
Regulation and Licensing. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall also
serve as the Tobacco and Cannabis Commissioner and as chair of the Joint
Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing as prescribed
under § 129B.02 of this Code and shall have and exercise such duties and powers
granted them under the same.
(1997 Code, § 35.02) (Ord. 72-1, passed 1-13- 1972; Am. Ord. 78-10, passed 5-
25-1978; Am. Ord. CO-97-07, passed 10-9-1997; Am. Ord. C0- 03-01, passed 1-6-
2003; Am. Ord. C0-08-08, passed 3-18-2008; Am. Ord. C0-08-48, passed 11-18-
2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-
2021; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 117.03 LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSION.
   (A)   Created/membership. A Local Liquor Control Commission, having been
created by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, shall consist of the
President of the Board of Trustees as the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and
5 other persons as the President shall appoint with the advice and consent of
the Board of Trustees. The President’s appointments shall serve for a term of 1
year and shall assist the President in the exercise of the powers and in the
performance of their duties that are specified in the state statutes and/or in
this section and chapter. Persons appointed to the Local Liquor Commission by
the President may be reappointed and may serve a maximum of 3 consecutive 1-
year terms. Persons whose membership on the Local Liquor Control Commission
ended due to having served 3 consecutive 1-year terms may not be reappointed
until at least 1 year has elapsed since the conclusion of their membership on
the Commission. Members shall hold office for their designated terms and until
their successors have been appointed.
   (B)   Chairman. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall act as
chairperson for the purpose of presiding over meetings conducted by the
Commission.
   (C)   Powers/duties. The Local Liquor Control Commission shall have and
exercise the following duties as directed by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner:
      (1)   To review applications and the investigation of applicants for
liquor licenses, and to submit findings and recommendations to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner either through an oral vote or by setting forth in writing
its conclusions regarding such applications;
      (2)   To keep written records of its meetings and proceedings which shall
be open for public inspection in accordance with the Freedom of Information
Act; and
      (3)   Such other duties as determined by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
   (D)   Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing.
The members of the Local Liquor Control Commission shall also serve as the
members of the Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and
Licensing as prescribed under § 129B.01 of this Code and shall have and
exercise such duties and powers granted it under the same.
(1997 Code, § 35.31) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25- 1978; Am. Ord. CO-97-07, passed
10-9-1997; Am. Ord. CO-08-08, passed 3-18-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-
1-2022)
§ 117.04 CIVIL RIGHTS IN LICENSED PREMISES.
   No licensee licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall deny or
permit their agents and employees to deny any person full and equal enjoyment
of the accommodations, advantages, facilities and privileges of any premises in
which alcoholic liquor is authorized to be sold subject only to the conditions
and limitations established by law and applicable alike to all citizens.
(1997 Code, § 35.32) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25- 1978)
LICENSE REQUIREMENTS
§ 117.20 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail in the Village any
alcoholic liquor without having a retail liquor dealer’s license, or in
violation of the terms of such license, or this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 35.03) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.21 APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner of the Village, in writing, and under oath on forms
provided by the Village Clerk.
      (2)   The following persons are required to file a completed Liquor
License Application with the Village Clerk: any applicant seeking issuance of a
new license, any applicant seeking to renew an existing liquor license, or any
person seeking to acquire ownership in an entity currently possessing a valid
liquor license.
   (B)   Except for temporary liquor license applications (Class C and E
licenses), the Village Clerk shall schedule a public hearing before the Liquor
Control Commission on each completed application for liquor license that seeks
the issuance of a license for premises for which no liquor license of the same
class has been issued within the preceding 1 year or for each completed
application by a prospective new licensee for premises which already has a
current liquor license.
      (1)   The applicant for a liquor license that is subject to a public
hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commission must give written notice to all
occupants of properties within 350 feet of the lot line of the premises for
which the license is sought, of the date, time, place and purpose of the
hearing. The notice shall also state the name of the applicant, the address of
the premises for which the applicant is seeking to have a liquor license
issued, the type of liquor license applied for and the hours during which it is
proposed that liquor will be sold on the premises if a license is issued. At
least 5 days prior to the meeting date, the notices shall be mailed or
personally delivered by the applicant in envelopes to the "current owner/
occupant" at each common property address, as assigned by the United State
Postal Service, located within 350 feet of the lot line of the premises for
which the license is sought. At the hearing, the applicant shall be required to
provide an affidavit of delivery as evidence that they complied with the above
notice provisions.
      (2)   The Liquor Commissioner may, in their discretion, waive Local
Liquor Control Commission review of applications for a temporary liquor license
(Class C and E licenses). If such review is not waived, the temporary license
shall be considered at a meeting of the Local Liquor Commission. For Class C
and Class E temporary license applications where review is not waived, notice
of the meeting at which the application shall be considered by the Local Liquor
Control Commission shall be provided as set forth in §
117.23.
   (C)   The applicant for a license hereunder, and all persons they propose to
use or uses as managers and bartenders, shall be fingerprinted, and a complete
set of fingerprints maintained on file with the Police Department.
   (D)   As part of the application process, the applicant shall be required to
execute a sufficient number of "personal inquiry waiver" forms so as to allow
the Liquor Commissioner to obtain information about the applicant, and
information about businesses located outside the Village in which the applicant
has an interest, from other jurisdictions and law enforcement agencies.
   (E)   The Village Clerk shall maintain a Liquor License Application
Checklist to aid in processing of application. Upon receipt of a liquor license
application, the Village Clerk shall complete the Clerk’s portion of the Liquor
License Application Approval Checklist and then circulate the Checklist to the
Finance Director, Police Chief, Building/Zoning Officer, and the Fire Chief or
Fire Inspector, who shall verify whether or not the Applicant and the premises
are in compliance with the Village’s liquor license regulations found at
Chapter 117 (Alcoholic Beverages) and the business license regulations found at
Chapter 110 (Business Licenses). The Police Chief will perform a background
check on the applicant and the Department Directors will perform compliance
reviews. After completion, the Checklist will be returned to the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner and the Local Liquor Control Commission for further action
on the application.
(1997 Code, § 35.04) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25- 1978; Am. Ord. 84-48, passed 12-
27-1984; Am. Ord. CO-97-07, passed 10-9-1997; Am. Ord. CO-03-01, passed 1-6-
2003; Am. Ord. CO-2010- 25, passed 12-21-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2015-16, passed 5-
19-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2016-20, passed 9-20-2016; Am. Ord. 2017-37, passed 10-3-
2017; Am. Ord. CO-2023-29, passed 7-11-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2023-32, passed 8-8-
2023)
§ 117.22 RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSES.
   No Village liquor license shall be issued to:
   (A)   A person who is not a resident of the Village;
   (B)   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community
in which they reside;
   (C)   A person who is not a citizen of the United States;
   (D)   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or state
law, if the Local Liquor Control Commissioner determines, after investigation,
that such person has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public
trust;
   (E)   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame;
   (F)   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency or morality;
   (G)   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;
   (H)   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
   (I)   A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co-partnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license;
   (J)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock
of such corporation, or a limited liability company, if any member owning more
than 5% of the aggregate ownership interest in such limited liability company,
would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason other than
citizenship and residence within the Village.
   (K)   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois Business Corporation
Act to transact business in Illinois;
   (L)   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the
licensee;
   (M)   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or shall
have forfeited their bond to appear in court to answer charges for any such
violation;
   (N)   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued;
   (O)   Any full-time employee or officer of the Village, including members of
the Local Liquor Control Commission, the Village President, members of the
Board of Trustees, any members of either the Plan Commission, the Zoning Board
of Appeals and the Board of Fire and Police Commissioners, and no such
employee, member or official shall be interested in any way, either directly or
indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquors;
provided, however, the restrictions of this division (O) of this section shall
not apply to either the Village Clerk, or to Class E licenses as long as the
employee or official of the Village is not financially interested in the sale
or distribution of the alcoholic liquor;
   (P)   Any applicant who fails to obtain a state liquor license;
   (Q)   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee;
   (R)   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by
Section 28-1 of the Criminal Code of 1961, subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11),
(720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(3) - (a)(11)), or as prescribed by Section 28-1.1 or 28- 3
of the Criminal Code of 1961, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or as
prescribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions,
or any person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as prescribed by an
ordinance of the Village;
   (S)   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax period;
   (T)   A co-partnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period, or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device
stamp or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax
period;
   (U)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such
corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering
stamp for the current tax period;
   (V)   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period.
(1997 Code, § 35.05) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25- 1978; Am. Ord. CO-03-01, passed
1-6-2003; Am. Ord. CO-08-08, passed 3-18-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2010-25, passed 12-
21-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2024-46, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 117.23 CLASSIFICATIONS; FEES; NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   There shall be the following classes of licenses with an annual license fee
as indicated.
   (A)   Class A (full service restaurant) license.
      (1)   A restaurant license authorizes the retail sale, on the premises
specified, of alcoholic liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises.
      (2)   Service of alcoholic liquor shall be only during the time that
meals are being served or a menu is in effect.
      (3)   There may be a patron bar or a service bar within the licensed
premises.
      (4)   No holder of a Class A liquor license shall require a person to pay
a cover charge or any other type or form of admission fee in order to be able
to enter the premises for which the license was issued.
      (5)   All Class A liquor licensees shall have available on the licensed
premises seating for not less than 100 persons at all times during which liquor
is served.
      (6)   Class A liquor licenses shall be issued only to hotels or
restaurants which have regular dining facilities with a floor area of not less
than 1,200 square feet. No part of this required floor area may be satisfied by
basement dining facilities.
      (7)   The annual fee for a Class A liquor license shall be:
         (a)   Regular closing hours, $2,100.
         (b)   Extended closing hours, $2,400.
      (8)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
      (9)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
      (10)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements of
§
117.57 below, as applicable.
   (A-1)   Class A-1 (full service restaurant with video gaming) license.
      (1)   A Class A-l full service restaurant with video gaming license shall
authorize the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor by
the drink for consumption on the premises, and for video gaming in compliance
with the following:
         (a)   The licensee must meet all of the requirements for a Class A
liquor license set forth above.
         (b)   Consumption of alcoholic liquor is allowed in the entire
licensed premises, but there shall be a designated gaming area in the full
service restaurant where the video terminals are located, separate from tables
meant for food service.
         (c)   Alcoholic liquor shall be sold and served only during the
permitted service hours for Class A full service restaurants set forth in §
117.41 below. The operation of video gaming terminals shall not be permitted
during the hours alcoholic liquor sales are prohibited.
         (d)   A Class A-l licensee must have a video gaming license issued by
the Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with the provisions of the Video Gaming
Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., and shall comply at all times with all provisions
of the Illinois Video Gaming Act and all rules, regulations and restrictions
imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board, as well as the requirements in Chapter
125 of this Code. A failure to maintain a video gaming license in good standing
shall result in the immediate suspension of the Class A-l liquor license.
      (2)   The annual fee for a Class A-l license shall be:
         (a)   Regular closing hours: $3,100.
         (b)   Extended closing hours: $3,400.
   (B)   Class B (package store) licenses.
      (1)   Authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of alcoholic
liquor in its original package, not for consumption on the premises.
      (2)   (a)   Such licenses shall be available only for the following types
of premises:
            1. Grocery stores occupying a minimum of 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area (GFA) (GFA means the total building footprint including retail
sales area, interior bathrooms, storage areas and cashier areas) and offering a
full line of groceries, fresh meats, dairy products, vegetables, fruits and
packaged frozen goods;
            2.   Drug stores, if the drugstore is operated in conjunction with,
and shares a common entrance with, a grocery store which meets the requirements
of division (2)(a)1. above, and the grocery and drug store together occupy a
minimum of 15,000 square feet of GFA; and
            3.   Alcoholic liquor stores occupying a minimum of 10,000 square
feet of GFA.
         (b)   In the case of either division (2)(a)1. or 2. above, the portion
or portions of the premises devoted to the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be no
larger than 10% of the total retail floor space of the premises.
         (c)   If the sale of alcoholic liquor is conducted on premises which
are utilized primarily for other retail sales activity, the sale of liquor
shall be confined to an area which is separated from the other retail portions
of the premises by a suitable enclosure or partition, the design and
construction of same to be approved by the Liquor Control Commissioner.
         (d)   Class B liquor licenses in effect on March 31, 2008, that do not
meet the square footage or other requirements set forth in this division may
only be renewed by the current licensee provided that the licensee and licensed
premises complies with all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and
regulations relative to operation of the licensed establishment, except for the
square footage requirements set forth in this division. In order to qualify to
be considered for the issuance of a new Class B liquor license, the applicant
shall own, lease or otherwise control premises which conform to the above
square footage requirements and the other applicable provisions of the Village
Code, including the Liquor Code.
         (e)   Notwithstanding the limitations set forth above, an existing
Class B liquor license holder may retain and renew their existing license in
circumstances where the Class B licensed premises of less than 10,000 square
feet are expanded through land acquisition or a building addition in order to
create an expanded retail footprint through the incorporation of new retail
floor space into the existing Class B licensed premises.
      (3)   The annual fee for a Class B license shall be as follows:
      Class B liquor license under subsection (B)(2)(a)(1):   $5,000
      Class B liquor license under Subsection (B)(2)(a)(2):   $5,000
      Class B liquor license under Subsection (B)(2)(a)(3):   $10,000
      Class B liquor license under Subsection (B)(2)(d):   $10,000
      (4)   Consumption of liquor and the possession of open liquor on the
premises of package stores holding a Class B liquor license are prohibited. As
a condition to obtaining and maintaining a Class B liquor license, each
licensee is responsible for the licensed premises being monitored for open
liquor and consumption on the premises. Where it is found that open alcohol is
present or the consumption of liquor is occurring or has occurred on any
portion of the licensed premises, including but not limited to the parking lot
or within the interior of the store, the licensee is subject to citation under
this division and shall be subject to all penalties provided in §
117.99, including but not limited to monetary fines and suspension or
revocation of the liquor license.
      (5)   Effective October 1, 2004, as a condition to obtaining or
maintaining a Class B liquor license, Class B liquor licensees are required to
install and operate a video and audio surveillance system within the licensed
store premises which shall record the activities within all parts of the
licensed store premises and shall function during all operating hours. In the
alternative, such licensees may maintain a security guard on the licensed
premises during all operating hours, whose duties shall include ensuring that
no loitering or consumption of alcohol occurs on the licensed premises. A Class
B liquor licensee who fails to maintain a security guard or video and audio
surveillance system on and after October 1, 2004, as required by this division
shall be subject to citation and to all penalties provided in §
117.99, including but not limited to monetary fines and suspension or
revocation of their liquor license.
      (6)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 (Hours of Operation) below.
      (7)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 (BASSET Training) below.
      (8)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements of §
117.57 below, as applicable.
   (C)   Class C (temporary special event - for non-Village property) license.
Authorizes the retail sale and dispensing of alcoholic liquor (beer, wine and
spirits) for consumption on the licensed premises where sold at a special event
that is conducted by or sponsored by a qualified educational, fraternal,
political, civic, religious or other not for profit organization or for profit
organization. For any such special event, the retail sale and dispensing of
alcoholic liquor and the consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be allowed in an
alcoholic beverage tent or alcoholic beverage sales/consumption area, subject
to the approval of the President and Board of Trustees and the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner. A special event liquor license is not required for a
private event on private property where the event is not open to the public and
where there is no retail sale of alcoholic liquor. The payment of any type of
charge, fee or requirement of a donation to attend a special event where any
portion of the charge, fee or donation relates to the purchase of alcoholic
liquor to be consumed by the attendee is a retail sale transaction and requires
the issuance of a Class C liquor license. A Class C liquor license, if
approved, shall be subject to each of the appropriate conditions required by
the President and Board of Trustees of the Village in an ordinance approving
the creation and issuance of such a liquor license, the approval and issuance
of the liquor license by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and the
following conditions:
      (1)   Fee. The fee for a Class C liquor license shall be $75 for each
authorized special event.
      (2)   Pre-application review. In order to determine whether a Class C
liquor license is required for a particular special event, prior to submitting
an application, the prospective applicant may send a pre-application letter to
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner requesting a determination of whether the
proposed special event requires the issuance of a Class C liquor license. The
pre-application letter shall contain sufficient facts regarding the special
event that will allow the Local Liquor Control Commissioner to evaluate whether
the special event will involve the retail sale of alcohol. The Local Liquor
Control Commissioner may request additional information from the prospective
applicant and may request a meeting with the applicant to discuss the matter in
more detail or to inspect the proposed special event site. The Local Liquor
Control Commissioner's determination relative to any special event shall be
made on a case by case basis and shall be limited to that particular special
event as described in the pre-application letter. A decision by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner that a Class C liquor license is required for a
special event is not an approval of a Class C liquor license. The decision by
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner that a liquor license is not required for
a special event may be reviewed and changed in the future by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, or his/her successor, based on facts that show the
special event involves the retail sale of alcohol.
      (3)   A Class C liquor license shall be authorized for not more than 2
consecutive days.
      (4)   The applicant shall provide a diagram that proposes the size,
internal setup and location of an alcoholic beverage tent or an alcoholic
beverage sales/consumption area to be operated during the special event as part
of its application. The size, internal setup and location of an alcoholic
beverage tent or an alcoholic beverage sales/consumption area shall be approved
by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, in his or her sole discretion.
      (5)   Consumption. Consumption of alcoholic liquor is restricted to the
licensed premises.
      (6)   Package sales prohibited; no pitchers. No package sales shall be
permitted. The sale or giving away of alcoholic liquor in pitchers is
prohibited.
      (7)   Sales limitation per person. No more than 2 servings of alcoholic
liquor shall be sold to any person during each retail sales transaction or
dispensed to any person at 1 time.
      (8)   Approval of location; approved containers. At indoor special
events, alcoholic liquor may be sold and served in glass bottles, glassware or
paper or plastic cups. At outdoor special events, alcoholic liquor shall be
sold and served in paper or plastic cups at retail in an alcoholic beverage
tent or alcoholic beverage sales/consumption area, the size, internal setup,
fence requirements and location of which shall be subject to the approval of
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
      (9)   Security; outdoor alcoholic beverage tent. An outdoor alcoholic
beverage tent or alcoholic beverage sales/consumption area shall have
designated entrance and exit points for patrons and minors shall be prohibited
from entering into the alcoholic beverage tent. During hours of operation, an
outdoor alcoholic beverage tent or alcoholic beverage sales/consumption area
shall have at least 1 person over the age of 21 posted at each designated
entrance and exit point to check state or government issued identification of
patrons.
      (10)   Security; alcoholic beverage sales/ consumption area. If there is
a dedicated alcoholic beverage sales/consumption area open to the general
public, proper security measures, such as color coded wristbands, shall be used
to designate minors and adults who enter the alcoholic beverage sales/
consumption area.
      (11)   Music. Amplified music or live music or other forms of music
entertainment at an outdoor special event shall be approved and regulated by
the President and Board of Trustees of the Village in an ordinance approving
the creation and issuance of such a liquor license and the approval by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
      (12)   Signage. The posting of advertising signs that relate to the sale
of any type of alcoholic liquor shall be prohibited, except for signs, located
within the alcoholic beverage tent or alcoholic beverage sales/consumption area
and approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, that identify the
alcoholic liquor being offered for retail sale.
      (13)   Residency. At least 1 officer or member of the for profit
organization or not for profit organization to which such license is issued
must be a resident of the Village and must sign the local liquor license
application.
      (14)   Number of events. Subject to the approval of the President and
Board of Trustees and the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, an applicant may
be authorized to conduct more than 1 special event under the issuance of a
single Class C liquor license in any 1 calendar year.
      (15)   State and village licenses. Prior to conducting the special event,
the holder of a Class C liquor license must provide to the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner evidence of all required state and Village licenses, including a
state special event liquor license or similar approval.
      (16)   Duration of special event license. The Class C liquor license
issued for each special event shall be valid and in effect for a maximum of 2
consecutive days. The number of days shall be subject to approval by the
President and Board of Trustees of the Village as contained in the ordinances
approving the creation and issuance of such a liquor license, and the further
approval and issuance of the liquor license by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
      (17)   Application process. At least 45 days prior to the special event
date, the applicant shall file with the Village Manager a completed
application, site plan or diagram, undergo fingerprinting and a background
check conducted by the Police Department, pay the nonrefundable application fee
and provide a current price quote for the insurance coverage as required by §
117.57 below. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner can grant a waiver of the
45-day period for good cause shown. Payment of the liquor license fee, delivery
of the final certificate of insurance to the Village Manager and satisfying
each precondition set forth in the ordinance that creates a liquor license for
the applicant must be completed prior to the issuance of the liquor license.
      (18)   Compliance with other laws. The operation of the special event
shall comply with state and village fire and health code regulations,
accessibility laws and regulations and all other applicable provisions of
federal, state or county law and this Code.
      (19)   Revocation. A Class C liquor license issued to an applicant for 1
or more special events in a calendar year may be revoked by action of the
Village Board at any time with 30 days written notice or immediately by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner in the event of a violation of the liquor
control ordinance or any of the provisions of the ordinance creating the liquor
license for issuance to the applicant.
      (20)   Charges for additional municipal services. The Village reserves
the right to charge the applicant for special municipal services, such as
police, fire and public works personnel and services, which are necessary to
protect the health, welfare and safety of the public and those individuals who
attend the special event.
      (21)   Notification of application. Unless such review is waived by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, the Village will, upon receipt of an
application for a Class C liquor license, advise an applicant of the date the
application shall be considered by the Local Liquor Control Commission. The
applicant shall then send written notice by first class United States mail of
the Local Liquor Control Commission hearing to be held to consider the
application to those property addresses located within 100 feet of the location
of the proposed special event. The notice shall contain the date, time and
place of the Local Liquor Control Commission hearing and a brief description of
the application. A copy of the agenda for the Local Liquor Control Commission
hearing shall be a sufficient notice. At least 10 days prior to the hearing
date, the notices shall be mailed in envelopes addressed to the occupants of
properties within 100 feet of the proposed special event location.
      (22)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
      (23)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
      (24)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements of
§
117.57 below, as applicable.
   (D)   Class D (private club) license.
      (1)   There shall be licenses available for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor:
         (a)   For consumption on the premises; and
         (b)   In the original package not for consumption on the premises, by
a lodge, fraternal order, club or other association of a kindred kind which has
been issued a charter from the Secretary of the State of the State of Illinois
as an Illinois not for profit corporation and which has been active and in
continuous existence for at least a period of 1 year and which has 25 or more
members at least 50% of whom are residents of the Village. In addition, the
applicant organization must have as one of its principal purposes the raising
of funds for charity or the provision of volunteer services to governmental or
community organizations.
      (2)   All Class D licensees must provide the Liquor Control Commission
with a current list of all members of the organization to which the license was
issued. A current membership list must also be kept on file at the licensed
premises.
      (3)   All members of an organization which has been issued a Class D
license shall be required to carry an identification card which identifies them
as a member of the organization and to produce said identification card at the
request of any Village police officer during all times that they are on the
licensed premises.
      (4)   The minimum annual fee for membership in an organization holding a
Class D club liquor license shall be $15.
      (5)   (a)   Except for special events no non-member of an organization
which has been issued a Class D license shall be admitted to the licensed
premises unless they are accompanied by a member. No member may bring more than
6 non-members with them onto the licensed premises.
         (b)   A CLUB-RELATED SPECIAL EVENT shall be defined as any occasion
upon which persons, including members, are required to pay an admission fee in
order to enter the licensed premises.
         (c)   No Class D licensee shall conduct more than 2 special events in
any 1 calendar week.
      (6)   Each application for a club liquor license shall be accompanied by
a statement in writing of the principal officer of the applicant, stating that
the particular club, lodge, order or association has a membership which is
nonexclusive in terms of any protected class of people under the local, state,
county or federal anti-discrimination laws.
      (7)   Each Class D licensee as a condition for renewal of their license
shall be required to provide the Liquor Control Commissioner with proof
satisfactory to the Commission of its civic community and charitable
involvement.
      (8)   The annual fee for a Class D license shall be $1,250.
      (9)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
      (10)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
      (11)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements of
§
117.57 below, as applicable
   (E)   Class E (temporary special event on village-owned property) license.
      (1)   Authorizes the sale or transfer of alcoholic liquor on municipally
owned property for consumption purposes on the licensed premises only which is
now or may in the future be designated for public use during wedding receptions
and other social events except events where the prospective attendees are
predominantly youth, such as coming out parties. No alcoholic liquor shall be
sold or transferred on municipally owned property for any event unless a Class
E liquor license has been issued which authorizes the sale or transfer.
      (2)   A Class E liquor license shall be issued on a day-to-day basis but
for not more than 7 consecutive days.
      (3)   No more than 2 such licenses shall be issued to allow the sale or
transfer of liquor during the same time period. The hours for the sale of
alcoholic liquor pursuant to such license shall be as determined by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner at the time of the issuance of such license.
      (4)   The fee for a Class E license shall be $125 per day.
      (5)   The applicant shall be required to comply with divisions (2)
through (24) of the regulations set forth under the division (C) above, Class C
(temporary special event for non-village-owned property) liquor license
regulations. For purposes of applying for a Class E liquor license, all
references to a Class C liquor license under the above-mentioned divisions (2)
through (24) shall be read as Class E liquor license.
   (F)   Class F (special event space) license.
      (1)   There shall be licenses available for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises in conjunction with the service and
consumption of complete meals only by corporations or individuals who operate
special event spaces.
      (2)   Special event spaces are defined in §
117.01 (Definitions) above.
      (3)   Class F licensees may serve and allow consumption of alcoholic
liquor only at those functions during the time period when the licensee or
other food provider for the function is also serving meals. The service and
consumption of alcoholic liquor by a Class F licensee shall at all times be
incidental or complementary to the service of meals, and if the kitchen is
closed or no meals are being served or available to be served, then no
alcoholic liquor can be sold, served or consumed on the licensed premises.
      (4)   Alcoholic liquor may be served by the licensee or their agents or
wait staff or from 1 more temporary patron bars or from a temporary patron bar
or service bar.
      (5)   The annual fee for a Class F license shall be:
         (a)   Regular closing hours - $1,000.
         (b)   Extended closing hours - $1,300.
      (6)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
      (7)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
      (8)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements of §
117.57 below, as applicable.
      (9)   Live entertainment events shall be subject to the regulations and
permitting requirements set forth in §
111.36 of this Code.
      (10)   Subclass F-1 (Special Event Space/Limited Restaurant) Liquor
License Designation:
         (a)   The Subclass F-l designation is an add-on to a Class F license.
         (b)   Subject to the annual fee discount provided by §
117.26(B) below, the annual fee for the Subclass F-1 designation, which is in
addition to the annual fee for the Class F license, shall be:
            1.   Regular closing hours: $1,250.
            2.   Extended closing hours: $2,000.
         (c)   While operating the special event space, the holder of a
Subclass F-1 liquor license designation shall comply with all applicable Class
F license regulations and all conditions of their Class F license.
         (d)   The following regulations shall apply to the operation of the
limited restaurant under this Subclass F-1 designation:
            1.   Retail sale, on the authorized premises, of alcoholic liquor
(beer, wine, spirits and other alcoholic liquor) by the drink for consumption
only the licensed premises is permitted.
            2.   Any type of restaurant, including a limited food service
restaurant, as defined in §
117.01 (Definitions), may be operated.
            3.   No alcoholic liquor can be sold, served or consumed on the
licensed premises as part of the restaurant operation, if the on-site kitchen
is not open and serving complete meals or if meals are not otherwise being
served or available to be served on the licensed premises by another restaurant
or a food truck or a caterer. Consumption of alcohol liquor shall only be
allowed where the patron has ordered and is waiting for food or is in the
process of consuming food.
            4.   A patron bar or a service bar may be located within the
licensed premises.
            5.   Beer, wine and spirits shall not be sold in pitchers.
            6.   No package sales shall be permitted.
            7.   Billiards and/or pool tables or mechanical/electrical
amusement devices, as defined and regulated in §
114.07 (Coin And Non-Coin Operated Amusement Devices), §
114.08 (Music Devices) and Chapter 125 (Video Gaming) of the Village Code or
Illinois state law, shall be permitted on the licensed premises, including
sports-related electronic video devices or video simulators and internet music
stations and jukeboxes, provided that the devices or simulators are maintained
in a separate area or room from the dining area or bar area, provided the
licensee complies with the Village mechanical/electrical amusement device
licensing requirements. Video gaming terminals, as regulated by the Illinois
Video Gaming Act (235 ILCS 5/6-33) and
Chapter 125 (Video Gaming) of this Code, may be operated on the licensed
premises, provided the licensee complies with required state and Village
licensing requirements.
         8.   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
         9.   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers
education and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
         10.   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements
of §
117.57 below, as applicable.
         11.   Live entertainment events are allowed, subject to the
regulations and permitting requirements set forth in §
111.36 of this Code.
         12.   All conditions required by the corporate authorities of the
Village as part of the approval of an ordinance amending the current Class F
license to allow the add-on of the Subclass F-1 designation.
      (11)   Subclass F-2 (Special Event Space/Outdoor Liquor Café) Liquor
License Designation:
         (a)   The Subclass F-2 designation is an add-on to a Class F license.
         (b)   Subject to the annual fee discount provided by §
117.26(B) below, if applicable, the annual fee for the Subclass F-
2 designation, which is in addition to the annual fee for the Class F license,
shall be: $300.
         (c)   While operating the special event space, the holder of a
Subclass F-2 designation shall comply with all applicable Class F license
regulations and all conditions of their Class F license.
         (d)   The following regulations shall apply to the operation of the
Outdoor Liquor Café under this Subclass F-2 designation:
            1.   Each of the regulations of §
117.23(J) applicable to outdoor liquor cafes.
            2.   No alcoholic liquor can be sold, served or consumed on the
licensed premises as part of the outdoor liquor café operation, if the on-site
kitchen is not open and serving complete meals or if meals are not otherwise
being served or available to be served on the licensed premises by another
restaurant or a food truck or a caterer. Consumption of alcohol liquor shall
only be allowed where the patron has ordered and is waiting for food or is in
the process of consuming food.
            3.   Live entertainment events are allowed, subject to the
regulations and permitting requirements set forth in §
111.36 of this Code.
         (e)   All conditions required by the corporate authorities of the
Village as part of the approval of an ordinance amending the current Class F
license to allow the add-on of the Subclass F-2 designation.
   (G)   Class G (full service restaurant - beer and wine only) license.
      (1)   A Class G license authorizes the retail sale on the premises
specified in the license of wine and beer by the drink for consumption on the
premises and authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of wine and
beer in its original package, not for consumption on the premises when the
purchase of the wine and beer is incidental to the purchase from the licensee
of a meal costing not less than $5 by the person who is purchasing the beer and
wine.
      (2)   Wine and beer shall be sold and served by a Class G licensee only
during the time that meals are being served.
      (3)   There may be a patron bar or a service bar within the licensed
premises.
      (4)   No person shall be served alcoholic liquor on the premises of a
Class G licensee for consumption on the premises unless that person is sitting
at a table or a booth.
      (5)   No Class G liquor licensee shall require a person to pay a cover
charge or any other type of form of admission fee in order to be able to enter
the premises for which the license was issued.
      (6)   All Class G liquor licensees shall have available on the licensed
premises, seating for not less than 50 persons at all times during which liquor
is served.
      (7)   Class G liquor licenses shall be issued only to restaurants which
have regular dining facilities with a floor area of not less than 600 square
feet. No part of this required floor area may be satisfied by basement dining
facilities.
      (8)   The annual fee for a Class G license shall be:
         (a)   Regular closing hours - $1,600.
         (b)   Extended closing hours - $1,900
      (9)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
      (10)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.29 below.
      (11)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements of
§
117.57 below, as applicable.
   (H)   Class H (limited service restaurant; beer and wine only) license.
      (1)   A Class H license shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine
only in a limited service restaurant for consumption only within the licensed
premises. Beer and wine shall be served as an adjunct to food service at the
restaurant. There may be a patron bar or service bar within the licensed
premises.
      (2)   A Class H license shall be subject to all of the following
conditions and such other appropriate conditions required by the corporate
authorities of the Village in an ordinance approving the creation and issuance
of such a liquor license:
         (a)   Consumption of beer, wine and nonalcoholic liquor is restricted
to the dining area of the restaurant and the licensed premises.
         (b)   Beer and wine shall not be sold in pitchers.
         (c)   No package sales shall be permitted.
         (d)   No billiard and/or pool tables or mechanical/electrical
amusement devices, as defined in the Village Code or Illinois state law shall
be permitted on the licensed premises.
         (e)   Wine and beer shall be sold and served by a Class H licensee
only during the time that meals are being served.
      (3)   The annual fee for a Class H license shall be:
         (a)   Regular closing hours - $1,250.
         (b)   Extended closing hours - $1,550.
      (4)   No Class H liquor licensee shall require a person to pay a cover
charge or any other type of form of admission fee in order to be able to enter
the premises for which the license was issued.
      (5)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
      (6)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
      (7)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements of §
117.57 below, as applicable.
   (I)   Class I (package store - beer and wine only) license.
      (1)   Authorizes the retail sale, on the premises specified, of beer and
wine only in its original package, not for consumption on the premises. No sale
of single cans or bottles of beer. Beer may be sold in 6-packs or by the case.
Wine bottles that are at least 750 ML in size may be sold by the bottle or by
the case.
      (2)   (a)   Such licenses shall be available only for the following types
of premises:
            1.   Grocery stores occupying a minimum of 6,100 square feet of
gross floor area (GFA) (GFA means the total building footprint including retail
sales area, interior bathrooms, storage areas and cashier areas);
            2.    Drug stores occupying a minimum of 3,200 square feet of GFA;
and
            3.    Convenience stores, as defined in §
117.01 of this Code, occupying a minimum of 3,200 square feet of GFA.
CONVENIENCE STORE means a retail store engaged  primarily in the retail sale of
convenience items, i.e., consumer and household items, including the following
types of food, articles and other products: bread, milk, cheese, sliced or pre-
packaged meats, pre-packaged canned and bottled foods and drinks, tobacco
products, beer or wine, candy, papers and magazines, sandwiches for off-
premises consumption, and various other consumer and household items. These
stores may be part of a gas station or an independent facility.
         (b)   The portion or portions of the premises devoted to the sale of
alcoholic liquor shall be no larger than 10% of the total retail floor space of
the premises.
         (c)   The sale of liquor shall be confined to an area which is
separated from the other retail portions of the premises by a suitable
enclosure or partition, the design and construction of same to be approved by
the Liquor Control Commissioner.
      (3)   The annual fee for a Class I license shall be $2,500.
      (4)   Consumption of liquor and the possession of open liquor on the
premises of package stores holding a Class I liquor license are prohibited. As
a condition to obtaining and maintaining a Class I liquor license, each
licensee is responsible for the licensed premises being monitored for open
liquor and consumption on the premises. Where it is found that open alcohol is
present or the consumption of liquor is occurring or has occurred on any
portion of the licensed premises, including but not limited to the parking lot
or within the interior of the store, the licensee is subject to citation under
this division and shall be subject to all penalties provided in §
117.99, including but not limited to monetary fines and suspension or
revocation of the liquor license.
      (5)   As a condition to obtaining or maintaining a Class I liquor
license, Class I liquor licensees are required to install and operate a video
and audio surveillance system within the licensed store premises which shall
record the activities within all parts of the licensed store premises and shall
function during all operating hours. In the alternative, such licensees may
maintain a security guard on the licensed premises during all operating hours,
whose duties shall include ensuring that no loitering or consumption of alcohol
occurs on the licensed premises. A Class I liquor licensee who fails to
maintain a security guard or video and audio surveillance system as required by
this division shall be subject to citation and to all penalties provided in §
117.99, including but not limited to monetary fines and suspension or
revocation of their liquor license.
      (6)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
      (7)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of subsection §
117.28 below.
      (8)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements of §
117.57 below, as applicable.
   (J)   Class J (outdoor liquor café) license. A Class J liquor license shall
authorize restaurants to permit the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages
within a Village-licensed outdoor liquor café operated by the restaurant while
patrons are being served a complete meal by the restaurant, subject to the
following conditions and such other conditions required by the President and
Board of Trustees of the Village in an ordinance approving the creation and
issuance of such a liquor license:
      (1)   Consumption of alcoholic beverages is restricted to the licensed
premises, which shall be an outdoor dining area, as defined in § 17.4 of the
Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Maywood, that has received a Village-issued
business license issued pursuant to the Village Code. The Village Board and
Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall approve the location and layout of the
outdoor liquor café as part of the approval of an ordinance creating the liquor
license to be issued to a particular applicant.
      (2)   The outdoor liquor café shall be subject to the rules of operation
set forth in subsection 11.3(P) of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of
Maywood. In addition, the location, layout and operation of an outdoor liquor
café shall be subject to the conditions set forth in the ordinance creating a
Class J liquor license and such other rules or conditions relating to the
service and consumption of alcoholic beverages as set forth in writing and
required by the Village Board and Local Liquor Control Commissioner, including
restrictions on noise, music, screening, etc.
      (3)   A Class J license shall only be granted to a licensee who holds
another Village-issued restaurant related liquor license and is in good
standing under the terms of the license. Portions of the application submittal
including background check may be waived for the licensee by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner.
      (4)   The annual fee for a Class J liquor license shall be $300.
      (5)   No package sales shall be permitted under this license. The sale of
beer, wine, spirits or other alcoholic beverages (e.g., wine coolers, spirits,
prepared mixed drinks, etc.) in kegs or pitchers is prohibited.
      (6)   No billiard and/or pool tables or mechanical/electrical amusement
devices as defined in this Village Code shall be permitted on the licensed
premises.
      (7)   Patrons are prohibited from taking any opened alcoholic beverage
outside of the licensed premises, except for a recorked wine bottle that has
been sealed in a carryout bag in accordance with state law (see 235 ILCS 5/6-
33).
      (8)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
      (9)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
   (K)   Class K (caterer) license. It shall be unlawful for any caterer that
maintains its principal place of business within the Village to sell, offer for
sale, or provide any alcoholic liquor within the Village unless such caterer
has a current, valid caterer’s liquor license. A Class K license permits the
retail sale of alcoholic liquor in conjunction with the service of food by
caterers with a place of business within the Village limits for catered events
conducted inside or outside of the Village corporate limits. The sale of
alcoholic liquor may be made in bulk to the person holding the event or the
sale of alcoholic liquor may be made to the person holding the event in
individual servings only for immediate consumption on premises other than that
of the licensee, provided that the licensee has been hired to serve food to a
group of people attending the catered event by invitation or by ticket. If the
holder of the event wants to operate a cash bar for retail sales of alcohol,
then he or she must apply for a Class C (temporary special event-for non
village-owned property) license. The annual fee for such license shall be
$1,000, unless fewer than 35 events are catered within the licensing year, in
which case the annual fee shall be $750. The licensee shall comply with the
following additional regulations:
      (1)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
      (2)   No package sales shall be permitted under this license. The sale of
beer, wine, spirits or other alcoholic beverages (e.g., wine coolers, spirits,
prepared mixed drinks, etc.) in kegs or pitchers is prohibited.
      (3)   Patrons are prohibited from taking any opened alcoholic beverage
outside of the premises, except for a recorked wine bottle that has been sealed
in a carryout bag in accordance with state law (235 ILCS 5/6-33).
      (4)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
   (L)   Class L (limited service restaurant operated at recreational facility)
license.
      (1)   A Class L license shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor in a limited service restaurant located at a recreational facility for
consumption only within the licensed premises. Alcoholic liquor shall be served
as an adjunct to food service at the restaurant. There may be a patron bar or
service bar within or on the licensed premises.
      (2)   A Class L license shall be subject to all of the following
conditions and such other appropriate conditions required by the corporate
authorities of the Village in an ordinance approving the creation and issuance
of such a liquor license:
         (a)   Consumption of alcoholic liquor is restricted to the dining area
of the restaurant and the licensed premises.
         (b)   Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold in pitchers.
         (c)   No package sales shall be permitted.
         (d)   No billiard and/or pool tables or mechanical/electrical
amusement devices, as defined in the Village Code or Illinois state law shall
be permitted on the licensed premises, except for sports-related electronic
video devices or video simulators provided that the devices or simulators are
maintained in a separate room from the bar area.
         (e)   Alcoholic liquor shall be sold and served by a Class L licensee
only during the time that meals are being served.
      (5)   The annual fee for a Class L license shall be:
         (a)   Regular closing hours - $1,550.
         (b)   Extended closing hours - $1,850.
      (6)   No Class L liquor licensee shall require a person to pay a cover
charge or any other type of form of admission fee in order to be able to enter
the premises for which the license was issued.
      (7)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
      (8)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
      (9)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements of §
117.57 below, as applicable.
   (M)   Class M (video gaming cafe/bistro) license.
      (1)   A Class M license shall authorize the retail sale of beer and wine
only in a video gaming cafe/bistro. Beer and wine shall be served as an adjunct
to café fare as specified in the definition of video gaming cafe/bistro above
in §
117.01.
      (2)   A Class M license shall be subject to all of the following
conditions and such other appropriate conditions required by the corporate
authorities of the Village in an ordinance approving the creation and issuance
of such a liquor license:
         (a)   Consumption of beer and wine is allowed in the entire licensed
premises, but there shall be a designated gaming area in the cafe/bistro where
the video terminals are located, separate from tables meant for food service
and consumption of cafe/bistro fare.
         (b)   Beer and wine shall not be sold in pitchers.
         (c)   No package sales shall be permitted.
         (d)   Beer and wine shall be sold and served only during the permitted
service hours set forth in §
117.41 below. The operation of video gaming terminals shall not be permitted
during the hours alcoholic liquor sales are prohibited.
         (e)   A Class M licensee must have a video gaming license issued by
the Illinois Gaming Board in accordance with the provisions of the Video Gaming
Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., and shall comply at all times with all provisions
of the Illinois Video Gaming Act and all rules, regulations and restrictions
imposed by the Illinois Gaming Board. A failure to maintain a video gaming
license in good standing shall result in the immediate suspension of the Class
M liquor license.
         (f)   No Class M liquor licensee shall require a person to pay a cover
charge or any other type of form of admission fee in order to be able to enter
the premises for which the license was issued.
         (g)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers
education and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
         (h)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements
of §
117.57 below, as applicable.
         (i)   Minors are not allowed in video gaming cafe/bistro
establishments.
         (j)   Class M liquor licensees are required to install and operate a
video and audio surveillance system within the licensed premises which shall
record the activities within all parts of the licensed premises and shall
function during all operating hours. In the alternative, such licensees may
maintain a security guard on the licensed premises during all operating hours,
whose duties shall include ensuring that no loitering occurs on the licensed
premises. A Class M liquor licensee who fails to maintain a security guard or
video and audio surveillance system as required by this subsection shall be
subject to citation and to all penalties provided in §
117.99, including but not limited to monetary fines and suspension or
revocation of the liquor license.
      (3)   The annual fee for a Class M license shall be:
         (a)   Regular closing hours: $1,250.
         (b)   Extended closing hours: $2,000.
      (4)   No new Class M (Video Gaming Café/Bistro) licenses shall be issued
after July 31, 2023. Class M (Video Gaming Café/Bistro) licenses existing on
July 31, 2023, may continue to operate and may be renewed until such time as
the license terminates due to closure of the establishment or due to
termination of the license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
   (N)   Class N (bar and grill) license.
      (1)   A Class N license shall authorize the retail sale, on the
authorized premises, of alcoholic liquor (beer, wine, spirits and other
alcoholic liquor) by the drink for consumption on the premises.
      (2)   A Class N licensee may operate a limited food service restaurant,
which can consist of a full kitchen for preparation of full meals or a limited
kitchen (e.g., hot plates, small ovens, small deep fryers, microwaves,
refrigerators and coolers, etc.) for preparation of a limited food menu (e.g.
appetizers, salads, sandwiches, hamburgers, chicken wings, tacos and other
casual dinning fare) or the licensee may have a limited kitchen with a limited
food menu, but also establish and maintain active business relationships with
local and regional restaurants and food delivery services so that patrons can
order and eat food from the menu or delivered to the restaurant.
      (3)   The retail sale, service and on-site consumption of alcohol
beverages shall only occur while the kitchen is open and consumption of alcohol
shall only be allowed where the patron has ordered and is waiting for food or
is in the process of consuming food.
      (4)   There may be a patron bar or a service bar within the licensed
premises.
      (5)   A Class N license shall be subject to all of the following
conditions and such other appropriate conditions required by the corporate
authorities of the Village in an ordinance approving the creation and issuance
of such a liquor license:
         (a)   Consumption of beer, wine, spirits and other alcoholic liquor
shall occur only within the licensed premises.
         (b)   Beer, wine and spirits shall not be sold in pitchers.
         (c)   No package sales shall be permitted.
      (6)   Billiards and/or pool tables or mechanical/electrical amusement
devices, as defined and regulated in §
114.07 (Coin And Non-Coin Operated Amusement Devices), §
114.08 (Music Devices) and
Chapter 125 (Video Gaming) of the Village Code or Illinois state law, shall be
permitted on the licensed premises, including sports-related electronic video
devices or video simulators and internet music stations and jukeboxes, provided
that the devices or simulators are maintained in a separate area or room from
the dining area or bar area, provided the licensee complies with the Village
mechanical/electrical amusement device licensing requirements. Video gaming
terminals, as regulated by the Illinois Video Gaming Act (235 ILCS 5/6-33) and
Chapter 125 (Video Gaming) of this Code, may be operated on the licensed
premises, provided the licensee complies with required state and Village
licensing requirements.
      (7)   No holder of a Class N liquor license shall require a person to pay
a cover charge or any other type or form of admission fee in order to be able
to enter the premises for which the license was issued.
      (8)   The annual fee for a Class N liquor license shall be:
         (a)   Regular closing hours: $1,250.
         (b)   Extended closing hours: $2,000.
      (9)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
      (10)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers education
and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
      (11)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements of
§
117.57 below, as applicable.
   (O)   BYOB - Corkage License (Beer and Wine Only) license - Restaurants.
      (1)   A Class N license shall authorize restaurants that do not sell
alcoholic beverages to permit consumption of beer and wine only brought onto
the premises of a restaurant by an adult patron for personal consumption,
including consumption by their adult dining guest(s), subject to all of the
following conditions and such other appropriate conditions required by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner and the President and Board of Trustees of
the Village in an ordinance approving the creation and issuance of such a
liquor license:
         (a)   Consumption of beer and wine is restricted to the licensed
premises. If the restaurant maintains an area for outdoor dining, as defined in
§ 17.4 of the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Maywood, then the licensed
premises may include the outdoor dining area as well as the dining area of the
restaurant, subject to the approval of Local Liquor Control Commissioner and
the Village Board.
         (b)   The restaurant may charge a corkage fee to the patron.
         (c)   The sale of beer, wine, spirits and all other types of alcoholic
liquor beverages to patrons of the licensed premises shall be prohibited.
         (d)   No package sales shall be permitted under this license. The
retail sale of beer, wine, spirits or other alcoholic beverages (e.g., wine
coolers, spirits, prepared mixed drinks, etc.) in single cans or bottles, kegs
or pitchers or any other form is prohibited.
         (e)   The licensee, on-site manager(s) or its BASSET-trained wait
staff shall be responsible for opening the beer or wine bottles or containers
brought into licensed premises by the patrons and may provide glasses to the
patrons as part of the service of the beer or wine to its patrons.
         (f)   Patrons are prohibited from taking any opened alcoholic beverage
outside of the premises, except for a re-corked wine bottle that has been
sealed in a carry-out bag in accordance with state law (235 ILCS 5/6-33).
         (g)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers
education and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
         (h)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
         (i)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements
of §
117.57 below, as applicable.
      (2)   The annual fee for a Class N license shall be:
         (a)   Regular closing hours: $1,000.
         (b)   Extended closing hours: $1,300.
   (P)   Class P (BYOB - Corkage license - Smoking Lounge.
      (1)   A Class P license shall authorize smoking lounges that are not
allowed to sell alcoholic beverages to permit consumption of alcoholic liquor
brought onto the premises of a restaurant by an adult patron for personal
consumption, including consumption by their adult guest(s), subject to all of
the following conditions and such other appropriate conditions required by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner and the President and Board of Trustees of
the Village in an ordinance approving the creation and issuance of such a
liquor license:
         (a)   Consumption of alcoholic liquor is restricted to the licensed
premises.
         (b)   The smoking lounge may charge a corkage fee to the patron.
         (c)   No meal service is required.
         (d)   The sale of alcoholic liquor in any form, to patrons of the
licensed premises for either off-premises or on- premises consumption shall be
prohibited.
         (e)   The licensee, on-site manager(s) or its BASSET-trained wait
staff shall be responsible for opening the alcoholic liquor bottles or
containers brought into licensed premises by the patrons and may provide
glasses to the patrons as part of the service of the alcoholic liquor to its
patrons.
         (f)   Patrons are prohibited from taking any opened alcoholic beverage
outside of the premises, except for a re-corked wine bottle that has been
sealed in a carry-out bag in accordance with state law (235 ILCS 5/6-33).
         (g)   Compliance with the beverage alcohol sellers and servers
education and training (BASSET) requirements of §
117.28 below.
         (h)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
         (i)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements
of §
117.57 below, as applicable.
      (2)   The annual fee for a Class P license shall be:
         (a)   Regular closing hours: $1,000.
         (b)   Extended closing hours: $1,300.
   (Q)   Class Q (Fulfillment Center Alcoholic Liquor Package Sales and
Delivery License).
      (1)   A Class Q license shall authorize the retail sale and subsequent
delivery by fulfillment centers with usable floor space of 25,000 square feet
or more off the licensed premises of alcoholic liquor in its original package,
not for consumption on the premises. A Class Q license is subject to all of the
following conditions and such other appropriate conditions required by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner and the President and Board of Trustees of
the Village in an ordinance approving the creation and issuance of such a
liquor license:
         (a)   Alcoholic liquor must be delivered by an individual at least 21
years of age or older who is an employee or agent of a Class Q liquor license
holder. Delivery as authorized by this division (Q) shall not include the use
of common carriers;
         (b)   Deliveries must be during liquor service hours allowed for the
Class Q liquor license holder pursuant to the hours of operation requirements
of §
117.41 below;
         (c)   The packaging of any alcoholic liquor delivered under this
section shall be clearly labeled with the following words: “CONTAINS ALCOHOL.
SIGNATURE OF A PERSON 21 YEARS OF AGE OR OLDER REQUIRED FOR DELIVERY. PROOF OF
AGE AND IDENTITY MUST BE SHOWN BEFORE DELIVERY.” This warning must be
prominently displayed on the packaging;
         (d)   The employee or agent of a Class Q liquor license holder that
carries or transports alcoholic liquor within the Village shall not deliver or
leave such deliveries without requiring a signature of an individual 21 years
of age or older;
         (e)   Adequate evidence for proof of age shall be produced to the
delivery agent in all instances of delivery;
         (f)   The delivery shall be made only within 12 hours from the time
the alcoholic liquor leaves the licensed premises of the retailer for delivery;
         (g)   A record shall be kept by the employee or agent of a liquor
license holder who delivers alcoholic liquor within the Village indicating the
purchaser’s name, address, and driver’s license/state identification number:
the time, date and place of delivery; and the individual deliverer’s identity;
and
         (h)   All persons delivering alcoholic liquor within the Village shall
receive BASSET training and training that covers the Village’s rules and
regulations, specifically regarding how to properly check and record proper
identification. Proof of this training shall be provided to the Village upon
request.
         (i)   Compliance with the hours of operation requirements of §
117.41 below.
         (j)   Compliance with the insurance and indemnification requirements
of §
117.57 below, as applicable.
      (2)   The annual fee for a Class Q license shall be $3,200.
   (R)   Increase or decrease in number of licenses. The number of licenses
authorized to be issued for each license class may be increased or decreased
from time to time only by an ordinance duly adopted by the President and Board
of Trustees upon a determination that such increase or decrease in the number
of licenses is in the best interests of the Village, except that no class M
(Video Gaming Café/Bistro) licenses shall be issued after July 31, 2023. Class
M (Video Gaming Café/Bistro licenses existing on July 31, 2023, may continue to
operate and may be renewed until such time as the license terminates due to
closure of the establishment or due to termination of the license pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter. The number of licenses authorized for the above
classes shall be information retained by, and available from, the Office of the
Village Clerk. When a liquor license expires or is not renewed or is revoked or
terminated, it shall automatically reduce the number of authorized licenses of
the particular class by the total number of revoked or terminated licenses in
the particular class.
In addition, the Local Commissioner shall notify, in writing, the Village Clerk
and Board of Trustees of the revocation or termination of any authorized
license within 7 days of such occurrence.
(1997 Code, § 35.07) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978; Am. Ord. 82-7, passed 2-25-
1982; Am. Ord. 84-1, passed 1-26-1984; Am. Ord. 85-11, passed 4-25-1985; Am.
Ord. 89-8, passed 6-22-1989; Am. Ord. 91-1, passed 5-9-1991; Am. Ord. CO-97-07,
passed 10-9-1997; Am. Ord. CO-03-01, passed 1-6-2003; Am. Ord. CO-04-18, passed
6-21-2004; Am. Ord. CO-05-37, passed 10-12-2005; Am. Ord. CO-05-50, passed 12-
4-2005; Am. Ord. CO-08-08, passed 3-18-2008; Am. Ord. CO-08-25, passed 6-16-
2008; Am. Ord. CO-08-26, passed 6-16-2008; Am. Ord. CO-08-34, passed 8-19-2008;
Am. Ord. CO-08-46, passed 11-18-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2010-25, passed 12-21-2010;
Am. Ord. CO-2011-05, passed 3-1-2011; Am. Ord. 2011-13, passed 8-16-2011; Am.
Ord. CO-2011-14, passed 8-16-2011; Am. Ord. CO-2011-28, passed 7-19-2011; Am.
Ord. CO-2012-25, passed 7-17-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2013-04, passed 2-5-2013; Am.
Ord. CO-2014-17, passed 4-29-2014; Am. Ord. CO-2014-38, passed 11-17-2014; Am.
Ord. CO-2015-15, passed 5-19-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2015-16, passed 5-19-2015; Am.
Ord. CO-2015-30, passed 12-15-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2016-20, passed 9-20-2016; Am.
Ord. CO-2016-32, passed 12-21-2016; Am. Ord. 2018-38, passed 9-4-2018; Am. Ord.
CO-2020- 08, passed 3-17-2020; Am. Ord. CO-2020-29, passed 10-20-2020; Am. Ord.
CO-2023-36, passed 6-20-2023 Am. Ord. CO-2023-31, passed 7-11-2023; Am. Ord.
CO-2023-40, passed 9-12-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2023-43, passed 10-10-2023; Am. Ord.
CO-2024-05, passed 2-6- 2024; Am. Ord. CO-2024-52, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 117.24 TERMINATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Each license except Class C and Class E licenses shall terminate on
December 31 next following its issuance unless sooner revoked for cause as
provided by law.
   (B)   When a license has been issued to an individual who is no longer
eligible for a license, the license shall terminate and be revoked without
further action by the Village or the Local Commissioner.
(1997 Code, § 35.08) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978; Am. Ord. CO-03-01, passed
1-6-2003; Am. Ord. CO-2010-25, passed 12-21-2010)
§ 117.25 LICENSE PERIOD.
   Except for Class C (Temporary Special Event - For Non-Village Property)
liquor licenses and Class E (Temporary Special Event on Village-Owned Property)
liquor licenses, all of liquor licenses set forth in this
Chapter 117 shall be issued on an annual basis, covering the period from
January 1 to December 31.
(1997 Code, § 35.10) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978; Am. Ord. 84-1, passed 1-26-
1984; Am. Ord. CO-2010-25, passed 12-21-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2020-29, passed 10-
20-2020)
§ 117.26 INITIAL APPLICATION FEES, PAYMENT OF FEES, RENEWAL.
   (A)   Application fee. Except for temporary liquor license applications
(Class C and Class E licenses), at the time an application is filed as provided
in this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the Village an initial application
fee in the sum of $750, no part of which shall be refundable, to cover the
Village's costs in reviewing and investigating such applicant. For temporary
liquor license applications (Class C and Class E licenses), a nonrefundable
initial application fee of $75 must be paid at the time of application.
   (B)   Annual license fee. Annual license fees for all classes of licenses
must be paid in full at the time the initial application or an application for
renewal of a liquor license is filed. The fee shall be turned over to the
Village Treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied, the license
fee shall be returned to the applicant. Except for temporary liquor license
applications (Class C and Class E licenses), all other liquor license fees
shall be prorated or apportioned if issued for a period less than the calendar
year. When a licensee receives and maintains 2 or more liquor licenses during
the same year, the licensee shall be entitled to receive 1 50% discount applied
to the less expensive of the annual liquor license fees. This 50% discount does
not apply if the annual fee of 1 of the 2 liquor licenses is less than
$1,000.00.
   (C)   License for part of year. For any annual liquor license provided by
this chapter and issued prior to July 1 in any calendar year, the full
prescribed annual fee shall be paid. For any such license issued on or after
July 1 but before October 1 in any calendar year, one-half the prescribed
annual fee shall be paid. For any such license issued on or after October 1 in
any calendar year, one-fourth of the prescribed annual fee shall be paid. There
shall be no refund for unused portion of an annual license fee.
   (D)   Application filing. Except for temporary liquor license applications
(Class C and Class E licenses), renewal applications shall be filed between
December 1 and December 5 in any given year.
   (E)   Payment. All fees received by the Village for liquor licenses shall be
deposited by the Village Treasurer in the general corporate fund, or in such
other fund as shall have been designated by the Board of Trustees. Failure of
any licensee to pay the specified license fee on or before the date when such
fee is payable shall prevent such licensee from selling alcoholic liquor at
retail and the license shall automatically be revoked and the number of
authorized licenses of a particular class shall automatically be reduced by 1.
   (F)   No refund. There shall be no refund of a license fee in the event a
license is suspended or revoked.
   (G)   Renewals. Appearance Before Liquor Commission. In September of each
year, the Village Clerk shall send notice to each current liquor licensee
directing that the licensee or a designee appear before the Local Liquor
Control Commission at a meeting to be held in October. At the meeting, the
Local Liquor Control Commission shall review reports from the Code Enforcement
Department and Police and Fire Departments regarding compliance by licensees
with Village and other applicable laws, rules and regulations during the
preceding 12 months. Licensees or their designees shall be present and
available to answer any questions the Local Liquor Control Commission may have
relative to operation of the licensed establishment and compliance by the
licensee with Village and other applicable laws, rules and regulations. The
Local Liquor Control Commission may recommend to the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner such further enforcement or other actions as are deemed by the
Commission to be advisable based on the information provided. Citations may be
issued to licensees who fail to appear as required by this subsection.
(1997 Code, § 35.11) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25- 1978; Am. Ord. 84-1, passed 1-
26-1984; Am. Ord. 85-25, passed 7-11-1985; Am. Ord. CO-2010-25, passed 12-21-
2010; Am. Ord. CO- 2015-31, passed 12-15-2015)
§ 117.27 TRANSFER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed
1 year after issuance unless sooner revoked as provided in this chapter, and
shall not constitute property, nor shall it be subject to attachment,
garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated.
Except as provided in division (B) of this section, such license shall not
descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution, but shall cease upon
the death of the licensee; provided, however, that executors or administrators
of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or
bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor under
order of the appropriate court, may exercise the privileges of the deceased or
insolvent or bankrupt's license after the death of such descendent, or such
insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of such license but not longer
than 6 months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of such licensee.
   (B)   (1)   A license may, upon the licensee's death, descend only to the
licensee's spouse or children and in the event such licensee is not survived by
a spouse or child then to the licensee's mother or father; provided, however,
any such survivor must possess the same qualifications required by the deceased
licensee. The passage of a license pursuant to the terms of this subsection
shall not require the payment of any fees.
      (2)   Nothing contained in this subsection shall create any vested or
property right in any liquor license in any person whatsoever, nor shall it
limit or restrict the right of the Village to at any time amend or repeal this
subsection.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided herein and in division (J), when the
licensee is a partnership or a corporation whose stock is not publicly traded
on a recognized stock exchange, the license shall terminate whenever 50% or
more of the ownership interest therein changes from that shown on the original
license application. Prior to a transfer of 50% or more of the ownership, the
partnership or corporation, through its officers/partners, shall submit a
complete application and the required fees for the issuance of a new license,
as provided herein, and said application is subject to approval by the Board of
the Trustees and the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, in their sole
discretion, and such approval is necessary for the new corporate ownership to
sell and/or serve alcoholic beverages.
   (D)   When the licensee is a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a
recognized stock exchange, the license shall terminate whenever 50% or more of
the membership of the Board of Directors of the corporation changes from that
shown on the original license application, or whenever 1 person who was not
shown as an owner of 50% or more of the ownership interest in the publicly-
traded corporation at the time of the original liquor license application,
becomes an owner of a 50% or more ownership interest in the publicly-traded
corporation. In such event, the corporation, through its officers/Board of
Directors, must make application for the issuance of a new license as provided
in this chapter.
   (E)   When the licensee is a partnership or corporation, no change in
ownership from that shown on the original application involving the addition of
a new partner(s) of such partnership or a new shareholder(s) who will own in
the aggregate more than 5% of the stock of such corporation, shall be effective
until such proposed change in ownership has first been reported in writing to
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner along with a completed liquor license
application. Such application shall be submitted to the Liquor Control
Commission for review as to the new partner or shareholder’s eligibility to
hold a liquor license. The Commission shall make a recommendation to the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner regarding such eligibility. After receiving such
recommendation, the Commissioner shall determine whether the proposed new
partner(s) or shareholder(s) is/are eligible under the provisions of §
117.22 of this chapter and shall so advise the licensee of their determination
in writing. Any change in ownership without complying with the terms hereof
shall constitute grounds for a fine and/or the suspension or revocation of the
liquor license issued to such partnership or corporation.
   (F)   When the licensee is a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a
recognized stock exchange, no change in the membership of the Board of
Directors of the corporation from that shown on the original application
involving the addition of a new Director of such corporation shall be effective
until such proposed change in Directors has first been reported in writing to
the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and the Commissioner finds that the
proposed new Director is not ineligible under the provisions of § 
117.22 of this chapter and so advises the licensee in writing. Any change in
the membership of the Board of Directors without complying with the terms
hereof shall constitute grounds for a fine and/or suspension or revocation of
the liquor license issued to such corporation.
   (G)   When the licensee is a partnership or corporation whose stock is not
publicly traded on a recognized stock exchange, no change in ownership from
that shown on the original application involving the withdrawal of any partner
or shareholder shall be made without reporting such change in ownership in
writing to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner within 10 days of any such
change in ownership. Any such change in ownership made without complying with
the terms hereof shall constitute grounds for a fine and/or the suspension or
revocation of the liquor license issued to such partnership or corporation.
   (H)   When the licensee is a corporation whose stock is publicly traded on a
recognized stock exchange, no change in the membership of the Board of
Directors from that shown on the original application involving the withdrawal,
removal or elimination of any Director shall be made without reporting such
change in the membership of the Board of Directors in writing to the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner within 10 days of any such change. Any such change
in the membership of the Board of Directors made without complying with the
terms hereof shall constitute grounds for a fine and/or the suspension or
revocation of the liquor license issued to such corporation.
   (I)   (1)   In the event that a liquor license is granted to a corporation
which issues franchises relative to its business locations, the liquor license
issued to the corporation may be transferred to an authorized franchisee,
notwithstanding any other provision of the Code, provided the following
conditions are met:
         (a)   The appropriate application fee, as set forth in §
117.22 of this chapter, is paid, and submitted with an original liquor license
application, by the franchisee.
         (b)   The franchisee qualifies for a liquor license in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
         (c)   The corporation and franchisee submit written documentation to
the Village evidencing the issuance of a franchise to the franchisee at the
licensed location.
         (d)   The transfer request occurs within 180 days of the approval of
the issuance of the liquor license to the corporation. Upon petition of the
corporation, the Board of Trustees may grant an extension of the 180 days
limitation upon a showing of good cause as to why the transfer could not occur
within the initial 180-day period.
      (2)   Provided all the foregoing conditions are met, the liquor license
may be transferred to the franchisee upon payment of transfer fee which shall
be calculated based on the following formula:
 
                                                             Number
                                                             of days
Renewal Fee for the Particular Class of License as per §  x left in
117.22                                                       the     = Total
                                                             license   Fee
                                                             year
365
 
      (3)   If at any time after the transfer of the liquor license to the
franchisee there is a change in the franchisee, it shall be the obligation of
the corporation and the original franchisee to report the change, within 10
days after it occurs, to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, and the new
franchisee shall be required to apply for a new liquor license.
(1997 Code, § 35.13) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25- 1978; Am. Ord. 84-48, passed 12-
27-1984; Am. Ord. CO-03-01, passed 1-6-2003; Am. Ord. CO-09- 33, passed 11-17-
2009; Am. Ord. CO-2013-22, passed 3-19-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2014-04, passed 1-21-
2014; Am. Ord. 2017-37, passed 10-3- 2017; Am. Ord. CO-2020-29, passed 10-20-
2020; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-29, passed 7-11-
2023; Am. Ord. CO-2023-32, passed 8-8-2023)
§ 117.28 BASSET TRAINING.
   The licensee, each on site manager and all waitstaff shall take and
successfully complete a beverage alcohol sellers and servers education and
training (BASSET) program that has been certified by the State of Illinois and
shall obtain from the Village a current copy of the liquor license ordinance. A
copy of the BASSET course completion certificate(s) for each such person shall
be made available at all times at the licensed premises for inspection by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, or their designee. A copy of the BASSET
course completion certificate(s) for each such person shall be made available
at all times at the licensed premises for inspection by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, or their designee.
(Ord. CO-03-01, passed 1-6-2003; Am. Ord. CO-2010-25, passed 12-21-2010)
§ 117.29 REPORTS IN RELATION TO, AND ANNUAL REVIEW OF, LIQUOR LICENSES.
   (A)   Semi-annual report. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall file
an semi-annual report with the Board of Trustees relative to liquor licensees
within the Village of each year, on or before the 10th day of January and July.
The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may also file additional supplemental
reports with the Board of Trustees during the year as needed to inform the
Village Board of matters relating to the operation or conduct of any licensees
or the suspension or revocation of any licenses. The semi-annual report shall,
at a minimum, provide the following information relative to all liquor
licensees for the previous 6- month period:
      (1)   Any change in the ownership interest in any liquor licensee.
      (2)   Any police reports filed relative to a liquor establishment, and
the general circumstances of the incident resulting in each report.
      (3)   Any citizen complaints filed against any liquor establishment and
the general nature of each complaint.
      (4)   Any disciplinary action taken against a liquor licensee and any
reasons therefor.
      (5)   Any other information that the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
determines should be brought to the Board of Trustee's attention relative to a
liquor licensee.
   (B)   Semi-annual review. The Legal, License and Ordinance Committee shall
conduct a semi-annual review of all liquor establishments and liquor licensees
at the Committee's January and July meeting each year. The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be present at the meeting. At the meeting, the Committee
shall review, with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, the semi-annual
reports submitted covering the preceding months by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner. In addition, the Committee and the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall review the Village's ordinances relative to liquor control
to determine if any changes are necessary, as well as discuss any problems
relative to any particular liquor establishment(s) or licensee(s). If, as a
result of the semi-annual review, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner is
requested to report on any particular matter, the report shall be filed by the
Local Liquor Control Commissioner with the Committee, at or before the
Committee's March meeting.
(Am. Ord. CO-03-01, passed 1-6-2003; Am. Ord. CO-08-08, passed 3-18-2008; Am.
Ord. CO-2010-25, passed 12-21-2010)
REGULATIONS
§ 117.40 VIOLATION OF RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX ACT.
   In addition to other grounds specified in this chapter, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner may refuse the issuance or renewal of a retail license, or
suspend or revoke such license, for any of the following violations of 35 ILCS
120, the “Retailers' Occupation Tax Act,” as amended:
   (A)   Failure to make a tax return;
   (B)   The filing of a fraudulent return;
   (C)   Failure to pay all or part of any tax or penalty finally determined to
be due;
   (D)   Failure to keep books and records;
   (E)   Failure to secure and display a certificate or sub-certificates of
registration;
   (F)   Willful violation of any rule or regulation of the Department of
Revenue relating to the administration and enforcement of tax liability.
(1997 Code, § 35.06) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978; Am. Ord. CO-97-07, passed
10-9-1997)
§ 117.41 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No alcoholic liquor shall be sold, given away delivered from or offered for
sale in, upon or about any premises or place of business licensed for the sale
of alcoholic liquor, except in accordance with the following hour limitations,
which may be further restricted by ordinance for any liquor licensee in the
discretion of the President and Board of Trustees of the Village or the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner:
   (A)   Class A (full service restaurant) license.
      (1)   Regular hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing at 11:00
a.m. until 11:00 p.m., with extended hours from 11:00 p.m. on New Year's Eve
Day to 2:00 a.m. on New Year's Day.
      (2)   Extended hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing at 11:
00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
      (3)   A Class A licensee may apply to the Village Board for a temporary
extension of the applicable hours of operation for a special event to be held
on the licensed premises. If approved by the Village Board and the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, the temporary extension shall be limited to 1 hour,
either allowing the service of alcoholic liquor 1 hour earlier or 1 hour later
than permitted by this Code or by the ordinance authorizing the licensee's
liquor license. The approval of the temporary extension of the hours of
operation shall be by an ordinance passed by a majority of the Village Board
members and further approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (B)   Class B (package store) license.
      (1)   Monday through Thursday, 9:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m.
      (2)   Friday, Saturday and holidays, 9:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next
day, provided that, if a holiday falls on a Sunday, no liquor may be sold
before 11:00 a.m.
      (3)   Sunday, 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m.
   (C)   Class C (temporary special event for non village-owned property)
license. During such hours as may be determined by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner at time application for license is approved.
   (D)   Class D (private club) license.
      (1)   From 12:00 p.m. until 12:00 a.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday,
Thursday and Sunday. From 12:00 p.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day on Fridays,
Saturdays and holidays.
      (2)   A Class D licensee may apply to the Village Board for a temporary
extension of the applicable hours of operation for a special event to be held
on the licensed premises. If approved by the Village Board and the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, the temporary extension shall be limited to 1 hour,
either allowing the service of alcoholic liquor 1 hour earlier or 1 hour later
than permitted by this Code or by the ordinance authorizing the licensee's
liquor license. The approval of the temporary extension of the hours of
operation shall be by an ordinance passed by a majority of the Village Board
members and further approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (E)   Class E (temporary special event for village-owned property) license.
During such hours as may be determined by the Liquor Control Commission at time
application for license is approved.
   (F)   Class F (special event space) license.
      (1)   Regular hours license. From the hours of noon until midnight on
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Sunday. From the hours of noon until
2:00 a.m. the next day on Fridays, Saturdays and holidays.
      (2)   Extended hours license. From the hours of noon until 1:00 a.m. the
next day on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Sunday. From the hours of
noon until 3:00 a.m. the next day on Fridays, Saturdays and holidays.
      (3)   A Class F licensee may apply to the Village Board for a temporary
extension of the applicable hours of operation for a special event to be held
on the licensed premises. If approved by the Village Board and the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, the temporary extension shall be limited to 1 hour,
either allowing the service of alcoholic liquor 1 hour earlier or 1 hour later
than permitted by this Code or by the ordinance authorizing the licensee's
liquor license. The approval of the temporary extension of the hours of
operation shall be by an ordinance passed by a majority of the Village Board
members and further approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
      (4)   Subclass F-1 (Special Event Space/Limited Restaurant) Liquor
License Designation:
         (a)   Regular hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing at
11:00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m., with extended hours from 11:00 p.m. on New Year's
Eve Day to 2:00 a.m. on New Year's Day.
         (b)   Extended hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing at
11:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
      (5)   Subclass F-2 (Special Event Space/Outdoor Liquor Café) Liquor
License Designation:
         (a)   Regular hours license: Same as Class J (outdoor liquor café)
license.
         (b)   Extended hours license: Same as Class J (outdoor liquor café)
license.
   (G)   Class G (full service restaurant - beer and wine only) license.
      (1)   Regular hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing at 11:00
a.m. until 11:00 p.m., with extended hours from 11:00 p.m. on New Year's Eve
Day to 2:00 a.m. on New Year's Day.
      (2)   Extended hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing at 11:
00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
      (3)   A Class G licensee may apply to the Village Board for a temporary
extension of the applicable hours of operation for a special event to be held
on the licensed premises. If approved by the Village Board and the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, the temporary extension shall be limited to 1 hour,
either allowing the service of alcoholic liquor 1 hour earlier or 1 hour later
than permitted by this Code or by the ordinance authorizing the licensee's
liquor license. The approval of the temporary extension of the hours of
operation shall be by an ordinance passed by a majority of the Village Board
members and further approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (H)   Class H (limited service restaurant; beer and wine only) license.
      (1)   Regular hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing at 11:00
a.m. until11:00 p.m., with extended hours from 11:00 p.m. on New Year's Eve Day
to 2:00 a.m. on New Year's Day.
      (2)   Extended hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing at 11:
00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
      (3)   A Class H licensee may apply to the Village Board for a temporary
extension of the applicable hours of operation for a special event to be held
on the licensed premises. If approved by the Village Board and the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, the temporary extension shall be limited to 1 hour,
either allowing the service of alcoholic liquor 1 hour earlier or 1 hour later
than permitted by this Code or by the ordinance authorizing the licensee's
liquor license. The approval of the temporary extension of the hours of
operation shall be by an ordinance passed by a majority of the Village Board
members and further approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (I)   Class I (package store - beer and wine only) license.
      (1)   Monday through Thursday, 9:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m.
      (2)   Friday, Saturday and holidays, 9:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the next
day, provided that if a holiday falls on a Sunday , no liquor may be sold
before 12:00 p.m.
      (3)   Sunday 11:00 a.m. until 12:00 a.m.
   (J)   Class J (outdoor liquor café) license.
      (1)   During such hours as may be determined by the Liquor Control
Commission at time application for license is approved.
      (2)   A Class J licensee may apply to the Village Board for a temporary
extension of the applicable hours of operation for a special event to be held
on the licensed premises. If approved by the Village Board and the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, the temporary extension shall be limited to 1 hour,
either allowing the service of alcoholic liquor 1 hour earlier or 1 hour later
than permitted by this Code or by the ordinance authorizing the licensee's
liquor license. The approval of the temporary extension of the hours of
operation shall be by an ordinance passed by a majority of the Village Board
members and further approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (K)   Class K (caterer) license.
      (1)   During such hours as may be determined by the Liquor Control
Commission at time application for license is approved.
      (2)   A Class K licensee may apply to the Village Board for a temporary
extension of the applicable hours of operation for a special event to be held
on the licensed premises. If approved by the Village Board and the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, the temporary extension shall be limited to 1 hour,
either allowing the service of alcoholic liquor 1 hour earlier or 1 hour later
than permitted by this Code or by the ordinance authorizing the licensee's
liquor license. The approval of the temporary extension of the hours of
operation shall be by an ordinance passed by a majority of the Village Board
members and further approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (L)   Class L (limited service restaurant at a recreational facility)
license.
      (1)   Regular hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing from 11:
00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m., with extended hours from 11:00 p.m. on New Year's Eve
Day to 2:00 a.m. on New Year's Day.
      (2)   Extended hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing at 11:
00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
      (3)   A Class L licensee may apply to the Village Board for a temporary
extension of the applicable hours of operation for a special event to beheld on
the licensed premises. If approved by the Village Board and the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, the temporary extension shall be limited to 1 hour,
either allowing the service of alcoholic liquor 1 hour earlier or 1 hour later
than permitted by this Code or by the ordinance authorizing the licensee's
liquor license. The approval of the temporary extension of the hours of
operation shall be by an ordinance passed by a majority of the Village Board
members and further approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (M)   Class M (video gaming cafe/bistro) license.
      (1)   Regular hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing from 11:
00 a.m. until 11:00 p.m., with extended hours from 11:00 p.m. on New Year's Eve
Day to 2:00 a.m. on New Year's Day.
      (2)   Extended hours license: Mondays through Sundays commencing at 11:00
a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
   (N)   Class N (bar and grill) license.
      (1)   Regular hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing at 11:00
a.m. until 11:00 p.m., with extended hours from 11:00 p.m. on New Year's Eve
Day to 2:00 a.m. on New Year's Day.
      (2)   Extended hours license: Mondays through Sundays, commencing at 11:
00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. the next day.
      (3)   A Class N licensee may apply to the Village Board for a temporary
extension of the applicable hours of operation for a special event to be
held on the licensed premises. If approved by the Village Board and the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner, the temporary extension shall be limited to one
hour, either allowing the service of alcoholic liquor 1 hour earlier or 1 hour
later than permitted by this Code or by the ordinance authorizing the
licensee's liquor license. The approval of the temporary extension of the hours
of operation shall be by an ordinance passed by a majority of the Village Board
members and further approved by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (O)   Class Q (Fulfillment Center Alcoholic Liquor Package Sales and
Delivery) license. A fulfillment center holding a Class Q Fulfillment Center
Alcoholic Liquor Package Sales and Delivery license under this chapter may make
deliveries in compliance with §
117.23(Q) 24 hours a day.
   (P)   Holidays. For purposes of this section, the following shall be
considered holidays:
      New Year's Day (January 1)
      Martin Luther King's birthday (January 15)
      Valentine's Day (February 14)
      Memorial Day
      Independence Day (July 4)
      Labor Day
      Halloween (October 31)
      Thanksgiving
      Christmas Eve (December 24)
      Christmas Day (December 25)
      New Year's Eve (December 31)
   (Q)   Retail liquor sales. It shall be unlawful to keep open for business,
or to admit the public to any premises in or on which alcoholic liquor is sold
at retail during the hours within which the sale of such liquor is prohibited;
provided, that in the case of special event spaces, caterers, restaurants,
outdoor cafes, hotels and Class D licensees, Class B licensees and Class I
licensees, such as grocery stores and drug stores, where the sale of liquor is
not the primary business conducted on the licensed premises, such
establishments may keep open during such hours, but no alcoholic liquor may be
sold to, given away, or consumed by the public during such hours.
(1997 Code, § 35.09) (Ord. 84-1, passed 1-26- 1984; Am. Ord. CO-97-07, passed
10-9-1997; Am. Ord. CO-2010-25, passed 12-21-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2012-50, passed
12-18-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2014-17, passed 4-29-2014; Am. Ord. CO-2015-30, passed
12-15-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2016-23, passed 11-3-2016; Am. Ord. CO-2020-08, passed
3-17-2020; Am. Ord. CO-2020-29, passed 10-20-2020; Am. Ord. CO-2023-36, passed
6-20-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2023-43, passed 10-10-2023) Penalty, see §
117.99
§ 117.42 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the
storage of such liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be kept and maintained in full compliance with the Building
Code, Fire Code, Health Code and other ordinances of the Village regulating the
condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption.
(1997 Code, § 35.14) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978)
§ 117.43 EMPLOYEES.
   It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is the carrier of,
any contagious, infectious or venereal disease; it shall be unlawful for any
person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such disease to work on or
about any premises, or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of such liquor.
(1997 Code, § 35.15) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.44 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No Class B (package store) license shall be issued for the retail sale
of any alcoholic liquor within 100 feet of any church, school, hospital, home
for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or children, or
any military or naval station, provided that this prohibition shall not apply
to Class B licensees where sale of alcoholic liquor is not the principal
business carried on. This prohibition on Class B licenses shall not apply to
any renewal or transfer of a liquor license where a church, school, hospital,
home for the aged or indigent persons or for veterans, their spouses or
children, or any military or naval station locates within 100 feet of a
licensed premises. For purposes of the location restrictions in this section,
distance is to be measured from portal to portal, not from lot line to lot
line, except in the case of a church or school, for which the distance of 100
feet shall be measured to the nearest part of any building used for worship
services or educational programs.
   (B)   Excluding Class A (full service restaurant) licenses, Class G
(restaurant; beer and wine only) licenses, Class H (limited service restaurant;
beer and wine only) licenses, Class J (outdoor café license) licenses, Class L
(limited service restaurant at a recreational facility) licenses, and Class N
(bar and grill) licenses, no license for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be
issued if the premises to be licensed are located within 100 feet of premises
for which the same class has already been issued. Excluding Class F (special
event facilities) licenses that are to be held by the same liquor licensee, or
that are to be held by different corporations where the ownership of the
corporations are comprised of at least 50% of the same individuals, no license
for the sale of alcoholic liquor shall be issued if the premises to be licensed
are located within 500 feet of premises for which a Class F (special event
facilities) license has already been issued.
   (C)   No Class A-1 (full service restaurant with video gaming) license may
be issued to an establishment that is located within 1,000 feet of any other
establishment with an A-1 (full service restaurant with video gaming) license.
   (D)   Except as provided in divisions (A), (B) and (C) above, there shall be
no other restriction on the location of premises for which a liquor license can
be issued.
(1997 Code, § 35.16) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25- 1978; Am. Ord. —, passed 7-22-
1993; Am. Ord. CO-03-01, passed 1-6-2003; Am. Ord. CO-2011- 05, passed 3-1-
2011; Am. Ord. CO-2015-14, passed 5-19-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2020-08, passed 3-17-
2020; Am. Ord. CO-2020-29, passed 10-20- 2020; Am. Ord. CO-2023-36, passed 6-
20-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2023-31, passed 7-11-2023)
§ 117.45 CLASS B LIQUOR LICENSEES PROHIBITED FROM SELLING ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR,
OTHER THAN SPIRITS, EXCEPT IN THE MANUFACTURER’S ORIGINAL CASE OR CARTON.
   No Class B liquor licensee shall sell or dispense any alcoholic liquor,
including but not limited to beer and wine, other than spirits as defined in
Illinois Liquor Control Act of 1934, § 1-3.02 (235 ILCS 5/1-3.02) except in the
manufacturer’s original case, carton or similar container, and in no event
shall any Class B liquor licensee sell any liquor, other than spirits, by the
individual can, bottle or other container if the volume of alcoholic liquor in
such can, bottle or other container is 16 ounces or less.
(1997 Code, § 35.17) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978; Am. Ord. 86-7, passed 6-12-
1986)
§ 117.46 ACCESS FROM LICENSED PREMISES TO DWELLING QUARTERS.
   Except in the case of hotels, no alcoholic liquor shall be sold at retail
upon any premises which has any access which leads directly from such premises
to any other portion of the same building or structure used for dwelling or
lodging purposes and which is permitted to be used or kept accessible for use
by the public. This provision shall not prevent any connection between such
premises and such other portion of the building or structure which is used only
by the licensee, his family and personal guests.
(1997 Code, § 35.18) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978)
§ 117.47 SALES TO AND BY PERSONS UNDER AGE 21, DRUNKARDS, SPENDTHRIFTS.
   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person or to any person
known by him to be an habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally ill,
mentally deficient person or person in need of mental treatment. No person,
after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor shall sell, give or
deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years
except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service. It shall be
unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to misrepresent his or her
age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor in any place in
the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold. No person under the age of 21 years
shall sell, transfer, dispense, possess or give alcoholic liquor except in the
performance of a religious ceremony or service.
(1997 Code, § 35.19) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978)
§ 117.48 PURCHASE OR ACCEPTANCE OF GIFT OF LIQUOR BY PERSON OF NONAGE;
IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of alcoholic liquor is
prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of alcoholic
liquor or have alcoholic liquor in his possession.
   (B)   If a licensee or his agents or employees believe or has reason to
believe that a sale or delivery of alcoholic liquor is prohibited because of
the nonage of the prospective recipient, he shall, before making such sale or
delivery, demand presentation of some form of positive identification
(containing proof of age) issued by a public officer in the performance of his
official duties.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
misrepresent his age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor in any place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold.
   (D)   No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card, use
an identification card of another, carry or use a false or forged
identification card, or obtain an identification card by means of false
information for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, selling, transferring or
dispensing alcoholic liquor.
   (E)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by any person under the age of 21
years is forbidden.
   (F)   The possession, dispensing, or consumption by a person under the age
of 21 years of alcoholic liquor in the performance of a religious service or
ceremony, or the consumption by a person under the age of 21 years under the
direct supervision and approval of a parent or legal guardian of such underage
person in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited.
(1997 Code, § 35.20) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978)
§ 117.49 REFILLING ORIGINAL PACKAGES, DISPENSING PAPER CUPS.
   (A)   No person licensed under this chapter shall fill or refill, in whole
or in part, any original package of alcoholic liquor with the same or any other
kind or quality of alcoholic liquor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
have in his possession for sale at retail any bottles, casks or other
containers containing alcoholic liquor, except in original packages.
   (B)   All persons licensed under this chapter and their employees are
prohibited from dispensing paper cups or other drinking utensils in connection
with the sale of packaged liquors.
(1997 Code, § 35.21) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978)
§ 117.50 DISPLAYING LICENSE.
   Every licensee shall cause his license or licenses to be framed and hung in
plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
(1997 Code, § 35.22) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978)
§ 117.51 WORD “SALOON” FORBIDDEN.
   No person licensed to sell alcoholic liquors shall use the word “saloon” in
any sign or advertisement.
(1997 Code, § 35.23) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25- 1978; Am. Ord. CO-2020-08,
passed 3-17-2020)
§ 117.52 SOLICITING.
   No holder of a liquor license, nor his or its agent or employee, shall
allow, permit, or suffer to remain on his or its premises any person who shall
solicit for himself or herself or for others for prostitution or shall solicit
any patron to purchase alcoholic or non-alcoholic beverages.
(1997 Code, § 35.24) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978)
§ 117.53 OUTSIDE LICENSED PREMISES.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee, or any officer,
associate, member, representative, agent or employee of any licensee, to allow
or permit any individual to exit the licensed premises, or remain outside of
the licensed premises on property under the control of the licensee, with
alcoholic liquor in his or her possession, other than alcoholic liquor in its
original package and unopened for consumption at another location.
(Am. Ord. C0-03-01, passed 1-6-2003)
§ 117.54 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided that
he is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such
renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; provided further, that
the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested
right which shall in any case prohibit the Board of Trustees from decreasing
the number of licenses to be issued within its jurisdiction.
(1997 Code, § 35.26) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978)
§ 117.55 CHANGE OF LOCATION.
   (A)   A liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the
premises described in the application and license. Such location may be changed
only upon a written permission to make such change issued by the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner.
   (B)   No change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new
location is a proper one for the sale of alcoholic liquor under the ordinances
of this Village.
(1997 Code, § 35.27) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978; Am. Ord. CO-97-07, passed
10-9-1997)
§ 117.56 WARNING, MINORS, PARENTS.
   (A)   In every place in the Village where alcoholic liquor is sold there
shall be displayed at all times in a prominent place a printed card which shall
read substantially as follows:
Warning to Minors:
You are subject to a fine of up to $750.00 under the ordinances of the Village
of Maywood if you purchase alcoholic liquor, or misrepresent your age for the
purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any holder of a Class B liquor license, or
his agent or employee, to suffer or permit any minor to be or remain in any
room or compartment adjoining or adjacent to or situated in the room or place
where such licensed premises is located; provided that this subsection shall
not apply to any minor who is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian, or
to any licensed premises which derives its principal business from the sale of
commodities other than alcoholic liquor. It shall be unlawful for any parent or
guardian to permit any minor child of which he be parent or guardian to violate
any provisions of this section.
(1997 Code, § 35.28) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978; Am. Ord. C0-03-01, passed
1-6-2003)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.57 INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No license shall be granted to any applicant until such applicant
shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner
that such applicant is covered by a policy of liquor liability insurance ("dram
shop insurance") issued by a responsible insurance company authorized and
licensed to do business in the state, insuring such applicant against liability
which such applicant may incur under the provisions of 235 ILCS 5/6-21 with
coverage limits not less than $1,000,000 per person and per occurrence and the
premium paid in full.
   (B)   Each licensee shall furnish the Local Commissioner with a certificate
of such insurance prior to the issuance of the license and annually. In the
event of a cancellation, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner or Village
Manager shall be notified immediately of such cancellation. The failure to
secure and continuously maintain insurance coverage as stated herein shall be
grounds for the immediate suspension of business activities and/or revocation
of the liquor license by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
   (C)   For Class E (temporary special event on village-owned property)
licenses, the licensee shall furnish the dram shop insurance policy as required
above under division (A) above and furnish a general liability insurance policy
with a minimum $2,000,000 per person and $2,000,000 per occurrence coverage
limits with the premium paid in full and execute and return to the Village
Manager a License And Indemnification Agreement For Temporary Use Of A Public
Right-Of-Way To Operate A Special Event prepared by the Village Attorney prior
to being allowed to sell or serve alcoholic liquor at the special event.
(1997 Code, § 35.29) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978; Am. Ord. CO-97-07,passed
10-9-1997; Am. Ord. CO-2010-25, passed 12-21-2010)
§ 117.58 BOND.
   (A)   Before any license shall be issued, the applicant shall furnish a bond
with a corporate surety, such corporate surety to be a surety company regularly
authorized to act as surety and to be approved by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner. Such bond shall provide against any violation by the principal,
his agents or employees of any of the terms of this chapter or any other
ordinance, rule or regulation now in force or which may hereafter be in force
in the Village affecting the operation of such business. The penalty of such
bond shall be $2,500.
   (B)   In lieu of such corporate surety such applicant may furnish a bond to
the Village with 2 sureties who shall be residents of the Village and each of
whom shall be able to schedule real estate owned by him in the Village of a
market value of twice the penalty of such bond over and above any encumbrances,
taxes, assessments, homestead rights and liens of any character. Such proposed
surety shall file with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner a schedule setting
forth the street address, as well as the legal description of the real estate
owned by him; the names of all persons interested therein, whether or not the
same is improved; if improved, the nature of the improvements thereon; whether
or not the same is encumbered and if encumbered, the amount and nature of the
encumbrance; whether or not the same is subject to homestead rights, listing
any unpaid taxes except the approximate estimated value of such property over
and above encumbrances, and such other information as the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner may request to aid him in determining the sufficiency of the bond.
Such schedule shall be sworn to by the proposed surety.
(1997 Code, § 35.30) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978; Am. Ord. CO-97-07,passed
10-9-1997)
§ 117.59 LIQUOR IN PUBLIC PLACES: VEHICLES; NO LOITERING.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any person to drink any alcoholic liquor as
defined by law on any public way or other Villlage-owned real property, except
as provided in division (A)(2), or in any motor vehicle upon a public way in
the Village, and it shall be unlawful for any person to possess or drink any
alcoholic liquor in or on a park owned or maintained by the Village, except as
provided in division (A)(2).
      (2)   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner may, through the issuance of
a Class C (temporary special event - for non- Village property) license or a
Class E (temporary special event on Village-owned property) license or a Class
J (outdoor liquor café) license, allow the possession and drinking of alcoholic
liquor in a public way or other Village-owned real property or a park owned or
maintained by the Village or by another unit of local government on certain
specific dates during specific times as part of a picnic, carnival or similar
function.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to transport, carry, possess or have any
alcoholic liquor in or upon or about any motor vehicle upon any public way in
the Village except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
   (C)   It shall be a violation of the Village’s liquor ordinance for any
holder of a liquor license to allow any person or persons to loiter on the
licensed premises. The term loiter means: stand, sit or lie in or upon any
private parking lot, private sidewalk, private walkway area, or private
property utilized for public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the
free passage of pedestrians thereon or so as to prevent the free access into or
out of the entrance(s) of any licensed premises, which is open to the public. A
holder of a liquor license who violates this division shall be subject to
citation and to all penalties provided in §
117.99, including but not limited to monetary fines and suspension or
revocation of his liquor license. Upon presentation to the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner of evidence that a holder of a liquor license has been found
guilty or entered a plea of guilty in a court of law for violation of this
division, the Commissioner shall immediately suspend the liquor license held by
that person for a period of 7 days, during which a public hearing shall be
held. At the public hearing, a holder of a liquor license who has been found
guilty in a court of law or who enters a plea of guilty relative to such a
violation shall be subject to all penalties provided in §
117.99, including but not limited to monetary fines and suspension or
revocation of his liquor license.
(1997 Code, § 35.33) (Ord. 57-1, passed 1-10- 1957; Am. Ord. 78-10, passed 5-
25-1978; Am. Ord. 83-16, passed 8-26-1982; Am. Ord. CO-97-07, passed 10-9-1997;
Am. Ord. CO-04- 20, passed 7-19-2004; Am. Ord. CO-2020-29, passed 10-20-2020)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 117.60 HAPPY HOURS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Happy hours prohibited. Drink price specials and happy hours are
prohibited. All licensees shall maintain a schedule of prices charged for all
drinks of alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on the licensed premises
or in any room or part thereof.
   (B)   Prohibited acts. Pursuant to the prohibitions imposed by this section,
licensees may not:
      (1)   Offer, sell, or serve any free drink to any person.
      (2)   Serve more than 2 drinks to 1 person at 1 time for consumption by
that 1 person (except when selling or delivering wine by the bottle or carafe).
      (3)   Offer, sell, or serve to any person an unlimited number of drinks
during any set period of time for a fixed price (except at private functions
not open to the general public).
      (4)   Offer, sell, or serve to any person or group of persons on any 1
day drinks at prices less than those charged the general public on that day.
      (5)   Offer, sell, or serve to any person or group of persons any drinks
at a price less than the price regularly charged for such drinks during the
same calendar week.
      (6)   Increase the volume of alcoholic liquor contained in a drink or the
size of a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged
for the drink on that day.
      (7)   Encourage or permit, on the licensed premises, any game or contest
which involves drinking alcoholic liquor or cereal malt beverage or the
awarding of drinks as prizes.
(Am. Ord. C0-03-01, passed 1-6-2003)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 117.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Suspension or revocation of license. The Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall have the power to suspend or revoke any liquor license
issued under the provisions of this chapter for cause, or if he determines that
the licensee shall have violated any of the provisions of this Village Code,
any of the statutes of the state or any other valid ordinance or resolution
enacted by the President and Board of Trustees of the Village. However, no such
license shall be revoked or suspended except after the holding of a public
hearing by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner pursuant to the provisions of
Liquor Control Act of 1934, § 7-5 (235 ILCS 5/7-5).
   (B)   Fine imposed. In addition, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, if
he finds it to be in the public good, may, after a public hearing, fine the
licensee in an amount not to exceed $1,000 for the first violation of this
chapter within a 12 month period, $1,500 for a second violation within a 12
month period, and $2,500 for a third or subsequent violation within a 12 month
period. Each day on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. No more than $15,000 in fines may be imposed against any licensee
during the period of the license.
   (C)   Penalty options. Based upon the evidence at such hearing, the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner may enter an order:
      (1)   Revoking the licensee’s license; or
      (2)   Suspending the licensee’s license; or
      (3)   Suspending the licensee’s license and fining the licensee as
provided above; or
      (4)   Fining the licensee as provided in division (B) of this section.
   (D)   Appeals. All appeals from orders of the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be limited to a review of the official record of proceedings
of such Local Liquor Control Commissioner as provided for in Liquor Control Act
of 1934, § 7-9 (235 ILCS 5/7-9). Within 5 days after the notice of an appeal
has been filed with the State Liquor Control Commission, a certified official
record of the proceedings for the Local Liquor Control Commissioner shall be
filed with the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission; provided, however,
that the appellant licensee pays for the cost of the transcript as provided by
Liquor Control Act of 1934, § 7-9 (235 ILCS 5/7-9).
   (E)   Criminal penalties. Nothing in this chapter shall act to bar the
imposition of any applicable criminal penalties, including incarceration,
provided for pursuant to state statute.
(1997 Code, § 35.34) (Ord. 78-10, passed 5-25-1978; Am. Ord. C0-00-27, passed
12-4-1999; Am. Ord. C0-03-01, passed 1-6-2003)
CHAPTER 118: TAXICABS
Section
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Taxicab companies
   
118.03   Taxicabs
   
118.04   Taxicab drivers
   
118.05   Rates
   
118.06   Taximeters
   
118.07   Taxicab stands
   
118.08   Applications for licenses and permits
   
118.09   Expiration of licenses and permits, proration of fees
   
118.10   Licenses and permits not transferable
   
118.11   Other fees
   
118.12   Revocation and suspension of licenses and permits
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   TAXICAB. Any vehicle operated by or on behalf of a taxicab company which is
used to transport passengers for hire to or from a destination as directed by
the passenger at rates of fare which are recorded and indicated by a taximeter.
   TAXICAB COMPANY. A person, partnership unincorporated association,
corporation or other entity doing business in the Village which owns, operates
or leases taxicabs in the Village, or has taxicabs operated on its behalf in
the Village. A taxicab company shall be considered to be doing business in the
Village if vehicles operated by it or on its behalf transport passengers for
hire on trips which originate within the corporate limits of the Village.
   TAXIMETER. A mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of
a taxicab is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled, or for
waiting time, or for both and upon which such charge shall be indicated by
means of figures.
(1997 Code, § 36.01) (Ord. 83-7, passed 4-28-1983)
§ 118.02 TAXICAB COMPANIES.
   (A)   License required. Each taxicab company shall obtain a Village taxicab
company license.
   (B)   License fee. The license fee for taxicab companies shall be $275 per
year.
   (C)   Service. Each taxicab company shall have taxicabs available to provide
taxicab service 24 hours a day, every day of the year. Each taxicab company
shall maintain, or shall be a member of an association which maintains, an
office within the Village. Each taxicab company shall operate, or shall be a
member of an association which operates, a 24 hour per day telephone service
and a commercial 2-way radio station licensed by the Federal Communication
Commission which provides radio communication between the taxicab company’s
Maywood office and each taxicab operated by or on behalf of the taxicab
company. Each taxicab company shall maintain a listing of the telephone numbers
of its 24-hour telephone service in each telephone directory which covers the
Village.
   (D)   Abandonment of service. A taxicab company shall be deemed to have
abandoned service if it fails to provide service as required by §
118.02(C) for a period of 3 consecutive days.
   (E)   Insurance. Each taxicab company shall obtain a public liability
insurance policy which covers each taxicab operated by or on behalf of the
taxicab company. The insurance policy shall have limits of not less than
$100,000 for injury or death to any one person up to a maximum of not less than
$300,000 per occurrence and shall have limits of not less than $50,000 for
property damage in any one occurrence. Each taxicab company shall maintain on
file with the Building Director a certificate of insurance which evidences that
the company has obtained and there is currently in force the insurance coverage
required by this section. Such insurance certificate shall provide that not
less than 10 days written notice of cancellation shall be given to the Village.
In the event that the Village receives a notice of cancellation, the taxicab
company license and all taxicab vehicle licenses issued to taxicabs operated by
or on behalf of the taxicab company shall immediately terminate as of the
effective date of the cancellation of the insurance policy unless the taxicab
company provides a substitute policy of insurance which meets the requirements
of this section. In case a final judgment or claim has been paid by or pursuant
to any indemnitor or an insurance policy, as a result of which the amount of
insurance coverage which a taxicab company has is reduced below the minimum
required by this section, the taxicab company license of the taxicab company
and any taxicab vehicle licenses issued to taxicabs operated by or on behalf of
the taxicab company shall immediately terminate.
   (F)   Colors and names. All taxicabs operated by or on behalf of a taxicab
company shall be identically painted so that they are readily identifiable as
being operated by or on behalf of the taxicab company. However, no coloring
scheme or name shall be similar to that of any other taxicab company licensed
to do business in the Village.
   (G)   Drivers must have permit. A taxicab company shall not allow any
taxicab operated by it or on its behalf to be driven by a person who has not
been issued a Village taxicab driver permit.
(1997 Code, § 36.02) (Ord. 83-7, passed 4-28- 1983; Am. Ord. C0-00-28, passed
12-4-2000; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-
17-2021)
§ 118.03 TAXICABS.
   (A)   License required. No vehicle shall be operated within the Village as a
taxicab unless a Village taxicab vehicle license has been issued for the
vehicle.
   (B)   License fee. The fee for each taxicab vehicle license shall be $125
per year.
   (C)   Vehicle condition. Each vehicle operated as a taxicab shall be in a
mechanically sound condition and shall not have any visible rust or body
damage.
   (D)   Quarterly inspections required. Each taxicab shall be inspected by the
Building and Code Enforcement Department during the months of February, May,
August and November for the purpose of determining whether the taxicab is in
sound and safe mechanical and operating condition and meets any and all minimum
standards established by law, ordinance, rule or regulation for vehicles which
use public ways. The quarterly inspections required by this section shall be
made at times and places and shall be conducted in a manner to be determined by
the Building Director. In addition to the quarterly inspection required by this
section, the Building Director may, upon 24 hours written notice, require that
a taxicab be produced for inspection by the licensee to whom the taxicab
vehicle license was issued. Each time a taxicab is inspected the licensee shall
produce the taxicab’s vehicle identification number.
   (E)   Display of license. All vehicles for which a taxicab vehicle license
has been issued shall have affixed to their windshield decals to be issued by
the Village which shall contain the number of the taxicab vehicle license and
the month and year in which the vehicle was last inspected.
   (F)   Taximeters required. All vehicles operated as taxicabs shall have
taximeters which comply with the provisions of §
118.06. No taxicab vehicle license shall be issued for any vehicle until the
taximeter attached thereto shall have been inspected as provided in §
118.06 and found to be accurate.
   (G)   Identification of taxicabs. Each vehicle for which a taxicab vehicle
license is issued shall have painted on its trunk the Illinois vehicle license
plate number issued for such vehicle by the Illinois Secretary of State. The
name of the taxicab company which operates the vehicle as a taxicab or on whose
behalf the vehicle is operated as a taxicab shall be painted on both sides of
the vehicle. The license plate numbers and taxicab company names shall be
lettered in U.S. Standard Series "E" print which is not less than 2 inches in
height.
(1997 Code, § 36.03) (Ord. 83-7, passed 4-28-1983; Am. Ord. C0-00-28, passed
12-4-2000; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-
17-2021)
§ 118.04 TAXICAB DRIVERS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall drive a taxicab unless the person has
been issued a Village taxicab driver permit.
   (B)   Permit fee. The fee for the issuance of a Village taxicab driver
permit shall be $25 per year.
   (C)   Requirements for taxicab drivers. All applicants for Village taxicab
driver permits shall meet each of the following requirements:
      (1)   Must be not less than 18 years of age;
      (2)   Must have good eyesight;
      (3)   Must not be subject to any infirmity of body or mind which would
render the applicant unfit to operate a taxicab in a safe manner;
      (4)   Must be able to read, write and speak the English language;
      (5)   Must be clean in dress and person and not be addicted to the use of
narcotics or intoxicating liquor;
      (6)   Must have been issued a valid Illinois driver’s license of the
class required to operate a taxicab;
      (7)   Must not have been convicted of reckless driving, driving while
intoxicated or manslaughter or reckless homicide resulting from the operation
of a motor vehicle within 3 years of the date of application;
      (8)   Must not have been convicted within 10 years of the date of
application of either murder, rape, deviate sexual conduct or assault, indecent
liberties with a child, contributing to the sexual delinquency of a child,
indecent solicitation, public indecency, aggravated incest, prostitution,
soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping a place of prostitution,
pimping, obscenity, handling of harmful materials, burglary, theft, assault or
battery, possession, sale or exchange of instruments adapted for illegal drug
use or abuse, possession of a deadly weapon, armed violence, illegal
manufacture, possession, sale or delivery of controlled substances or
kidnaping.
   (D)   Photographs and fingerprints required. Every applicant for a taxicab
driver permit shall file with their application 2 recent photographs of
himself, of a size which may be easily attached to their permit, one of which
shall be attached to the permit when issued, and the other of which shall be
filed with the application by the Building and Code Enforcement Department.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver’s permit shall be fingerprinted.
   (E)   Display of permit. All taxicab driver permits shall be numbered when
issued and shall contain the permittee’s photograph. Whenever the permittee is
driving a taxicab, the permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the
taxicab in a manner that will make it clearly visible to passengers. No person
shall deface a taxicab driver permit, nor shall any person remove or obliterate
any official entry made on a taxicab driver permit.
   (F)   Change of address or telephone number. Each person to whom a taxicab
driver permit is issued shall notify the Building Director of any change that
may have occurred in their address or telephone number not less than 10 days
after the date the change occurred.
   (G)   Operation of taxicabs.
      (1)   No taxicab driver shall be on duty for more than 12 hours in any 24
hour period.
      (2)   Each taxicab driver shall remain in their taxicab while the taxicab
is parked or standing unless the driver is required to get out of the taxicab
in order to assist passengers into or out of the taxicab.
      (3)   Every taxicab stopped or parked for the purpose of picking up or
discharging passengers shall be stopped or parked with its right wheels
parallel to and within 12 inches of the street curb. No taxicab driver shall
permit any person to board or alight from any taxicab on any side other than
the right side of the taxicab.
      (4)   No taxicab driver shall solicit persons to become passengers in a
manner which causes alarm, disturbs another or provokes a breach of the peace.
No taxicab driver shall solicit persons to become passengers in a manner which
obstructs the movement of persons or vehicles. No taxicab driver shall follow a
person for the purpose of soliciting the person to become a passenger. No
taxicab driver shall interfere with the proper and orderly access to or egress
from any hall, hotel, railway station or other place of public gathering.
      (5)   Every taxicab driver shall have the right to demand payment of the
legal fare in advance and may refuse employment unless so prepaid, but no
taxicab driver shall otherwise refuse to convey any orderly person upon request
anywhere in the Village, unless previously engaged.
      (6)   If requested by the passenger, a taxicab driver shall deliver to
the person paying the fare at the time of payment a receipt in legible type or
writing containing the name of the taxicab company by or on whose behalf the
taxicab is being operated, the Village taxicab vehicle license number of the
taxicab, the taxicab driver's Village permit number, the number of the
taximeter, any items for which the charge is made, the total amount of fare
paid and the date of payment.
      (7)   A taxicab driver shall not charge or attempt to charge a passenger
a greater fare than that to which such driver is entitled under the provisions
of this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 36.04) (Ord. 83-7, passed 4-28-1983; Am. Ord. C0-00-28, passed
12-4-2000; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-
17-2021)
§ 118.05 RATES.
   A passenger shall not be charged more than the following rates for being
transported in a taxicab; provided, however, that the minimum fee for any
taxicab ride shall be $2.00:
   (A)   When initial flag pull:   $1.30;
   (B)   For the first 1/11 of a mile or fraction thereof:    $0.10;
   (C)   For each additional 1/11 of a mile or fraction thereof:         $0.10;
   (D)   For each additional passenger over the age of 12 who is picked up and
discharged at the same location:         $0.50;
   (E)   For each minute of waiting time (waiting time shall include the time
when the taxicab is not in motion, beginning within a reasonable time after
arrival at the place to which it has been called, or the time consumed while
standing because of conditions beyond the control of driver, but no charge
shall be made for the time lost due to inefficiency of a taxicab or its driver,
or time consumed by premature response to a call):    $0.22;
   (F)   For use of the trunk of the taxicab: $0.50. (1997 Code, § 36.05) (Ord.
83-7, passed 4-28-1983; Am. Ord. 86-2, passed 3-13-1986)
§ 118.06 TAXIMETERS.
   (A)   Inspection of taximeter required. No person shall drive a taxicab
which has a taximeter that has not been inspected and approved as required by
this section.
   (B)   General requirements for taximeters. The dial of every taximeter shall
show only 1 fare. Each taximeter shall also properly and accurately register,
indicate and display the fare which has accrued. In addition, each taximeter
shall also properly and accurately register, indicate and display the time
consumed by the taxicab while in waiting. Each taximeter shall be equipped with
a flag at least 3 inches by 2 inches in size, either painted red or bearing
thereon in letters at least 1 inch in height, the word “vacant” or the words
“for hire.” The flag post of such flag shall be kept up or toward a vertical
position when the taxicab is for hire. When a taxicab is engaged in the service
of a passenger or passengers, such flag pole shall be kept down or in a
horizontal position.
   (C)   Placement of taximeter. Each taximeter must be placed in a taxicab so
that it is in plain view of the passengers. Each taxicab shall, during the
period between sunset and sunrise, be equipped with a light which shall
illuminate the taximeter so as to enable the passengers within such taxicab to
read the figures indicated on the taximeter.
   (D)   Testing. Every taximeter shall be tested by running the taxicab to
which it is attached over a course of a standard mile in length or by a
mechanical test to prove the accuracy of the register thereof. Either of the
foregoing tests may be made in the discretion of the person making the
inspection. In order to determine whether such taximeter correctly registers
“waiting time” it shall be the duty of the person inspecting the taximeter to
test the taximeter by comparing the timing quoted as shown by the fare computed
on the dial of the taximeter with the standard time. It shall be the duty of
each taxicab company to deliver, upon request from the Building Director,
either the taxicab together with the taximeter, or the taximeter attached
therefrom to the person and place specified by the Building Director for the
purpose of testing.
   (E)   Sealing of taximeters. All taximeters found accurate and correct are
to be sealed. The Building Director shall keep a record of the numbers of each
taximeter, the vehicle license of the cab in which each taximeter is installed
and the date on which the taximeter was last inspected.
   (F)   Use of unsealed taximeters prohibited. No taxicab company shall permit
a taxicab to be operated which is equipped with a taximeter, whose case is
unsealed. No taxicab driver shall drive a taxicab equipped with a taximeter
whose case is unsealed.
   (G)   Transfer of taximeters. No person shall detach any certified or
inspected taximeter from any taxicab and attach the same to any other taxicab
unless the taximeter is first inspected and resealed.
   (H)   False signals. No taxicab driver while transporting passengers shall
display the signal affixed to the taxicab’s taximeter in such a position as to
denote that he is employed at a rate of fare different from that to which he is
entitled under the provisions of this section.
(1997 Code, § 36.06) (Ord. 83-7, passed 4-28- 1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 118.07 TAXICAB STANDS.
   Only taxicabs in such numbers and of such kinds as set forth on the required
metal sign may remain at a taxicab stand while waiting for employment and only
in single file pointed in accordance with the applicable traffic regulations.
No taxicab standing at the head of any such line shall refuse to carry any
orderly person applying for a taxicab who agrees to pay the proper fare. This
will not prevent any person from electing any taxicab he may desire, whether it
be at the head of the line or not. As the taxicabs leave the line with
passengers, those behind shall move up. Taxicabs seeking a place on the line
shall approach the same only from the rear of the stand and shall stop as near
as possible to the last cab already on the line.
(1997 Code, § 36.07) (Ord. 83-7, passed 4-28-1983)
§ 118.08 APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   The Building Director shall provide application forms for taxicab company
licenses, taxicab vehicle licenses and taxicab driver permits. Such forms shall
request such information as the Building Director finds is necessary to
determine whether an applicant meets all the requirements set forth in this
chapter for the license or permit for which the applicant is applying.
(1997 Code, § 36.08) (Ord. 83-7, passed 4-28- 1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 118.09 EXPIRATION OF LICENSES AND PERMITS, PRORATION OF FEES.
   Taxicab company licenses, taxicab vehicle licenses and taxicab driver
permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. The fee for licenses and
permits issued on or after July 1 shall be one-half of the annual fee.
(1997 Code, § 36.09) (Ord. 83-7, passed 4-28-1983)
§ 118.10 LICENSES AND PERMITS NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Taxicab company licenses, taxicab vehicle licenses and taxicab driver
permits shall not be transferable.
(1997 Code, § 36.10) (Ord. 83-7, passed 4-28-1983)
§ 118.11 OTHER FEES.
   The fees for taxicab company licenses, taxicab vehicle licenses and taxicab
driver permits provided for in this chapter shall be paid in addition to any
and all fees otherwise applicable under the provisions of other chapters of
this Code or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the Village.
(1997 Code, § 36.11) (Ord. 83-7, passed 4-28-1983)
§ 118.12 REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF LICENSES AND PERMITS.
   (A)   The Village President, or his or her designee, following notice and a
hearing conducted in conformance with §
110.17, may suspend or revoke a taxicab company license, a taxicab vehicle
license or a taxicab driver permit for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for a license or permit;
      (2)   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of a provision of this
chapter, for any of the reasons set forth in §
110.10, or for violations of any other section of this title or Code;
      (3)   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or a
misdemeanor if such conviction indicates an inability to operate or participate
in a safe, honest and legitimate business operation within the Village;
      (4)   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine, penalty or
other charge owing to the Village, including but not limited to bills for water
service;
      (5)   Refusal to permit or to have a taxicab or taximeter inspected or
interfering with a duly authorized Village officer or employee while in the
performance of his or her duty in making such inspection or seeking any other
information pertinent to the issuance or renewal of either a taxicab company
license, a taxicab vehicle license or a taxicab driver permit;
      (6)   Employing a person as a taxicab driver who has not been issued a
taxicab driver permit, leasing a taxicab to a person who has not been issued a
taxicab driver permit or otherwise authorizing a person who has not been issued
a Village taxicab driver permit to drive a taxicab;
      (7)   Abandonment of taxicab service; and
      (8)   Violation of any applicable state or municipal law, ordinance, rule
or regulation.
(1997 Code, § 36.12) (Ord. 83-7, passed 4-28-1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed 4-1-2014)
CHAPTER 119: LIVERY SERVICES
Section
   
119.01   Definitions
   
119.02   Requirements for livery vehicles
   
119.03   Operation of livery vehicles and livery services
   
119.04   Livery service license
   
119.05   Livery vehicles license
   
119.06   Inspection of livery vehicles
   
119.07   Public service required; abandonment
   
119.08   Suspension or revocation of licenses
   
119.09   Maywood mini-bus operations
§ 119.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   LIVERY SERVICE. A company, firm, corporation, partnership, individual or
other entity which operates 1 or more livery vehicles.
   LIVERY VEHICLE. A public passenger vehicle used to transport passengers for
hire only at a charge of fare for each passenger per trip or for each vehicle
per trip fixed by agreement in advance.
(1997 Code, § 36A.01) (Ord. CO-82-12, passed 4-29-1982)
§ 119.02 REQUIREMENTS FOR LIVERY VEHICLES.
   (A)   No livery vehicle shall contain a taximeter. It shall be unlawful for
any person to operate or drive a livery vehicle equipped with a meter which
registers a charge or indicates the distance traveled by which the charge or
fare to be paid by a passenger is measured.
   (B)   The outside of the body of a livery vehicle shall not contain any
inscription. No lights shall be attached to or exposed outside of the livery
vehicle unless such lights are required or permitted by the laws of the state
and the ordinances of the Village regulating traffic.
   (C)   No vehicle shall be used as a livery vehicle unless a livery vehicle
license for such vehicle has been issued by the Village.
   (D)   No livery vehicle license shall be issued until such vehicle has been
thoroughly and carefully inspected and examined and determined by the Building
and Code Enforcement Department to be in a thoroughly safe condition for the
transportation of passengers, clean, fit, of good appearance and well painted.
No livery vehicle license shall be issued for any vehicle which is more than 6
years old.
   (E)   All livery vehicles must have at least 4 doors and have a seating
capacity of not less than 5 persons, including the driver.
(1997 Code, § 36A.02) (Ord. CO-82-12, passed 4-29-1982; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.03 OPERATION OF LIVERY VEHICLES AND LIVERY SERVICES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a livery service within the Village unless
such person has first obtained a livery service license from the Village.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit passengers for
transportation in a livery vehicle on any public way. No livery vehicle shall
be parked on any public way for a time longer than is reasonably necessary to
accept passengers in answer to a call for service, and no passenger shall be
accepted for any trip in such vehicle without previous engagement for such trip
at a fixed charge or fare, through the station or office from which the livery
vehicle is operated.
   (C)   Livery vehicles are prohibited from using taxicab stands.
   (D)   No livery vehicle shall be operated by any livery service unless a
livery vehicle license has been obtained for such vehicle.
   (E)   No livery vehicle shall be operated within the Village except by a
livery service which has been issued a livery service license by the Village.
(1997 Code, § 36A.03) (Ord. CO-82-12, passed 4-29-1982)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 119.04 LIVERY SERVICE LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a livery service within the Village until such
person has obtained a livery service license issued by the Village.
   (B)   There shall be one livery service license authorized. The number of
authorized livery service licenses may be increased by the corporate
authorities of the Village if the corporate authorities determine after a
hearing, that the public convenience and necessity require additional livery
services in the Village.
   (C)   No person shall be licensed to operate a livery service until such
person has complied with all provisions of this chapter, all other applicable
provisions of this Code and with all sections of the state law pertaining to a
surety bond or the insurance policy which has been issued for the benefit of
any person who might suffer damage by reason of the operation of a livery
vehicle by such livery service. Before issuing a livery service license, the
applicant for such license shall submit to the Village Clerk the approval of
such bond by the Secretary of State or proof of the issuance of such insurance
policy. Such surety bond or insurance policy may cover 1 or more vehicles.
   (D)   The license fee for each livery service license shall be $800 per
calendar year.
   (E)   No licensee shall operate more than 15 vehicles.
(1997 Code, § 36A.01) (Ord. CO-82-12, passed 4-29-1982; Am. Ord. C0-00-29,
passed 12-4-2000)
§ 119.05 LIVERY VEHICLES LICENSE.
   (A)   The sticker fee for livery vehicles shall be $25 per vehicle per
calendar year. In case of a livery vehicle license issued on or after July 1,
one half the license fee shall be paid. Such license fee shall be paid in lieu
of the regular annual license fee charged by the Village, pursuant to §§ 70.20
et seq. for motor vehicles housed in the Village.
   (B)   The livery vehicle license shall be in the form of a card which shall
contain the official license number of the livery vehicle, together with the
date such vehicle was last inspected. Such card shall be signed by the Village
Clerk. License cards shall be of a distinctly different color each year. The
livery vehicle license shall be affixed to a conspicuous and indispensable part
of each livery vehicle.
(1997 Code, § 36A.05) (Ord. CO-82-12, passed 4-29-1982)
§ 119.06 INSPECTION OF LIVERY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Before a livery vehicle license is issued for any livery vehicle, the
livery service which operates such livery vehicle shall, at the livery
service’s cost, provide to the Building Director a report which shows that such
livery vehicle has been tested within the preceding 10 days at a reputable
testing lane or garage, and which shows that such livery vehicle is in a
thoroughly safe condition for the transportation of passengers. In addition,
the Building and Code Enforcement Department shall prior to the issuance of a
livery vehicle license inspect the livery vehicle for the purpose of
determining whether such livery vehicle is clean, fit, of good appearance and
well painted.
   (B)   The Building and Code Enforcement Department and the Police Department
shall maintain constant vigilance over all livery vehicles for the purpose of
seeing that they are kept in a condition of continued fitness for public use,
and to this end the Building and Code Enforcement Department shall order the
inspection of all livery vehicles from time to time or on the complaint of any
person or as often as such inspections may be necessary. The Building and Code
Enforcement Department may direct that the operator of a livery service shall,
at the livery service’s cost, have the livery service’s livery vehicles tested
at a reputable testing lane or garage in order that the Building and Code
Enforcement Department may receive reports regarding the condition of such
vehicles.
(1997 Code, § 36A.06) (Ord. CO-82-12, passed 4-29-1982; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 119.07 PUBLIC SERVICE REQUIRED; ABANDONMENT.
   Each livery service licensee shall regularly and daily operate 1 or more
livery vehicles during each day of the year to the extent reasonably necessary
to meet the public demand for such livery service. Such livery service shall be
deemed abandoned when the service is discontinued for a period of 10
consecutive days by the owner or operator of the service.
(1997 Code, § 36A.07) (Ord. CO-82-12, passed 4-29-1982)
§ 119.08 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
   Livery service licenses and livery vehicle licenses issued under this
chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Village President, or his or her
designee, following notice and a hearing held in conformance with §
110.17 for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for license;
   (B)   Any violation by the licensee of the provisions of this chapter, for
any of the reasons set forth in §
110.10, or for violations of any other section of this title or Code;
   (C)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony or a misdemeanor if such
conviction indicates an inability to operate or participate in a safe, honest
and legitimate business operation within the Village;
   (D)   Failure of the licensee to pay any fine, penalty, or other charge
owing to the Village;
   (E)   Refusal to permit or to have a livery vehicle inspected or any
interference with a duly authorized Village officer or employee while in the
performance of his or her duty in making such inspections or seeking any other
information pertinent to the issuance or renewal of either the livery service
license or a livery vehicle license;
   (F)   Failure to maintain a livery vehicle in good, safe and proper working
order;
   (G)   Failure to employ properly licensed drivers;
   (H)   Abandonment of the livery service for a period of 10 or more
consecutive days;
   (I)   Violation of any applicable state or municipal law, ordinance, rule or
regulation.
(1997 Code, § 36A.08) (Ord. CO-82-12, passed 4-29-1982; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14,
passed 4-1-2014)
§ 119.09 MAYWOOD MINI-BUS OPERATIONS.
   (A)   There is no rider charge for the Village mini-bus.
   (B)   The fee for the operating permit for the mini-bus is to be waived.
   (C)   The Village is committed to have a mini-bus to provide an alternative
to public/private transportation to senior, handicapped and other citizens of
the Village.
(1997 Code, § 36A.09) (Ord. CO-82-12, passed 4-29-1982; Am. Ord. 89-6, passed
5-11-1989; Am. Ord. C0-00-29, passed 12-4-2000)
CHAPTER 120: WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
Section
   
120.01   Purpose
   
120.02   Definitions
   
120.03   Applicability
   
120.04   General requirements
   
120.05   General location, siting criteria and preferences
   
120.06   Co-location requirements
   
120.07   Co-location design requirements
   
120.08   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technology
   
120.09   Aesthetic requirements
   
120.10   Landscaping
   
120.11   Buildings or other equipment storage
   
120.12   Roads and parking
   
120.13   Information required
   
120.14   Permitted uses
   
120.15   Administratively approved uses
   
120.16   Special use permits
   
120.17   Factors considered in granting special use permits for towers
   
120.18   Setbacks
   
120.19   Separation
   
120.20   Removal of abandoned or dangerous antennas and towers
   
120.21   Nonconforming uses
   
120.22   Business registration permits
   
120.23   Liability and insurance requirements
§ 120.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communication facilities, towers, antennas and equipment.
The goals of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts
of towers and antennas;
   (B)   Encourage the location of towers in non-residential areas:
      (1)   Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
      (2)   Strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as
a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
      (3)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
      (4)   Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a
manner that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas
through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative
camouflaging techniques;
      (5)   Enhance the ability of the providers of communications services to
provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently;
      (6)   Consider the public health and safety of communication towers; and
      (7)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. To further these
goals, the Village shall give due consideration to the comprehensive plan,
zoning map, existing land uses, historic and environmentally sensitive areas in
approving sites for the location of towers and antennas.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 120.02 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, these terms shall have the following meanings:
   ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE. An artificially constructed tree, clock tower,
bell steeple, light pole and similar alternative-design mounting structures
that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
   ANTENNA. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless communications signals or other
communication signals.
   BACKHAUL NETWORK. The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell sites to 1
or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or long distance providers,
or the public switched telephone network.
   COMMERCIAL WIRELESS COMMUNICATION SERVICE. Commercial wireless
telecommunications services including cellular, personal communication services
(PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio
(ESMR), paging, and similar services that are marketed to the general public,
and licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
   COMMUNICATION FACILITY. A facility that transmits and/or receives
electromagnetic signals. It includes towers, antennas, microwave dishes, horns,
and other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals,
telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting said equipment,
equipment buildings, parking area, and other accessory development.
   COMMUNICATION FACILITY - EXEMPT. The following are exempt from the
regulations of this chapter, but may be subject to regulation in the Village's
Zoning Ordinance or elsewhere in this Code:
      AMATEUR RADIO OPERATOR. A ground, building, or tower mounted antenna
operated by a federally licensed amateur radio operator as part of the Amateur
Radio Service, if the height (post and antenna) does not exceed 35 feet. Such
antennas are regulated by the Village's Zoning Ordinance.
      CITIZENS BAND RADIO. A ground or building mounted citizens band radio
antenna including any mast, if the height (post and antenna) does not exceed 35
feet.
      EARTH SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA. A ground or building mounted "receive only"
radio or television satellite dish antenna, for the sole use of the resident
occupying a residential parcel on which the satellite dish is located. Such
antennas are regulated by the Village's Zoning Ordinance.
      HAND HELD DEVICES. Hand held devices such as cellular phones, business-
band mobile radios, walkie-talkies, cordless telephones, garage door openers
and similar devices as determined by the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation.
      MOBILE ANTENNAS. Mobile services providing public information coverage of
news events of a temporary nature.
      PERSONAL RADIO & TELEVISION ANTENNA. A single ground or building mounted
receive-only radio or television antenna including any mast, for the sole use
of the tenant occupying a residential parcel on which the radio or television
antenna is located; with an antenna height not exceeding 25 feet.
      TEMPORARY ANTENNAS AND TOWERS. Antennas and/or towers may be erected
temporarily for test purposes and for emergency communication, provided that
all applicable building code requirements are met. TEMPORARY ANTENNAS AND/OR
TOWERS shall be removed within 72 hours following installation.
      VILLAGE OWNED AND OPERATED ANTENNAS. Village owned and operated receiving
and/or transmitting telemetry station antennas for  supervisory control and
data acquisition (SCADA) systems for water, flood alert, traffic control
devices and signals, storm water, pump stations and/or irrigation systems.
   EQUIPMENT BUILDING, SHELTER OR CABINET. A cabinet or building used to house
equipment used by wireless communication service providers at a communication
facility.
   FAA. Federal Aviation Administration.
   FCC. Federal Communications Commission.
   HEIGHT. A tower or other structure whose distance is measured from the
finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the tower or other
structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
   LOT OF RECORD. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat recorded with
the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County, Illinois, in accordance with state law.
   MONOPOLE. A wireless communication facility, which consists of a monopolar
structure, erected on the ground to support wireless communication antennas and
connecting appurtenances.
   MULTI-FAMILY STRUCTURE. For purposes of this chapter, a multi-family
structure is a building used for occupancy by 8 or more separate and
independent family units.
   PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS. Any tower or antenna for which
a building permit or special use permit has been properly issued prior to the
effective date of this chapter, including permitted towers or antennas that
have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is current and not
expired.
   PUBLICLY USED STRUCTURE OR FACILITY. A structure or facility used or
operated by a bona fide public body or public utility in connection with any of
the following services: water,  waste water management, public education, parks
and recreation, fire and police protection, solid waste management,
transportation or utilities.
   SUPPORT FACILITIES AND RELATED EQUIPMENT. The cabinet or building used to
house equipment used by wireless communication providers, including all
equipment ancillary to the transmission and reception of voice and data via
radio frequencies. Such equipment may include, but is not limited to cable,
conduit and connectors.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting 1 or more antennas for telephone, radio and similar
communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers,
or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers,
microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative
tower structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support
thereto.
   TOWER CO-LOCATION. Any tower that is designed and constructed to accommodate
the antennas of more than 1 commercial wireless communication service provider
or governmental entity.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.03 APPLICABILITY.
   All new towers or antennas in the Village shall be subject to the
regulations of this chapter, except for those communication facilities that are
exempt under §
120.02, or small wireless facilities as defined and regulated in
Chapter 160 (Small Wireless Facilities) of this code, to the extent the
provisions in
Chapter 160 conflict with the regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 120.04 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or
tower on such lot.
   (B)   Lot size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with the development regulations of the zoning
district in which the facility is located, including but not limited to setback
requirements, lot-coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the
dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers
may be located on leased parcels within such lot. For the purpose of this
chapter, the dimensions of an entire lot of record shall control the
development regulations, even though the communication facility may be located
on leased parcels within such lot.
   (C)   Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or
tower shall provide to the Director of Sustainability and Innovation an
inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or sites approved for towers or
antennas, that are either within the jurisdiction of the Village or within 1
mile of the Village borders, including specific information about the location,
height, and design of each tower. The Director of Sustainability and Innovation
may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative
approvals or special use permits under this chapter or other organizations
seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the Village, provided,
however that the Director of Sustainability and Innovation is not, by sharing
such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are
available or suitable.
   (D)   Signs. No advertising design or media shall be placed upon an antenna,
tower, equipment structure, building or site.
   (E)   Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by
the FAA or other applicable authority.
      (1)   If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives and design
chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. It shall be
shielded or directed to the greatest extent possible in such a manner as to
minimize the amount of light that falls onto nearby properties, particularly
residential properties.
      (2)   When incorporated into the approved design of the tower, light
fixtures used to illuminate ball fields, parking lots, or similar areas may be
attached to the tower.
      (3)   In residential districts, any exterior lights shall be kept off
except when personnel are actually present at night.
   (F)   State or federal requirements. All towers, support facilities and
telecommunications services must meet or exceed current standards and
regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal
government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas, including the
requirements regarding installation of emergency generators at each tower site
(see §
120.11(J)), and shall not interfere with public safety and other Village and
private telecommunications operations. If such standards and regulations are
changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter
shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with revised standards and
regulations within 6 months of the effective date, unless a different
compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal agency.
Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at
the owner's expense.
   (G)   Building codes/safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance
with standards contained in applicable state or local building codes and the
applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries
Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the Village
concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and
constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice to the tower
owner, the owner shall have 30 days to bring the tower into compliance with
such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within 30 days
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's
expense.
   (H)   Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located in
the Village irrespective of municipal and county jurisdictional boundaries.
   (I)   Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this chapter and shall not be regulated or permitted as
essential services, public utilities, or private utilities.
   (J)   Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall
certify that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or
operation of a wireless communication system in the Village have been obtained
and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation.
   (K)   Public notice. For purposes of this chapter, any special use request,
variance request, or appeal of an administratively approved use or special use
shall require public notice to all abutting property owners and all property
owners of properties that are located within the corresponding separation
distance listed in §
120.19(B) (Table 2, Separation Distances Between Towers), in addition to any
notice otherwise required by the Zoning Ordinance.
   (L)   Buildings and support equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements of §
120.11 (Buildings and Other Equipment Storage).
   (M)   Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Village encourages tower and antenna
users to submit a single application for approval of multiple towers and/or
antenna sites. Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given
priority in the review process.
   (N)   Height. The height limitation in all zoning districts for new tower
construction is 100 feet, unless the height limitation is increased by the
Village Board as part of a special use permit process. The maximum height of
any tower, antenna or personal wireless service facility shall be certified by
the applicant's engineer as part of the application. The Village Board may
increase the maximum height restriction as part of the special use permit
approval process if the goals of this chapter would be better served by the
adjustment. Two primary (but not exhaustive) criteria for consideration of
allowing an increase in the maximum tower height above 100 feet as part of a
special use permit process are as follows: a study certified by a professional
engineer demonstrates that the tower height needs to be increased in order to
allow the personal wireless facilities and related service to serve their
desired and intended purpose(s) and to properly function; and to allow
sufficient capacity on the tower pole to place personal wireless facilities and
related antennas owned or operated by the Village on the pole. The maximum
height that a tower and its attached antennas may be increased to under a
special use permit process is 150 feet. An applicant for a tower over 100 feet
in height must reserve space on the tower above 100 feet and allow the Village,
at its costs, to install, operate and maintain its antennas and related
equipment for municipal purposes and public health, welfare and safety purposes
during the time the tower is operational.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.05 GENERAL LOCATION, SITING CRITERIA AND PREFERENCES.
   The locations for siting communication facilities are listed in the
subsections below.
   (A)   No communication facility shall be constructed in or at a location
readily visible from a public trail, public park, forest preserve or other
outdoor recreation area, or in property designated as a floodway, unless it
blends with the surrounding existing natural and man-made environment in such a
manner as to be effectively unnoticeable (e.g. alternative tower structure) and
a certified engineer finds that no other location is technically feasible.
   (B)   No communication facility shall be installed at a location where
special painting or lighting will be required by the FAA regulations unless
technical evidence acceptable to the Director of Community Development and/or
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals is submitted showing that this is the
only technically feasible location for this facility.
   (C)   No communication facility that is readily visible from off-site shall
be installed closer than one-half mile from another readily visible
uncamouflaged or unscreened communication facility, regardless of the Village
boundaries, unless it is a co-located facility, situated on a multiple-user
site, or blends with the surrounding existing natural and built environment in
such a manner as to be effectively unnoticeable; or technical evidence
acceptable to the Director of Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, is submitted demonstrating a clear need for
this facility and the unfeasibility of co-locating it on 1 of these former
sites.
   (D)   Preferred location sites. Publicly used structures are preferred
locations throughout the Village because they appear in all neighborhoods and,
within each neighborhood, they appear to be institutional/infrastructure uses,
similar in appearance to communication facility installations. Therefore
communication facility installations on publicly used structures appear less
noticeable than on commercial or residential structures. Similarly, the
communication facilities on structures which already feature similar
installations (co-locations) would also appear less noticeable than on other
structures, up to the point when there would be too many antennae and the
structure appears too "busy," "cluttered," visually obtrusive and irritating.
      (1)   Publicly-used structures. Public facilities such as police or fire
stations, libraries, community centers, utility structures, water towers,
elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, smokestacks, telephone switching
facilities, or other public structures. Where the installation complies with
all FCC regulations and standards, schools, hospitals, health centers, legally
designated places of worship, or other similar institutional structures should
also be considered.
      (2)   Co-location site. Any existing site on which a legal wireless
communications facility is currently located shall be a preferred location site
regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site, provided, however,
that locations which meet this criterion shall be subject to the design and
siting components of this chapter, applicable to the Comprehensive Plan, or
other such policies that may be adopted by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals, including, but not limited to, policies which prevent location of so
many facilities on a structure such that the roof or site resembles an "antenna
farm" or is otherwise deemed visually obtrusive.
      (3)   Manufacturing or commercial structures. Wholly industrial or
commercial structures within a manufacturing district, such as, factories,
retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, service stations where existing
visual obstructions/clutter on the roof or along the roofline can and will, in
a commercially practicable manner, be removed or camouflaged as part of the
installation.
      (4)   Billboards. The placement of only low profile antennas on existing
or new billboard structures is permitted, provided: the maximum height
regulations for antennas set forth in this chapter are complied with or a
special use permit is granted to increase the maximum height; and the antennas
shall be attached to the billboard monopole or installed behind the billboard
sign structure so that they are screened from public view to the extent
reasonably possible. In all cases, the maximum height of an antenna cannot
exceed the highest portion of the billboard sign or tower and the placement of
the antenna must be approved by a special use permit. Low profile antennas
installed on existing or new billboard structures or its related monopole are
not subject to the setback regulations set forth in this section. The color of
the antenna shall match the color of the monopole or billboard sign structure
to minimize its visibility.
   (E)   Limited preference sites. Antennas placed on buildings located in
business districts are limited preference sites. Antennas placed on multi-
family dwellings of 8 or more units are limited preference sites. The Director
of Sustainability and Innovation and/or the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals will not approve applications for such sites unless the application
describes the following:
      (1)   Demonstrates where any publicly-used buildings, co-location site or
other preferred location sites are located within the geographic service area;
      (2)   Demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence what good-faith
efforts and measures were taken to secure these preferred location sites;
      (3)   Explains why such efforts were unsuccessful; and
      (4)   Demonstrates that the location for the site is essential to meet
the demands in the geographic service area and the applicant’s network.
      (5)   The Village may require an independent verification of this
analysis at the applicant’s expense.
   (F)   Disfavored sites, residential districts. The Director of
Sustainability and Innovation and/or the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals will not approve applications for residential districts unless the
application describes the following:
      (1)   Demonstrates where any publicly-used buildings, co-location site or
other preferred location sites are located within the geographic service area;
      (2)   Demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence what good-faith
efforts and measures were taken to secure these preferred location sites;
      (3)   Explains why such efforts were unsuccessful; and
      (4)   Demonstrates that the location for the site is essential to meet
the demands in the geographic service area and the applicant’s network.
      (5)   The Village may require an independent verification of this
analysis at the applicant’s expense.
   (G)   Facilities placed on publicly used structures, as defined in division
(D)(1) of this section, shall not be considered disfavored sites and may be
approved as provided by this chapter.
   (H)   A co-location site as defined in division (D)(2) of this section shall
not be considered a disfavored site and may be approved as provided by this
chapter.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.06 CO-LOCATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Applicants shall certify, as documented by a qualified and licensed
professional engineer, that the commercial wireless communication service
equipment planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on an existing
or approved tower or building within a 1 mile search radius (one-half mile
search radius for towers under 120 feet in height, one-quarter mile search
radius for towers under 80 feet in height) of the proposed tower due to 1 or
more of the following reasons:
   (A)   The proposed antenna and/or equipment would exceed the structural
capacity of the existing or approved tower or building, and the existing or
approved tower cannot be reinforced, modified, or replaced to accommodate
planned or equivalent equipment at a reasonable cost.
   (B)   The proposed antenna and/or equipment would cause interference
materially impacting the usability of other existing or planned equipment at
the tower or building and the interference cannot be prevented at a reasonable
cost.
   (C)   Existing or approved towers and buildings within the search radius
cannot accommodate the proposed antenna and/or equipment at a height necessary
to function reasonably.
   (D)   Other unforeseen reasons that make it infeasible to locate the
proposed antenna and/or equipment upon an existing or approved tower or
building.
   (E)   The Village may require independent verification of this analysis at
the applicant's expense.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 120.07 CO-LOCATION DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   Any proposed wireless communication facility shall be designed,
structurally, electrically, and in all respects, to accommodate both the
applicant's antennas and comparable antennas for at least 2 additional users if
the tower is over 100 feet in height (plus Village antennas and related
equipment, as specified in division (E) of this section) or for at least 1
additional user if the tower is over 60 feet in height. Towers must be designed
to allow for future rearrangement of antennas upon the tower and to accept
antennas mounted at varying heights.
   (A)   The facility shall make available unutilized space for co-location of
other communication facilities, including space for these entities providing
similar, competing services.
   (B)   A good faith effort in achieving co-location shall be required of the
host entity.
      (1)   Requests for utilization of facility space and responses to such
requests shall be made in a timely manner, in writing, and copies shall be
provided to the Village's business license files.
      (2)   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall mediate any
unresolved disputes pursuant to Section 3.2 of the Zoning Ordinance of the
Village of Maywood.
   (C)   The applicant shall provide a notarized letter of intent committing
the tower owner and successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an
additional user agrees in writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for
shared use.
   (D)   The applicant shall also provide a report from a licensed professional
engineer that demonstrates the tower's compliance with co-location structural
and electrical standards.
   (E)   An applicant for a tower over 100 feet in height must reserve space on
the tower above 100 feet and allow the Village, at its cost, to install,
operate and maintain its antennas and equipment for municipal purposes and
public health, welfare and safety purposes during the time the tower is
operational. This reservation of space is exclusive of the space that must be
reserved for an additional 2 users as required in this division.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 120.08 AVAILABILITY OF SUITABLE EXISTING TOWERS, OTHER STRUCTURES, OR
ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY.
   No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant’s proposed antenna.
An applicant shall submit information requested by the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
related to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing
tower, structure or alternative technology can accommodate the applicant’s
proposed antenna may consist of any of the following:
   (A)   No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic
area, which meet applicant's engineering requirements.
   (B)   Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet
applicant's engineering requirements.
   (C)   Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment.
   (D)   The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic
interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the
antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the
applicant's proposed antenna.
   (E)   The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in
order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or
structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
   (F)   The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that
render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
   (G)   The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that does
not require the use of towers or structures, such as a cable microcell network
using multiple low-powered transmitters/ receivers attached to a wireline
system, is unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new tower or
antenna development shall not be presumed to render the technology unsuitable.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.09 AESTHETIC REQUIREMENTS.
   Towers and antennas shall meet the following aesthetic and design
requirements:
   (A)   Towers shall be of a monopole design.
   (B)   Towers and antennas shall be designed to blend into the surrounding
environment through the use of color and camouflaging architectural treatment,
except in instances where the color is indicated by federal or state
authorities such as the FAA.
   (C)   All poles, towers, antenna supports, antennas, and other components of
each site, other than the integral design of an alternative tower structure,
shall be initially painted and thereafter repainted as necessary with a “flat”
paint. The color selected shall be one that in the opinion of the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals,
as appropriate, will minimize their visibility to the greatest extent feasible.
To this end, improvements which will be primarily viewed against soils, trees
or grasslands shall be painted colors matching these landscapes while elements
which rise above the horizon shall be painted a blue-gray that matches the
typical sky color at that location.
   (D)   If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral
color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the
supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
   (E)   The Village shall have the authority to require special design of the
communication facilities where findings of particular sensitivity are made
(e.g. proximity to residential, historic or aesthetically significant
structures, views and/or community features).
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.10 LANDSCAPING.
   All communication facilities shall be installed in such a manner so as to
maintain and enhance existing native vegetation and to install suitable
landscaping to screen the facility, where necessary. The following requirements
shall be implemented for all communication facilities, except those
communication facilities that are exempt as defined in §
120.02. Where an antenna is installed on an existing building or where an
antenna is added to an existing tower as provided by this chapter, the Director
of Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
may reduce landscaping requirements if the goals of this chapter would be
better served thereby.
   (A)   A landscape plan shall be submitted with the project application
indicating all existing vegetation, identifying landscaping that is to be
retained on the site and any additional vegetation that is needed to
satisfactorily screen the facility from adjacent land uses and public view
areas. The landscape plan shall be subject to review and approval of the
administrative or special use review process. All trees larger than 4 inches in
diameter shall be identified in the landscape plan with indication of species
type, diameter at 4-1/2 feet high, and whether it is to be retained or removed
with project development.
   (B)   Existing trees and other screening vegetation in the vicinity of the
facility and along the access roads and power/telecommunication line routes
involved shall be protected from damage, both during the construction period
and thereafter. Therefore, the following measures shall be implemented:
      (1)   A tree protection plan shall be submitted with the building permit
or improvement plan. This plan shall be prepared by a certified arborist and
give specific measures to protect trees during project construction;
      (2)   Grading, cutting/filling, and the storage/parking of equipment/
vehicles shall be prohibited in the protected landscaped areas and the drip
line of any trees required to be preserved. Such areas shall be fenced to the
satisfaction of the Director of Sustainability and Innovation, as appropriate.
Trash, debris, or spoils shall not be placed within these fences nor shall the
fences henceforth be opened or moved until the project is complete and written
approval to remove the fencing has been received from the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation; and
      (3)   All underground lines shall be routed such that a minimum amount of
damage is done to tree root systems.
   (C)   All areas disturbed during project construction, other than required
access road and parking areas required under §
120.12, shall be replanted with vegetation compatible with the vegetation in
the surrounding area (e.g. ornamental shrubs or natural brush depending upon
the circumstances) to the satisfaction of the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation and/or Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (D)   Any existing trees or significant vegetation, on the facilities site
or along the affected access area that die shall be replaced with native trees
and vegetation of a size and species acceptable to the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (E)   No action shall be taken after project completion with respect to the
vegetation and landscaping that would increase the visibility of the facility
or the access road and power/ telecommunication lines serving it.
   (F)   Existing mature tree growth, vegetation and natural landforms on the
site shall be preserved to the absolute maximum extent possible. In some cases,
such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property
perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
   (G)   All communication facilities shall be screened from view by an
evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of 8 feet and a planted height of at
least 36 inches. Ultimate height of the hedge shall be met within 2 years. The
Director of Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan Commission/Zoning Board
of Appeals, as appropriate, may reduce these requirements if the goals of this
chapter would be better served.
   (H)   In locations where the visual impact of the communication facility
would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced, or a non-
vegetative screening used that better reflects and complements the
architectural or historic character of the surrounding neighborhood. A non-
vegetative screening by a solid wood or brick masonry fence 8 feet in height,
or other acceptable quality screening may be used if found by the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals,
as appropriate, to be compatible in the district and setting in which the
communications facility will be viewed.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.11 BUILDINGS OR OTHER EQUIPMENT STORAGE.
   (A)   Support facilities design. In all zoning districts, the design of the
buildings and related structures shall be treated to look like a building or
facility typically found in the area by use of materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend the facility into the natural or
historic setting and surrounding environment and buildings.
   (B)   In residential districts, support facilities shall be sited below the
ground, depressed, or located behind earth berms to minimize their profile to
all extents possible, and may be required in other or adjoining districts as
found necessary by the Director of Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan
Commission/ Zoning Board of Appeals.
      (1)   If the support facilities cannot be sited below ground, depressed,
or located behind earth berms, the applicant shall provide technical evidence
from a certified engineer outlining the specific reasons that the support
facility cannot meet these requirements. In this event, the support facilities
shall be designed, landscaped, screened and obscured to the satisfaction of the
Director of Sustainability and Innovation or Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals.
   (C)   The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 300 square feet
of gross floor area or be more than 15 feet in height, unless found necessary
by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals to encourage co-location.
   (D)   If the support facilities are located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and structures shall not
occupy more than 20% of the roof area.
      (1)   Rooftop installations shall be setback such that the structure
cannot be viewed from the street.
      (2)   For primary buildings and structures which are less than 65 feet in
height, the related unmanned equipment structure, if over 300 square feet of
gross floor area or 15 feet in height, shall be located on the ground and shall
not be located on the roof of the structure.
   (E)   Yard requirements. Support facilities shall be located in accordance
with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which the support
facilities are located.
   (F)   Security fencing. Towers and support facilities shall be enclosed by
security fencing not less than 6 feet in height and shall also be equipped with
an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided however, that the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
may waive such requirements, as deemed appropriate.
   (G)   Building codes. Support facilities shall comply with all applicable
local and state building codes.
   (H)   Satellite. Satellite dishes other than microwave dishes shall be of
mesh construction, except where technical evidence is acceptable to the
Director of Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan Commission/Zoning Board
of Appeals, as appropriate, demonstrating this is infeasible.
   (I)   Modification of building size requirements. The requirements of
divisions (C) and (D) of this section may be modified by the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation in the case of administratively approved uses or
by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals in the case of uses permitted by
special use to encourage collocation.
   (J)   Emergency back-up power sources. For purposes of compliance with the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Order released October 4, 2007
(amending Section 12.2 of Part 12 of Chapter I of Title 47 of the Code of
Federal Regulations), as amended, relating to the provision of emergency backup
power sources for communication systems and equipment, the owner shall: supply
the Village with a copy of the certified emergency backup power compliance plan
(and any amendments thereto) required by the above-mentioned FCC Order within
30 days of filing the plan with the FCC; and in emergency situations where
electric power to owner’s wireless communication towers and antennas and
related facilities is not available, the owner may temporarily locate and
operate a generator in proximity to the tower in order to supply emergency
backup power to operate its wireless communication towers and antennas and
related facilities provided that the placement of the generator complies with
applicable federal, state and local laws, including setback and noise control
regulations and does not create a safety risk to life or health.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.12 ROADS AND PARKING.
   The minimum roads and parking areas necessary shall serve all communication
facilities, except exempt facilities. The following measures shall be
implemented:
   (A)   Existing roads shall be used for access, whenever possible, and be
upgraded the minimum amount necessary to meet standards specified by the Fire
Chief and/or Village Engineer. Any new roads or parking areas built shall,
whenever feasible, be shared with subsequent communication facilities and/or
other permitted uses. In addition, they shall meet with the width and
structural requirements of the Fire Chief and/or Village Engineer.
   (B)   Existing parking areas shall, whenever possible, be used.
   (C)   Any new parking areas constructed shall be no larger than 350 square
feet, and shall be effectively landscaped to the satisfaction of the Director
of Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.13 INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   Applicants for a communication facility or tower shall submit the following
information. The required information may be reduced as applicable or deemed
appropriate for review by the Director of Sustainability and Innovation and/or
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, as the information relates to the
installation of towers and the installation of antennas. For special use
permits, applicants shall also include any information required for special use
permit applications pursuant to Sections 3.2 and 4.4 of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Village:
   (A)   A non-refundable application fee of $300, plus a $1,500 deposit to pay
any and all direct and indirect costs incurred by the Village in employing
professional consultants to review the application, in processing the permit or
special use permit (including but not limited to the costs associated with
publishing for a public hearing and court reporting fees), and inspecting the
construction of the wireless communication tower, antenna and related
facilities.
   (B)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of
the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning
(including when adjacent to other municipalities), Comprehensive Plan
classification of the site and all properties within the applicable separation
distances set forth in §
120.19, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property
lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures,
topography, parking, and other information deemed by the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation to be necessary to assess compliance with this
chapter.
   (C)   A visual analysis, which may include photomontage, field mock-up, or
other techniques, shall be prepared by or on behalf of the applicant which
identifies the potential visual impacts, at design capacity, of the proposed
facility to the satisfaction of the Director of Sustainability and Innovation
and/or Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals. Consideration shall be given to
views from public areas as well as from private residences. The analysis shall
assess the cumulative impacts of the proposed facility and other existing and
foreseeable communication facilities in the area, and shall identify and
include all feasible mitigation measures consistent with the technological
requirements of the proposed communication service. All costs for the visual
analysis, and applicable administrative costs, shall be borne by the applicant.
   (D)   Legal description or property identification number(s) (PIN) of the
parent tract and leased parcel (if applicable).
   (E)   The setback distance between the proposed tower and the nearest
residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted
residentially zoned properties.
   (F)   The separation distance from other towers described in the inventory
of existing sites submitted pursuant to §
120.04(C), shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant shall
also identify the type of construction of the existing tower(s) and the owner/
operator of the existing tower(s), if known.
   (G)   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials as required by §
120.10.
   (H)   Method of fencing, finished color and, if applicable, the method of
camouflage and illumination.
   (I)   A description of compliance with §§
120.04(C) through (G),
120.11,
120.18, and
120.19, and all applicable federal, state or local laws.
   (J)   A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of
the tower will accommodate co-location of additional antennas for future users.
   (K)   A notarized statement of intent committing the tower owner and the
successors to allow the shared use of the tower if an additional user agrees in
writing to meet reasonable terms and conditions for shared use.
   (L)   Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or
operated by the applicant in the municipality.
   (M)   A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers and
other structures as provided by §
120.06, or alternative technology not requiring the use of towers or structures
as provided by §
120.08.
   (N)   A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or antennas
within the Village based upon existing physical, engineering, technological or
geographical limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.
   (O)   The applicant, upon approval of any application but prior to the
issuance of a permit or a special use permit for the construction and operation
of a new tower, shall deliver a performance bond in the amount of $30,000, or
such other like security, acceptable in form to the Village, to ensure removal
and disposal of such tower where the structure is determined to be abandoned or
a danger to persons or property, and the owner fails or refuses to remove the
structure(s) in accordance with this section. The bond shall not expire or be
terminated without 30 days prior written notice to the Village. The bond shall
be issued for the benefit of the Village, callable upon demand by the Village,
renewed each year by the owner, at its cost, and delivered to the Village
Manager. The Village shall not be required to post such a bond for its own
wireless communication towers, antennas, or personal wireless service
facilities.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.14 PERMITTED USES.
   The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall
not require administrative approval or a special use permit.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted:
Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled
by the Village provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower
has been approved by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 120.15 ADMINISTRATIVELY APPROVED USES.
   The following provisions shall govern the issuance of administrative
approvals for towers and antennas. The Director of Sustainability and
Innovation may administratively approve the uses listed in this section.
   (A)   Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the Director
of Sustainability and Innovation providing the information set forth in §
120.13 and a nonrefundable application fee and deposit as established by §
120.13(A) to reimburse the Village for the costs of reviewing the application.
   (B)   The Director of Sustainability and Innovation shall review the
application for administrative approval and determine if the proposed use
complies with §§
120.04,
120.18 and
120.19.
   (C)   The Director of Sustainability and Innovation shall respond to each
such application within 45 days after receiving it by either approving or
denying the application. If the Director of Sustainability and Innovation fails
to respond to the applicant within said 45 days, then the application shall be
deemed to be approved.
   (D)   In connection with any such administrative approval, the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation may, in order to encourage co-location,
administratively waive any zoning district setback requirements in §
120.18 or separation distances between towers in §
120.19 by up to 50%.
   (E)   If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant shall file an
application for a special use permit pursuant to §
120.16 prior to filing any appeal that may be available under the Zoning
Ordinance.
   (F)   Administratively approved uses. The following uses may be approved by
the Director of Sustainability and Innovation after conducting an
administrative review:
      (1)   Preferred location sites as described in §
120.05(D).
      (2)   Any antenna which is not attached to a tower may be approved by the
Director of Sustainability and Innovation as an accessory use within a
preferred location site provided:
         (a)   The antenna does not extend more than 20 feet above the roofline
of the structure;
         (b)   The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations;
         (c)   The antenna complies with all applicable building codes; and
         (d)   The Village may, at its option, request that a licensed,
professional engineer, at the applicant’s cost certify the building or
structure upon which the tower or antenna is erected structurally sound.
      (3)   Antennas on existing towers. An antenna which is attached to an
existing tower may be approved by the Director of Sustainability and Innovation
and, to minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and
clustering of towers, co-location of antennas by more than 1 carrier on
existing towers shall take precedence over the construction of new towers,
provided such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with § 120.01.
      (4)   Height.
         (a)   An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to 120 feet, or 30
feet taller than its existing height, whichever is greater, to accommodate the
co-location of an additional antenna.
         (b)   The additional height referred to in division (F)(4)(a) above
shall not require an additional distance separation as set forth in §
120.19. The tower’s pre-modification height shall be used to calculate such
distance separations.
      (5)   Onsite location.
         (a)   A tower that is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of
an additional antenna may be moved onsite within 50 feet of its existing
location.
         (b)   After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only 1
tower may remain on the site.
         (c)   A relocated onsite tower shall continue to be measured from the
original tower location for purposes of calculating separation distances
between towers pursuant to §
120.19. The relocation of a tower hereunder shall in no way be deemed to cause
a violation of §
120.19.
         (d)   The on-site relocation of a tower which comes within the
separation distances to residential units or residentially zoned lands as
established in §
120.19 shall only be permitted when approved by the Director of Sustainability
and Innovation.
      (6)   Antennas in limited preference site. Locating new antennas which
are not attached to a tower may be approved by the Director of Sustainabilty
and Innovation as an accessory use provided:
         (a)   The antennas do not extend more than 20 feet above the roofline
of the structure;
         (b)   The antenna complies with all applicable FCC and FAA
regulations;
         (c)   The antenna complies with all applicable local and state
building codes; and
         (d)   The Village may, at its option, request that the building or
structure upon which the tower or antenna is erected be certified structurally
sound by a licensed, professional engineer, at the applicant’s cost.
      (7)   Alternative tower structure.  Locating any alternative tower
structure in a preferred or limited preference site that in the judgment of the
Director of Sustainability and Innovation is in conformity with the goals set
forth in §
120.01.
      (8)   Cable microcell network. Installing a cable microcell network
through the use of multiple low-powered transmitters/receivers attached to
existing wireline systems, such as conventional cable or telephone wires, or
similar technology that does not require the use of towers.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.16 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special use permits
for towers or antennas by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals:
   (A)   If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under §
120.14 or by §
120.15, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a
tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts.
   (B)   Applications for special use permits under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of Sections 3.2 (Application) and
4.4 (Special Use) of the Zoning Ordinance, except as modified in this section.
   (C)   In recommending a special use permit to the Board of Trustees, the
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may impose reasonable conditions it
concludes are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower
upon adjoining properties.
   (D)   Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits,
whether civil, mechanical, or electrical, shall be certified by a licensed
professional engineer.
   (E)   An applicant for a special use permit shall submit the information
described in §
120.13 and a nonrefundable application fee and deposit as established by §
120.13(A) to reimburse the Village for the costs of reviewing the application.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 120.17 FACTORS CONSIDERED IN GRANTING SPECIAL USE PERMITS FOR TOWERS.
   In addition to any standards for consideration of special use permit
applications pursuant to Section 4.4 (Special Use) of the Zoning Ordinance, the
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall consider the following factors in
determining whether to recommend issuance of a special use permit, although the
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may waive or reduce the burden on the
applicant of 1 or more of these criteria if the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals concludes that the goals of this chapter are better served thereby:
   (A)   Height of the proposed tower;
   (B)   Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
   (C)   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
   (D)   Surrounding topography;
   (E)   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
   (F)   Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual
obtrusiveness;
   (G)   Proximity to areas of historic or aesthetically significant
structures, views and/or community features;
   (H)   Buildings, structures, properties or districts located listed with, or
determined to be eligible for the National Register of Historic Places, or the
same listed or deemed eligible by a local historic preservation ordinance;
   (I)   Areas designated or eligible as scenic, recreational or natural
preservation areas or inhabited by threatened or endangered species;
   (J)   Areas that contain an archeological feature or site or developments
that will have adverse effects on the historical character of an archeological
feature or site;
   (K)   Proposed ingress and egress; and
   (L)   Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or structures, as
discussed in §
120.08.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 120.18 SETBACKS.
   The following setback requirements shall apply to all towers; provided,
however, that the Director of Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate, may reduce the standard
setback requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served
thereby:
   (A)   Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 75% of the height
of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.19 SEPARATION.
   The following separation requirements shall apply to all towers; provided,
however, that the Director of Sustainability and Innovation and/or Plan
Commission/ Zoning Board of Appeals, as appropriate may reduce the standard
separation requirements if the goals of this chapter would be better served.
   (A)   Separation from off-site uses/designated area requirements shall
comply with the minimum requirements in Table 1 below. Tower separation shall
be measured from the base of the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses
and/or designated areas, except as otherwise provided:
 
TABLE 1: SEPARATION DISTANCE FROM OFF-SITE USES
Off-Site Use/Designated Area               Distance Required Between Tower and
                                           Selected Land Uses
Single-family or duplex residential        200 feet or 300% height of tower,
                                           whichever is greater
Vacant single-family or duplex
residentially zoned land which is either   200 feet or 300% height of tower,
platted or has preliminary subdivision     whichever is greater
plan approval which is not expired
Vacant unplatted residentially zoned lands 100 feet or 100% height of tower,
                                           whichever is greater
Existing multi-family residential units    100 feet or 100% height of tower,
greater than duplex units                  whichever is greater
Non-residentially zoned lands or           None: only setbacks apply
nonresidential uses
 
   (B)   Separation distances between towers. Separation distances between
towers shall be applicable for and measured between the proposed tower and
preexisting towers. The separation distances shall be measured by drawing or
following a straight line between the base of the existing tower and the
proposed base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The separation
distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in Table 2:
 
TABLE 2: SEPARATION DISTANCES BETWEEN TOWERS
Type of Tower             Guyed Monopole Over 75 Ft. Monopole Under 75 Ft.
Guyed                     5,000 1,500                750
Monopole more than 75 ft. 1,500 1,500                750
Monopole less than 75 ft. 750   750                  750
 
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.20 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR DANGEROUS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.
   Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of such antenna or tower or of
a tower that constitutes a danger to persons or property shall remove the same
within 90 days of notice from the Village. Failure to remove an abandoned or
dangerous antenna or tower within 90 days shall be grounds to remove the tower
or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are 2 or more users of a single
tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease
using the tower. In the event the owner fails to remove the abandoned or
dangerous tower as required herein, the Village is entitled to draw on
performance bond required in §
120.13(O) in order to do so.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 120.21 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on
preexisting towers. New construction or modifications other than routine
maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas.
Notwithstanding §
120.09, bona fide nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or
destroyed by more than 50% of their replacement value may be rebuilt without
having to first obtain administrative approval or a special use permit and
without having to meet the separation requirements specified in §§
120.18 and
120.19. The type, height, and location of the tower onsite shall be of the same
type and intensity as the original facility approval unless the tower otherwise
complies with this chapter or a special use permit approval is granted.
Building permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then applicable
building codes and shall be obtained within 180 days from the date the facility
is damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires,
the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in §
120.20.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 120.22 BUSINESS REGISTRATION PERMITS.
   (A)   A business registration permit issued pursuant to the Village Code
and, issued with an initial site plan approval pursuant to this chapter
authorizing establishment of a wireless communication facility, except exempt
facilities, shall be reviewed every year. Costs associated with the review
process shall be borne by the owner/provider. Grounds for revocation of the
business registration permit shall be limited to a finding: the facility fails
to comply with the relevant requirements of this chapter as they exist at the
time of renewal and the permittee has failed to supply assurances acceptable to
the Director of Sustainability and Innovation that the facility will be brought
into compliance within 120 days; the permittee has failed to comply with the
conditions of approval imposed; the facility has not been properly maintained;
or the facility has not been upgraded to minimize its impact, including
community aesthetics, to the greatest extent permitted by the technology that
exists at the time of renewal and is consistent with the provisions of
universal service at affordable rates. The grounds for appeal of issuance of a
renewal shall be limited to a showing that 1 or more of the conditions listed
above do in fact exist.
   (B)   If a business registration permit or other entitlement for use is not
renewed, it shall automatically become void without notice or hearing 1 year
after it is issued or upon cessation of use for more than 1 year, whichever
comes first. Unless a new business registration permit or entitlement of use is
issued, within 120 days thereafter, all improvements installed including their
foundations down to 3 feet below ground surface shall be removed from the
property and the site restored to its natural pre-construction state within 180
days of non-renewal or abandonment. Any access road installed shall also be
removed and the ground returned to its natural condition unless the property
owner established to the satisfaction of the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation that these sections of road are necessary to serve some other
allowed use of the property that is permitted or is currently present or to
provide access to adjoining parcels.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 120.23 LIABILITY AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Liability requirements. The following liability requirements apply to
the owner of any tower operating within the Village. Stipulations setting forth
the standards shall also be included in the standard agreement required by §
120.22, release, indemnification and hold harmless agreement required by
division (B) of this section, and/or a site plan approval issued pursuant to
this chapter authorizing establishment of a wireless communication facility:
      (1)   Wireless communication service providers shall be strictly liable
for any sudden and accidental pollution and gradual pollution resulting from
their use within the Village. This liability shall include cleanup, intentional
or unintentional injury or damage to persons or property. Additionally,
providers shall be responsible for any sanctions, fines, or other monetary
costs imposed as a result of the release of pollutants from their operations.
Pollutants means any solid, liquid, gaseous or thermal irritant or contaminant,
including but not limited to, smoke, vapor, soot, fumes, acids, alkalis,
chemicals, electromagnetic waves and waste. Waste includes materials to be
recycled, reconditioned or reclaimed.
      (2)   The wireless communication service provider shall defend,
indemnify, and hold harmless the Village, its appointed and elected officials,
officers, President and Board of Trustees, engineers, attorneys, volunteers,
agents or employees from any and all liabilities, damages, claims, actions or
proceedings against the Village, its appointed and elected officials, officers,
President and Board of Trustees, engineers, attorneys, volunteers, agents or
employees of any kind or nature whatsoever which may arise as a result of the
construction, operation, removal or collapse of the tower, antenna or accessory
equipment as described herein or from any claim, action or proceeding to
attack, set aside, void, or annul, the approval of the project when such claim
or action is brought within the time period provided for in applicable state
and or local statutes, including, but not limited to reasonable attorneys’
fees, witness fees and expenses and court costs incurred by the Village in
defending against any claim or in enforcing this section or an approval or
agreement entered into hereunder. The Village shall promptly notify the
provider(s) of any such liability, damage, claim, action or proceeding. The
Village shall have the option of coordinating in the defense. Nothing contained
in this stipulation shall prohibit the Village from participating in a defense
of any claim if the Village bears its own attorney’s fees and costs, and the
Village defends the action in good faith.
   (B)   Insurance requirements. The owner of any tower shall provide the
Village on an annual basis with proof of comprehensive general liability
insurance in an amount not less than $5,000,000 which protects against losses
and damages of any kind due to illness, personal injury or death or property
damage resulting from the construction, operation, removal or collapse of the
tower, antenna or accessory equipment. The insurance certificate shall name the
Village and its affiliates (appointed and elected officials, officers,
President and Board of Trustees, engineers, attorneys, volunteers, agents or
employees) as additional insureds. In addition to the insurance required, the
person applying to locate a wireless communication tower within the Village
shall agree to execute and deliver to the Village Clerk a release,
indemnification and hold harmless agreement, prepared by the Village Attorney,
in which the person applying for the permit agrees to defend, indemnify, and
hold harmless the Village, its appointed and elected officials, officers,
President and Board of Trustees, engineers, attorneys, volunteers, agents or
employees from any and all liabilities, damages, claims, actions or proceedings
against the Village, its appointed and elected officials, officers, President
and Board of Trustees, engineers, attorneys, volunteers, agents or employees of
any kind or nature whatsoever which may arise as a result of the construction,
operation, removal or collapse of the tower, antenna or accessory equipment as
described herein or from any claim, action or proceeding to attack, set aside,
void, or annul, the approval of the project when such claim or action is
brought within the time period provided for in applicable state and or local
statutes, including, but not limited to reasonable attorneys’ fees, witness
fees and expenses and court costs incurred by the Village in defending against
any claim or in enforcing this section or an approval or agreement entered into
hereunder. Such agreement shall be executed prior to the issuance of any permit
approving construction of the tower and related facilities.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
CHAPTER 121: GARAGE SALES
Section
   
121.01   Definitions
   
121.02   Permit required
   
121.03   Property permitted to be sold
   
121.04   Limitation on number of sales
   
121.05   Hours and days of operation
   
121.06   Display of sale property
   
121.07   Display of signs
   
121.08   Maintenance of order
   
121.09   Parking
   
121.99   Penalty
§ 121.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   GARAGE SALE. All general sales open to the public, conducted from a
residential premise for the purpose of disposing of personal property
including, but not limited to, all sales entitled "garage", "lawn", "yard",
"attic", "porch", "room", "backyard", "patio", "flea market" or "rummage" sale.
This definition shall not include a situation where no more than 5 specific
items are held out for sale and all advertisement of such sale specifically
names those items to be sold.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an
individual or members of his residence and acquired in the normal course of
living in or maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was
purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
(Ord. C0-04-06, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-16, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 121.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in or conduct a garage sale as defined in this
chapter from any residence, structure or lot in the Village without first
having obtained a specific permit for such from the Community Development
Department of the Village. Application for a garage sale permit shall be made
on a form provided by the Community Development Department. A $10, non-
refundable fee shall be charged for each garage sale permit and shall be
payable at the time an application is submitted. The permit authorizing the
garage sale shall be posted in the front yard of the residence holding the sale
while the sale is in process so as to be seen by the public. A permit may be
issued only to the owner or lessee of the premises where such garage sale is to
take place. In the case of a lessee, written permission of the building owner
must be presented by the applicant at the time the permit is applied for.
Permits issued hereunder shall be nontransferable.
(Ord. C0-04-06, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-16, passed 6-7-2004; Am. Ord.
CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009)
Penalty, see § 121.99
§ 121.03 PROPERTY PERMITTED TO BE SOLD.
   It shall be unlawful for any individual to sell or offer for sale, under
authority granted by this Chapter, property other than personal property.
However, members of more than 1 residence may join in a garage sale to be
conducted at the residence of 1 of them.
(Ord. C0-04-06, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-16, passed 6-7-2004)
Penalty, see § 121.99
§ 121.04 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF SALES.
   No more than 4 garage sales may be conducted by members of 1 residence and
or family household during any calendar year. If members of more than 1
residence join in conducting a sale then this sale shall be considered as 1 for
each and all participating residences.
(Ord. C0-04-06, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-16, passed 6-7-2004)
Penalty, see § 121.99
§ 121.05 HOURS AND DAYS OF OPERATION.
   Garage sales shall be conducted only from the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. and are limited to Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays.
(Ord. C0-04-06, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-16, passed 6-7-2004; Am. Ord.
2017-33, passed 9-5-2017)
§ 121.06 DISPLAY OF SALE PROPERTY.
   Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in
a garage, driveway, carport and/or a front or rear yard. No personal property
offered for a sale at a garage sale shall be displayed in the side yard areas
of any such premises or in any public right-of-way. Personal property shall not
be displayed on fences, shrubs, bushes and/or trees, front steps, hand
railings, window sills and/or the facade of any residence.
(Ord. C0-04-06, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-16, passed 6-7-2004; Am. Ord.
2017-33, passed 9-5-2017) Penalty, see §
121.99
§ 121.07 DISPLAY OF SIGNS.
   A sign advertising a garage sale may be displayed on the property of the
residence where the garage sale is being conducted during the time the sale is
in progress, and may not exceed 8 square feet in surface area. The signs
advertising a garage sale may also be placed in the public right-of-way, so
long as the size, number and location of such signs does not present a
potential danger to drivers, pedestrians or other residents by impeding the
line of sight for vehicular or pedestrian traffic. All signs on the property of
the garage sale permit holder and in the public right-of-way must be removed
within 24 hours of the conclusion of the garage sale. Failure to remove all
signs advertising a garage sale within 24 hours of the conclusion of the garage
sale shall be a violation of this section and subject the garage sale permit
holder to fines as set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. C0-04-06, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-16, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 121.08 MAINTENANCE OF ORDER.
   The individual conducting the garage sale and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be responsible for
the maintenance of good order on the premises during such sale. In the event
good order is not maintained or the sale shall violate any of the provisions of
this chapter, the person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the penalties provided in accord with § 121.99 of this chapter.
(Ord. C0-04-06, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-16, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 121.09 PARKING.
   The Police Department may enforce temporary traffic and parking controls to
alleviate any traffic hazards or congestion created by any garage sale.
(Ord. C0-04-06, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-16, passed 6-7-2004)
§ 121.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $50 and not more than $750. Each day that a garage or house
sale is conducted in violations of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Ord. C0-04-06, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. C0-04-16, passed 6-7-2004)
CHAPTER 122: PAY TELEPHONES
Section
   
122.01   Definitions
   
122.02   General regulation
   
122.03   Pay telephones in public right-of-way
   
122.04   Pay telephones on private property
   
122.05   Nuisances; maintenance
   
122.99   Penalty
§ 122.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OWNER/OPERATOR. Either the owner of the payphone or the operator of the
payphone.
   PAY TELEPHONE. Any publicly accessible self-service or coin or credit card
operated telephone;
   PUBLIC WAY. Includes any public street or alley from property line to
property line, any park land within the Village, and any and all sidewalks,
plazas owned by the Village, parkways dedicated to public use, and other public
outdoor areas subject to Village control.
(Ord. C0-07-078, passed 3-8-2007)
§ 122.02 GENERAL REGULATION.
   (A)   No pay telephone shall be allowed in the Village unless the owner/
operator possesses a valid certificate of service authority to provide pay
telephone service granted by the Illinois Commerce Commission or some other
government body with jurisdiction.
   (B)   Each owner or operator of a pay telephone within the Village is
required to file proof of such valid certificate of service authority by
January 1 of each year with the Office of the Village Clerk. Along with a valid
certificate, each owner/operator must provide, on a form provided by the Clerk,
contact information for the owner/operator, a list of pay telephone locations
owned and/or operated by the owner/operator within the Village, and such other
information as the Clerk may require. Upon filing of the appropriate
information, and verification of its accuracy by the Village Clerk, a Village
of Maywood Certificate of Compliance shall issue relative to each pay telephone
location for which information has been provided. Any pay telephone that fails
to file a valid certificate of authority, fails to provide additional
information required by the Clerk hereunder, or is maintained or operated
without the issuance of a Village of Maywood Certificate of Compliance is a pay
telephone that is a public nuisance under §
122.05 of this Code that is subject to summary abatement pursuant to §
92.22 and other applicable sections of this Code and state law.
(Ord. C0-07-08, passed 3-8-2007)
§ 122.03 PAY TELEPHONES IN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   No person may install or maintain a pay telephone in the public way on
or after the effective date of this chapter. Beginning July 1, 2007, no pay
telephone may remain in the public way. The Village Manager may contract for
the removal of pay telephones illegally installed or maintained in the public
way. Any telephone installed or maintained in violation of this section shall
be subject to immediate removal at the owner's expense by the Village. However,
in the case of a telephone deemed to be in the public way as the result of this
chapter, no such pay telephone shall be removed until at least 7 days after a
representative of the Village has affixed a notice on the telephone stating
that it will be subject to removal within 7 days, and in no event shall such
telephone be removed before July 1, 2007. In addition, no such telephone shall
be removed until at least 7 days after the Village has sent, by certified mail,
a notice to the owner/operator listed on the pay telephone, informing the
owner/operator of the upcoming removal. Where the pay telephone lists no such
information, or lists inaccurate information, the Village shall not be
obligated to provide mailed notice.
   (B)   Any pay telephone removed by the Village pursuant to this section may
be reclaimed by its owner within 30 days after its removal. The owner must
reimburse the Village for its removal and storage costs before any such
telephone may be reclaimed. Such costs shall also include the costs of removing
any installation ancillary to the pay telephone, and the costs of restoring the
public way to its original condition. Any telephone not so reclaimed may be
disposed of as unclaimed property.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a pay telephone will be considered in
the public way if:
      (1)   Any portion of the telephone or its enclosure is situated on or
projects or hangs over the public way; or
      (2)   The telephone is so situated that it can be used by a person
standing on the public way.
(Ord. C0-07-08, passed 3-8-2007)
§ 122.04 PAY TELEPHONES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Pay telephones located on private property are subject to the following
restrictions and regulations:
   (A)   No outdoor pay telephones may be located within 1,000 feet of the real
property comprising any school, school buildings, grounds, or athletic fields,
daycare facilities, library buildings, public recreational buildings,
facilities and property, public parks, residential property owned, operated or
managed by a public housing agency or leased by a public housing agency as part
of a scattered site or mixed-income development, or public park, real property
comprising any church, synagogue, or other building, structure, or place used
primarily for religious worship, on the real property comprising any of the
following places, buildings or structures used primarily for housing or
providing space for activities for senior citizens: nursing homes, assisted-
living centers, senior citizen housing complexes, or senior centers oriented
toward daytime activities.
   (B)   No outdoor pay telephone may be located on any property within the
Village that is subject to a residential zoning classification or on any vacant
property.
   (C)   All pay telephones within the Village limits that are permitted to be
located outside must be restricted to emergency 911 calls only.
   (D)   Pay telephones may be installed and maintained within the interior of
any building, including those identified in division (A) above.
   (E)   No person may install a pay telephone outside on private property on
or after the effective date of this section unless the installation will not be
in violation of any of the above prohibitions. Determinations of whether a pay
telephone is allowed under this section may be requested from the Office of the
Village Manager. Upon submittal of a written request for such a determination,
the Village Manager shall make a determination and provide a written response
within 14 days.
   (F)   Beginning July 1, 2007, no pay telephone may remain outside on private
property in a prohibited area or where it is otherwise in violation of this
section. Any existing pay telephone that is in violation of this section shall
be removed by its owner, operator, or owner of the real property on which the
pay telephone is located prior to July 1, 2007. Any telephone installed or
maintained in violation of this section shall be subject to immediate removal
by the Village at the owner’s expense. However, in the case of a telephone
deemed to be in a prohibited location as the result of this chapter, or that
was otherwise in compliance prior to this chapter, no such pay telephone shall
be removed until at least 7 days after a representative of the Village has
affixed a notice on the telephone stating that it will be subject to removal
within 7 days, and in no event shall such telephone be removed before July 1,
2007. In addition, no such telephone shall be removed until at least 7 days
after the Village has sent, by certified mail, a notice to the owner/operator
listed on the pay telephone, informing the owner/operator of the upcoming
removal. Where the pay telephone lists no such information, or lists inaccurate
information, the Village shall not be obligated to provide mailed notice. The
Village Manager may contract for the removal of pay telephones illegally
installed or maintained outside on private property.
   (G)   Any pay telephone removed by the Village pursuant to this section may
be reclaimed by its owner within 30 days after its removal. The owner must
reimburse the Village for its removal and storage costs before any such
telephone may be reclaimed. Such costs shall also include the costs of removing
any installation ancillary to the pay telephone, and the costs of restoring the
property from which it was removed to its original condition. Any telephone not
so reclaimed may be disposed of as unclaimed or surplus property.
(Ord. C0-07-08, passed 3-8-2007)
§ 122.05 NUISANCES; MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Any pay telephone lawfully installed pursuant to this chapter must be
maintained by the owner/operator of the pay telephone in good working order,
free of graffiti and non-related advertising, and in compliance with all
Village ordinances, codes, rules and regulations. Graffiti or non-related
advertising must be removed within 5 working days of notice from the Village
that such graffiti or advertising has been placed on a pay telephone or pay
telephone equipment. Any pay telephone or equipment that is not maintained in
accordance with this division is hereby declared to be a public nuisance
pursuant to division (B) below.
   (B)   Any pay telephone not lawfully installed or maintained pursuant to
this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. In addition, any pay
telephone that is the subject of a report from the Chief of Police in which the
Chief reports the pay telephone is being used to facilitate the selling of
narcotics, gang loitering or to facilitate any other criminal activity or
activity prohibited by the Village Code, may be declared by the President and
Board of Trustees to be a public nuisance. All pay telephones found to be a
public nuisance are subject to summary abatement in conformance with §
92.22 of this Code. In addition, no pay telephone declared a public nuisance as
a result of this chapter shall be removed until at least 7 days after a
representative of the Village has affixed a notice on the telephone stating
that it will be subject to removal within 7 days, and in no event shall such
telephone be removed before July 1, 2007. A representative of the Village may
enter upon any private property within the Village that he or she has reason to
believe contains a pay telephone that constitutes a nuisance by being in
violation of this chapter, for the purpose of placing upon the telephone a
notice that the telephone is subject to removal within 7 days. Where the pay
telephone lists no information as to who the owner/operator is, or lists
inaccurate information, the Village shall not be obligated to provide mailed
notice to the owner/operator, and may satisfy the summary abatement
requirements by posting a notice on the pay telephone itself and by serving a
notice on the occupant, if any, of the property on which the pay telephone
exists. Any procedures and enforcement action pursuant to this section may be
pursued in conjunction with or independent of and in addition to any other
remedies specified in this chapter, Code, or state law.
(Ord. C0-07-08, passed 3-8-2007)
§ 122.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who installs or maintains a pay telephone in violation of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $750
for each offense. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense. However, for the period ending 4 months after the effective
date of this chapter, no fine shall be imposed with respect to a telephone
considered to be in violation as the result of this chapter unless any notice
or other requirements set forth in this chapter have been complied with.
(Ord. C0-07-08, passed 3-8-2007)
CHAPTER 123: CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
Section
   
123.01   Adoption
   
123.02   Amendments
   
123.03   Enforcement
   
123.04   Customer credits
   
123.05   Severability
 
   
123.99   Penalty
§ 123.01 ADOPTION.
   The regulations of the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law, 220 ILCS 5/
22-501, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the
cable or video providers offering services within the Village's boundaries.
(Ord. C0-07-44, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 123.02 AMENDMENTS.
   Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection Law that becomes
effective after the effective date of this section shall be incorporated into
this section by reference and shall be applicable to cable or video providers
offering services within the Village boundaries. However, any amendment that
makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the Village.
(Ord. C0-07-44, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 123.03 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
Village.
(Ord. C0-07-44, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 123.04 CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   The Village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations as
set forth in the Cable and Video Protection Law. Those credits shall be as
provided for in the provisions of 220 ILCS 5/22-501(s) and applied on the
statement issued to the customer for the next billing cycle following the
violation or following the discovery of the violation. The cable or video
provider is responsible for providing the credits and the customer is under no
obligation to request the credit.
(Ord. C0-07-44, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 123.05 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. C0-07-44, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 123.99 PENALTY.
   The Village, pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/22-501(r)(1), does hereby provide for a
schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and Video Protection
Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties provided in the
law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral basis and
shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach, and shall not exceed
$25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per customer. In this regard:
   (A)   Material breach means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   (B)   The Village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
   (C)   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice as provided for in
division (A)(2) above.
(Ord. C0-07-44, passed 11-6-2007)
CHAPTER 124:CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDERS, RELATED PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS
Section
   
124.01   Definitions
   
124.02   Cable/video service provider fee imposed
   
124.03   PEG access support fee imposed
   
124.04   Applicable principles
   
124.05   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
124.06   Audit of cable/video service provider
   
124.07   Late fees/payments
   
124.08   Severability
§ 124.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the Village.
      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service;
         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges;
         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment;
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and
repair charges;
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including but not limited to service order and service
termination charges;
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges,
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments;
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
Village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
Village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement;
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to division (i) below;
         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications,
the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business; and
         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b).
      (2)   GROSS REVENUES do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to 220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi);
         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service;
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders;
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the Village and pay the fee permitted by 220
ILCS 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service;
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes;
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers; and
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 ILCS 5/21-801(b) which would otherwise be
paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-
401.
   PEG. Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this section and 220 ILCS 5/
21-801(d) by the holder to the Village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE. The provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and
the interaction of  subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this section and 220 ILCS 5/21-
801 by the holder to a Village for the service areas within its territorial
jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over
the public internet.
(Ord. C0-07-45, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 124.02 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the Village.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of the
holder's gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice to the Village. The holder shall notify the Village at least 10
days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the Village
.   (D)   Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the
service provider fee to the Village. The holder's liability for the fee shall
commence on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this section by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this section shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6) to the
Village.
   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the Village in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) with credit
for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the amount of such
credit from the fees that operator owes under division (B) above.
(Ord. C0-07-45, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 124.03 PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   PEG fee imposed.  A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the Village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to §
124.02(B) above.
   (B) Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be 1% of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of
gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the Village or its
designee for PEG access support in the Village.
   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
Village or to the entity designated by the Village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in §
122.02(D) above.
   (D)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (D)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 ILCS 5/21-301(c) shall pay, at
the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG access that
would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had it not been
terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an incumbent cable
operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited against the fees
that that operator owes under division (B) above.
(Ord. C0-07-45, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 124.04 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this section shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(Ord. C0-07-45, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 124.05 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the Village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the Village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of any
validly imposed 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
(Ord. C0-07-45, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 124.06 AUDIT OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Audit requirement. The Village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the Village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
Village. If all local franchises between the Village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the Village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers Bill of Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et
seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that
the amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the Village's submission of an invoice for the sum.
(Ord. C0-07-45, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 124.07 LATE FEES / PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this Village pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers Bill of
Rights Act, 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
(Ord. C0-07-45, passed 11-6-2007)
§ 124.08 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
(Ord. C0-07-45, passed 11-6-07)
CHAPTER 125: VIDEO GAMING
Section
   
125.01   Authorization
   
125.02   Definition
   
125.03   License required
   
125.04   Application
   
125.05   Maximum terminals
   
125.06   Fee
   
125.07   Non-transferable
   
125.08   Nuisance operation
   
125.09   Compliance monitoring
   
125.10   Location restrictions
   
125.11   Electronic sweepstakes machines prohibited
 
   
125.99   Penalty
§ 125.01 AUTHORIZATION.
   Video gaming terminals, as defined herein, may be located, possessed,
maintained, and otherwise operated on premises within the Village by
establishments licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board and by the Village,
pursuant to the terms, conditions and requirements of this section and of the
Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq. Establishments eligible to be licensed
by the Illinois Gaming Board under the Video Gaming Act, as amended, include
licensed retail establishments where alcoholic liquor is drawn, poured, mixed
or otherwise served for consumption on the premises, certain fraternal
organizations, certain veterans establishments, and certain truck stop
establishments. This authorization does not apply to electronic sweepstakes
machines, as defined and prohibited by §
125.11 below.
(Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2024-06, passed 2-6-2024)
§ 125.02 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL. Any electronic video game machine that, upon
insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game,
including but not limited to video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized
by the Illinois Gaming Board from time to time, utilizing a video display and
microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or credits that can
be redeemed for cash. VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL does not include a machine that
directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens, or electronic sweepstakes machines,
as defined and prohibited by §
125.11  below.
(Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2024-06, passed 2-6-2024)
§ 125.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No establishment licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board shall be permitted to
operate any video gaming terminal in the Village pursuant to the Video Gaming
Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq., unless the establishment also has obtained a
license and paid a yearly fee to the Village in the amount established by
ordinance of the Village President and Board of Trustees from time to time for
each video gaming terminal on its premises. No license may issue where the
license applicant owes a debt, fine, fee or penalty to the Village.
(Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013)
§ 125.04 APPLICATION.
   Application to the Village for a video gaming terminal license shall be made
in conformity with
Chapter 110 of this Code except as otherwise may be provided in this chapter.
The application shall attach a copy of the state license, and shall in addition
set forth:
   (A)   The location of the premises where the video gaming terminal is to be
located, maintained, or operated: and
   (B)   The charge to be made to the player for operating the device: and
   (C)   Such other information as the Village may determine is necessary.
(Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013)
§ 125.05 MAXIMUM TERMINALS.
   No more than 6 video gaming terminals may be located, maintained or operated
in any 1 establishment.
(Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2019-33, passed 12-3-2019)
§ 125.06 FEE.
   The fee for each license to locate, maintain or operate video gaming
terminal shall be as set forth in §
110.13. The Village Clerk shall issue a decal or sticker for each licensed
terminal to each establishment that obtains a license to locate, maintain or
operate a video gaming terminal on its premises. This decal or sticker must be
affixed by the applicant to the licensed video gaming terminal in a conspicuous
place and must be kept on the device during all times the device is in use.
(Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013)
§ 125.07 NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
(Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013)
§ 125.08 NUISANCE OPERATION.
   No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of a video gaming
terminal in a manner which will disturb the peace of persons otherwise properly
within or without the premises where the terminal is located. No license issued
hereunder shall permit the operation of such a terminal amounts to a nuisance
in fact.
(Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013)
§ 125.09 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   The Village Manager, Assistant Village Manager, Village Treasurer, Building
Director or other Code enforcement officers, the Chief of Police, or any of
their respective designees, each has the authority to monitor compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2014-04, passed 1-21-2014; Am.
Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 125.10 LOCATION RESTRICTIONS.
   No establishment may be licensed under this chapter where it is located
within 100 feet of a school or a place of worship.
(Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013)
§ 125.11 ELECTRONIC SWEEPSTAKES MACHINES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ELECTRONIC MACHINE OR DEVICE. A mechanically, electrically or
electronically operated machine or device, that is owned, leased or otherwise
possessed by a sweepstakes sponsor or promoter, or any of the sweepstakes
sponsor’s or promoter’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors, that
is intended to be used by a sweepstakes entrant, that uses energy, and that is
capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism.
      ENTER OR ENTRY. The act or process by which a person becomes eligible to
receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
      ENTERTAINMENT DISPLAY. Visual information capable of being seen by a
sweepstakes entrant that takes the form of actual game play or simulated game
play of games, including, but not limited to, a poker game or any other kind of
playing card game; a bingo game; a craps game; a keno game; a lotto game; an
eight- liner game; a pot-of-gold game; a game based on or involving the random
or chance matching of different pictures, words, numbers or symbols not
dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player; a casino or gambling game;
and any other video game the outcome of which is not in whole or in part
dependent on the skill or dexterity of the player that is played in the course
of revealing a prize as a result of an entry into a sweepstakes.
      PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, or anything else
of value, which may be transferred to a person, whether possession of the prize
is actually transferred, or placed on an account or other record as evidence of
the intent to transfer the prize.
      SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, advertising scheme or plan, or other promotion,
which, with or without payment of any consideration, a person may enter to win
or become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based
upon an element of chance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, or place into
operation, an electronic machine or device for the following purposes:
      (1)   To conduct a sweepstakes through the use of an entertainment
display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize; or
      (2)   To promote a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an
entertainment display, including the entry process or the reveal of a prize.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit duly licensed video gaming
terminals as authorized by state law and by this chapter and other applicable
sections of this Code.
   (D)   It is the intent of this section to prohibit any mechanism that seeks
to avoid application of this section through the use of subterfuge or pretense
whatsoever.
(Ord. CO-2024-06, passed 2-6-2024)
§ 125.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $750
for each violation, with each day such violation continues constituting a
separate fineable offense. Fines may be assessed in administrative
adjudication, through a local ordinance violation brought in circuit court, or
by the Village President following a hearing as set forth below.
   (B)   Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked or suspended for a
period not to exceed 60 days by the Village President, after notice and hearing
as provided in §
110.17 of this title for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license.
      (2)   Any violation by the licensee of ordinance provisions relating to
the license, the subject matter of the license, or the premises occupied.
      (3)   Failure of the licensee to pay any amount, fine, fee or penalty
owing to the Village or other state or federal agency with regulatory
jurisdiction.
      (4)   The occurrence of 2 or more disturbances at the premises occupied
within a 90-day period, or 2 or more incidents involving injury or bodily harm
to patrons, bystanders or police officers within a 90-day period, provided that
the Village President finds, upon the recommendation of the Police Chief, that
as a result of the disturbances or incidents involving injury or bodily harm a
public nuisance exists therein or thereat endangering the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Village.
      (5)   Any grounds upon which a license may be suspended, revoked or
denied pursuant to §
110.10 of this title.
   (C)   Revocation, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and imposition
of any other penalties provided for the violation of other applicable
ordinances.
(Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2014-14, passed 4-1-2014)
CHAPTER 126: TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANIES
Section
   
126.01   Definitions
   
126.02   Trade dress required
   
126.03   Package delivery prohibited
   
126.04   Compliance with state law
 
   
126.99   Penalty
§ 126.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC). An entity operating in the Village
that uses a digital network or software application service to connect
passengers to TNC services provided by TNC drivers. A TNC is not deemed to own,
control, operate or manage the vehicles used by TNC drivers, and is not a
taxicab association or a for-hire vehicle owner.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY DIGITAL NETWORK (TNC DIGITAL NETWORK). Any
online-enabled application, software, website, or system offered or utilized by
a TNC that enables the prearrangement of rides with TNC drivers.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY DRIVER (TNC DRIVER). A person who uses his or
her personal vehicle to provide for-hire transportation services for passengers
matched through a TNC digital network. A TNC driver need not be an employee of
a TNC.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY SERVICES (TNC SERVICES). The transportation
of a passenger between points chosen by the passengerand prearranged with a TNC
driver through the use of a TNC digital network. TNC services shall begin when
a driver accepts a request for transportation received through the TNC’s
digital network, shall continue while the TNC driver transports the passenger
in the TNC driver’s vehicle, and shall end when the passenger exits the TNC
driver’s vehicle.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY VEHICLE (TNC VEHICLE). A privately-owned
vehicle used to provide TNC services through a TNC digital network.
(Ord. CO-2017-13, passed 5-2-2017)
§ 126.02 TRADE DRESS REQUIRED.
   A TNC driver shall identify his or her TNC vehicle at all times while
offering TNC services within the Village through display of consistent and
distinctive TRADE DRESS (i.e., distinctive signage, emblem or display on the
vehicle), visible from both the front and back of the vehicle. The trade dress
must be sufficiently large and color-contrasted as to be readable during
daylight hours at a distance of 50 feet or more from both in front of and in
back of the vehicle. The trade dress shall be sufficient to allow a passenger,
government official or member of the public to associate a vehicle with a
particular TNC. Acceptable forms of trade dress include, but are not limited
to, symbols or signs on vehicle windows, doors, roofs, trunks or grills.
Magnetic or removable trade dress is acceptable.
(Ord. CO-2017-13, passed 5-2-2017) Penalty, see §
126.99
§ 126.03 PACKAGE DELIVERY PROHIBITED.
   TNC drivers shall not accept a package for transportation unless it is
accompanied at all times by a passenger.
(Ord. CO-2017-13, passed 5-2-2017) Penalty, see §
126.99
§ 126.04 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
   TNC drivers and TNCs shall comply with the requirements of the
Transportation Network Providers Act (625 ILCS 57/1 et seq.), and all other
state traffic and other laws and regulations applicable to operation of motor
vehicles, TNC vehicles and TNCs in general at all times while operating in the
Village.
(Ord. CO-2017-13, passed 5-2-2017)
§ 126.99 PENALTY.
   Violations of this chapter are punishable by a fine of not less than $100
for a first offense, not less than $300 for a second offense within a 12-month
period, and not less than $500 for a third or subsequent offense within a 12-
month period.
(Ord. CO-2017-13, passed 5-2-2017)
CHAPTER 127: CONFLICTS WITH CERTAIN HOME RULE COUNTY ORDINANCES
Section
   
127.01   Payment of minimum hourly wages and paid sick leave
§ 127.01 PAYMENT OF MINIMUM HOURLY WAGES AND PAID SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Employers located within the Village shall comply with all applicable
federal and/or state laws and regulations, as such laws and regulations may
exist from time to time, with regard to both the payment of minimum hourly
wages and paid sick leave. Employee eligibility for paid sick leave and minimum
hourly wages shall be in compliance with all applicable federal and/or state
laws and regulations, as such laws and regulations may exist from time to time.
   (B)   No additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave or minimum
hourly wages imposed by any ordinance adopted by the County Board of
Commissioners shall apply to any employer located within the Village. The
Village opts out of any such ordinance(s) adopted by the County Board of
Commissioners. The ordinance codified by this section conflicts with any such
ordinance(s) adopted by the County Board of Commissioners that imposes
additional obligations with regard to paid sick leave or minimum hourly wages.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, the term EMPLOYEE means an
individual permitted to work by an employer regardless of the number of persons
the employer employs, and the term EMPLOYER means any person employing 1 or
more employees, or seeking to employ 1 or more employees, if the person has its
principal place of business within the Village or does business within the
Village.
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, the term EMPLOYER does not mean:
      (1)   The government of the United States or a corporation wholly owned
by the government of the United States;
      (2)   An Indian tribe or a corporation wholly owned by an Indian tribe;
      (3)   The government of the state or any agency or department thereof; or
      (4)   Any unit of government.
   (E)   In the event that County Ordinance Nos. 16-5768 and 16-4229, or any
other related, superseding county ordinances, are repealed by the county, or a
court of final jurisdiction rules that they are void, or they are superseded by
the enactment of a state-wide minimum wage law and minimum sick leave law, this
section and Village Ordinance No. CO-2017-20 shall automatically be repealed
upon the effective date of the repealing law, the final court ruling, or the
enactment of the state-wide minimum wage law and minimum sick leave law that
supersedes County Ordinance Nos. 16-5768 and 16-4229.
(Ord. CO-2017-20, passed 5-16-2017)
CHAPTER 128: VACATION RENTALS
Section
   
128.01   Definitions
   
128.02   License required
   128.03   License application for vacation rentals
   
128.04   Vacation rental license issuance and renewal; prohibitions
   
128.05   Legal duties; vacation rentals
   
128.06   Prohibited acts; vacation rentals
   
128.99   Penalty
§ 128.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   VACATION RENTAL. A dwelling unit or portion thereof offered for overnight
lodging on a temporary basis to paying guests in no more than two guestrooms
for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days to any person other than a
member of the owner's family. VACATION RENTAL owners may, but are not required
to, live in the VACATION RENTAL during the periods when the property is rented.
The term VACATION RENTAL shall not include hotels or motels or bed and
breakfast establishments, nor shall it include "house swapping" where a
homeowner switches or trades homes with another homeowner in a different town
for a short period of time for a vacation and no money is exchanged.
(Ord. CO-2019-26, passed 8-20-2019)
§ 128.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall carry on the business of operating a vacation rental
without first obtaining a
license therefore from the village in accordance with the licensing procedures
provided under this section. Licenses shall be issued by the Village's Finance
Department following review and approval of an application by the Community
Development Department. Licenses shall be for a period of one year from the
date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, and may thereafter be renewed for
successive one-year periods. No license shall be transferable to another person
or location or to other vacation rental establishments.
   (B)   The fee for a license under this sections shall be as set forth in §
110.13.
   (C)   An application for, and, if requested, renewal of, a business license
to engage in the business of vacation rental shall be accompanied by the
following information:
      (1)   An insurance certificate or other proof indicating that the
applicant and subject property is covered by liability insurance with limits of
not less than $1,000,000 per occurrence, for bodily injury and property damage
arising in any way from the issuance of the license. Each policy of insurance
required under this subsection shall:
         (a)   Be issued by an insurer authorized to insure in the State of
Illinois:
         (b)   Include a provision requiring 30 days' advance notice to the
village prior to cancellation or lapse of the policy. The licensee shall
maintain the insurance required under this section in full force and effect for
the duration of the license period for each vacation rental location. A single
violation of this subsection shall result in suspension or revocation of the
license;
      (2)   A statement as to whether the applicant or any other person with an
ownership interest in the property on which the vacation rental is located,
including co-owners, partners, members, managers, or officers of any owning
partnership, limited liability company or corporation, has ever been convicted
in any jurisdiction of any felony:
      (3)   Proof that the applicant is an owner of the property on which the
vacation rental is located, and names, addresses, ownership interest and
current contact information for any co-owners, partners, members, managers, and
officers;
      (4)   If the vacation rental property is subject to regulations or
restrictions by a homeowners association or condominium association, applicant
must provide documentary evidence that the applicable association or board has
approved the use of the property as a vacation rental; and
      (5)   Proof that the applicant has complied with the village's
requirements for registration and licensing of landlords pursuant to § 150.100.
      (6)   For renewals only, a summary of the number of nights the vacation
rental was rented and the number of guests who staved at the vacation rental
during the previous 12-month period.
(Ord. CO-2019-26, passed 8-20-2019)
§ 128.04 VACATION RENTAL LICENSE ISSUANCE AND RENEWAL: PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No business license to engage in vacation rental shall be issued to:
      (1)   Any applicant, if such applicant or any other person with an
ownership interest in the property on which the vacation rental is located,
including co-owners, partners, members, managers, or officers of any owning
partnership, limited liability company or corporation, has ever been convicted
in any jurisdiction of any felony that is rationally related to the
individual's fitness or capacity to operate a vacation rental.
      (2)   Any applicant whose license to operate a vacation rental or similar
establishment at any location within or outside the village has been revoked
for cause within the last three years.
      (3)   Any applicant where the applicant or any other person with an
ownership interest in the property on which the vacation rental is located,
including co-owners, partners, members, managers, or officers of any owning
partnership, limited liability company or corporation, is in default to the
village regarding payment of water and sewer charges, special taxes or
assessments, parking and other village violation citations or judgments, motor
vehicle tax, or any other license, taxes or fees that are due and unpaid by
such person to the village or where there are delinquent property taxes owed to
Cook County on the property on which the vacation rental is located, or any
other property owned within the village by the applicant or co-owners,
partners, members, managers, or officers of any owning partnership, limited
liability company or corporation.
   (B)   Vacation rental licenses shall be continually monitored By village
staff and renewal of a vacation rental license shall not be construed as a
vested right which shall in any case prohibit the village from declining to
renew a license in a subsequent year. Circumstances that may affect a license
renewal include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Any change in the ownership interest in the vacation rental during
the previous year:
      (2)   Any police reports filed relative to the vacation rental property,
and the general circumstances of the incident resulting in each report;
      (3)   Any citizen complaints filed against any vacation rental property,
and the general nature of each complaint;
      (4)   Any disciplinary action taken against a vacation rental licensee
and any reasons therefore; and
      (5)   Any other information that village staff determines is relevant
relative to a vacation rental.
   (C)   Reasonable conditions may be placed on a license or renewal by the
Finance Director, after input from the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation.
(Ord. CO-2019-26, passed 8-20-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 128.05 LEGAL DUTIES: VACATION RENTALS.
   Each vacation rental licensee shall be required to:
   (A)   Maintain current guest registration records which contain the
following information about each guest: the guest's name, address, signature,
room assignment and dates of accommodation. The registration records shall be
kept on file by the licensee for three years and, upon request by any
authorized Village official, shall be made available for inspection by such
Village official during regular business hours or in case of an emergency;
   (B)   Comply with all applicable Village building, fire, property
maintenance, life safety and other code requirements and Village and state
regulations, including but not limited to the State Fire Marshal's requirements
for one- and two-family dwellings;
   (C)   Conspicuously display a current Village vacation rental license within
the vacation rental with the name and telephone number of the licensee or their
manager, notice of the required quiet hours, an emergency exit floor plan and
location of fire and safety equipment; and
   (D)   Fulfill all requirements of the Illinois Department of Revenue for
operation of a vacation rental, including the payment of any applicable hotel
taxes.
   (E)   Accommodate any overnight parking for vacation rentals on the site or
in another approved location, and parking, including overnight parking, shall
be in conformance with this Code and zoning ordinance requirements.
   (F)   Compile a list of guests and their associated vehicle license plate
numbers upon check-in and make such information available to the Police
Department at any time upon request.
(Ord. CO-2019-26, passed 8-20-2019)
§ 128.06 PROHIBITED ACTS: VACATION RENTALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any vacation rental licensee to:
   (A)   Exceed the scope of the license;
   (B)   Allow occupancy of the property where the vacation rental or any part
thereof is situated to exceed the following occupancy limits:
      (1)   In order for a room to be considered habitable space for sleeping
purposes, it must be a minimum of 70 square feet. A 70 square foot room may
sleep 1 person. Each sleeping room occupied by more than one person shall
contain not less than 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant.
      (2)   Kitchens, bathroom, hallways, and closets are not considered
habitable rooms for sleeping purposes, thus the square footage represented by
these rooms shall not be used.
      (3)   Authorized persons on a vacation rental property while a vacation
rental is taking place are a maximum of 2 guests per room and their children
age 12 and under plus the owner/licensee, co-owners, manager, and owner's
family members. No other persons are allowed on the vacation rental property
while a vacation rental is taking place, and the total number of persons at the
vacation rental property may not exceed 6 at any one time.
      (4)   No pets other than service animals shall be allowed on the property
other than those belonging to the owner/licensee.
   (C)   Rent any vacation rental for more than 30 consecutive days, or fewer
than two consecutive days, to any guest;
   (D)   Rent any portions of the vacation rental concurrently to separate
guests;
   (E)   Allow any outdoor activity related to the rental between 10:00 p.m.
and 8:00 a.m.;
   (F)   Hold out or utilize a vacation rental property as a venue for
weddings, conferences, parties, or other events, regardless of the number of
attendees;
   (G)   Erect any external signage regarding the vacation rental;
   (H)   Permit any criminal activity or public nuisance, including excessive
noise, to take place on the property. If a licensee knows or suspects that any
criminal activity or public nuisance is taking place on or immediately adjacent
to the property, the licensee shall immediately notify the Police Department of
such fact and cooperate with the Police Department in any investigation that
may ensue;
   (I)   Knowingly make any false or incomplete or misleading statement about
the licensee's criminal background, or the criminal background of any other
person with an ownership interest, in connection with any license application
submitted pursuant to this chapter; or
   (J)   Be in violation of any other requirement of this chapter, this Code or
Zoning Code, or any rules or regulations promulgated under any of the
foregoing.
(Ord. CO-2019-26, passed 8-20-2019)
§128.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any one violation of this chapter, or any rules or regulations
promulgated under this chapter
may result in fines, suspension or revocation. A violation of any section of
this chapter is subject to the penalties set forth in § 10.99 in addition to
such other penalties as may be specified in this title. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense-Actions to
suspend or revoke licenses issued under this chapter shall be in accordance
with § 110.10 of this Code. In addition to any other penalty, suspension or
revocation provided for by this chapter or by law, three or more violations of
this chapter, this code or zoning ordinance, or any rules or regulations
promulgated under any of the foregoing, by the licensee or related to the
licensed property, on three different days within any 12 month period, shall
result in a mandatory license suspension or revocation.
   (B)   If a vacation rental license is revoked for any cause, no license
shall be granted to any person for the operation of a vacation rental at the
property described in the revoked license, or to the revoked licensee, and
their co-owners, or the partners, members, managers, or officers of any owning
partnership, limited liability company or corporation, for a period of three
years from the date of revocation.
(Ord. CO-2019-26, passed 8-20-2019)
CHAPTER 129A: CANNABIS BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
   
129A.01   Purpose and applicability
   
129A.02   Definitions
   
129A.03   Consumption, purchase, acceptance or possession prohibited
   
129A.04   Building enhancements
   
129A.05   Conduct of employees and agents; supervisor on premises
   
129A.06   Compliance with other regulations
   
129A.07   On-site consumption or use
   
129A.08   Signage prohibiting sales
   
129A.09   Advertisement prohibited
   
129A.10   Location restriction
   
129A.11   Other restrictions on cannabis dispensing organizations
   
129A.12   Enforcement
§ 129A.01 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   It is the intent and purpose of this section to provide regulations
regarding the cultivation, processing and dispensing of cannabis occurring
within the corporate limits of the Village of Maywood. Such facilities shall
comply with all regulations provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act
(410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.) (“Act”) and the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis
Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.) (“Medical Cannabis Act”), as they may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder, and the
regulations provided below. In the event that either the Act or Medical
Cannabis Act is amended, the more restrictive of the State or local regulations
shall apply.
(Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129A.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT. A cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization or
transporting organization. As used in this section, a cannabis business
establishment shall also include all medical cannabis cultivation centers and
dispensaries licensed under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
   CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER. A facility operated by an organization or business
that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to cultivate, dry,
cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary activities to make
cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or use at a processing
organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities to provide
cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1), as it
may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business
establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-
infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to
purchasers or to  qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1), as it may
be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1), as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS LOUNGE OR SOCIAL SPACE. A facility operated by an organization or
business that is:
      (1)   Licensed by the Illinois Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed cannabis business establishments
for the purpose of selling or dispensing cannabis, cannabis-infused products,
cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies to purchasers or to qualified
registered medical cannabis patients and caregivers that may permit the on-
premises consumption of cannabis at or within the business; or
      (2)   Any other entity authorized by the Village to allow on-premises
consumption of cannabis in a manner consistent with the Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder. Cannabis Lounges and Social Spaces are
prohibited within the village.
   CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
   CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER. An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/
1), as it may be amended from time-to- time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, association, club, society or other
organization, including any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer or
agent.
(Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129A.03 CONSUMPTION, PURCHASE, ACCEPTANCE OR POSSESSION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, give
away, deliver, possess with intent to sell at wholesale or retail, possess with
intent to give away or deliver for promotional purposes, either retail or
wholesale, any cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds,
paraphernalia or related supplies within the Village without first having
obtained a license from the State of Illinois. A dispensing organization's
license allows for a dispensary to be operated only at a single location.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, give
away, deliver, possess with intent to sell at wholesale or retail, possess with
intent to give away or deliver for promotional purposes, either retail or
wholesale, any cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds,
paraphernalia or related supplies to persons under 21 years of age and in
contravention to the provisions of the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410
ILCS 705/1 et seq.). The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply
to persons who consume, purchase or possess cannabis, cannabis-infused
products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person under 21 years of age to consume,
purchase, accept a gift of or have cannabis, cannabis-infused products,
cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies in their possession or in
their bloodstream. The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply
to persons who consume, purchase or possess cannabis, cannabis-infused
products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related supplies pursuant to the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
(Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129A.04 BUILDING ENHANCEMENTS.
   (A)   Any licensee of a cannabis business establishment shall install
building enhancements, such as security cameras, lighting or other
improvements, to ensure the safety of employees and customers of the cannabis
business establishments, as well as its environs. Said improvements shall be
determined based on the specific characteristics of the floor plan for a
cannabis business establishment and the site on which it is located, consistent
with the requirements of the Act and the Medical Cannabis Act. The Village
Manager or their designee may, at their discretion, require the cannabis
business establishment to install improvements and building enhancements beyond
the state's requirements based on the specific characteristics of the cannabis
business establishment in order to ensure the safety of employees, customers
and village residents.
   (B)   A dispensing organization must keep all lighting outside and inside
the dispensary in good working order and wattage sufficient for security
cameras.
(Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129A.05 CONDUCT OF EMPLOYEES AND AGENTS; SUPERVISOR ON PREMISES.
   (A)   Any act or failure to act of an employee or agent of either the
licensee or a management company with respect to the licensed business shall be
deemed to be the act of the licensee. Any duty set forth in this chapter as a
duty of the licensee shall also be the duty of any agent or employee of the
licensee.
   (B)   No employee or other server of cannabis may consume or be permitted to
consume any cannabis product on the licensed premises while on duty or while
performing any duties of employment.
   (C)   No person, including any employee, manager, owner or agent of the
licensee, may consume cannabis products on the licensed premises before or
after the permitted hours of operation.
   (D)   A person must be at least 21 years of age to sell cannabis products.
   (E)   A manager shall be on the premises at all times that the licensed
premises is open for business.
   (F)   A dispensing organization shall submit a list to the State of the
names of all service professionals that will work at the dispensary.
(Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129A.06 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All licensed premises shall be maintained in full compliance with all
other regulations of the State, the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act and the Village, including,
but not limited to, those relating to the storage or sale of food, sanitary
conditions, building and safety conditions.
   (B)   Applicants seeking to open a cannabis business establishment facility
shall provide the Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and
Licensing with proof of state licensing approval prior to the issuance by the
village of a special use permit. Persons operating a cannabis business
establishment shall annually provide to the Joint Commission for Tobacco and
Cannabis Regulation and Licensing all state inspection reports and other
information necessary to verify ongoing compliance with state and village
requirements. Applicants shall, after commencing operations, provide to the
Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing, within 7
days of receipt, copies of any notices, citations or other enforcement actions
undertaken against the facility by the state, along with an explanation as to
what steps are being taken by the applicant to bring the facility back into
compliance.
   (C)   Cooperation with village. Cannabis business establishments and
property owners, where such cannabis business establishments are located, shall
provide access to village police, fire and code enforcement personnel and the
Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing during
periods when employees are present to verify compliance with this chapter and
other village ordinances. Cannabis business establishments and property owners,
where such cannabis business establishments are located, shall cooperate with
the village police, fire and code enforcement personnel and the Joint
Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing in the provision
of security footage when requested, and in any related prosecution of any
persons who violate state law or local ordinances within a cannabis business
establishment and on properties where such organizations are located.
   (D)   All cannabis business establishments shall register with the village
pursuant to § 110.18 of the village code.
(Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129A.07 ON-SITE CONSUMPTION OR USE.
   No cannabis shall be smoked, eaten or otherwise consumed or ingested within
any cannabis business establishment and within the parking areas or other
public areas of a cannabis business establishment. Dispensing organizations are
required to prominently display signs regarding this prohibition near the exit
door or doors of the facility.
(Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129A.08 SIGNAGE PROHIBITING SALES.
   (A)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions of this section
shall be posted by every licensee in conspicuous view on the premises. Each
such sign shall state:
         The sale of cannabis products to persons under 21 years of age is
prohibited by law. A photo identification showing proof of age shall be
required of everyone under 27 years of age desiring to purchase cannabis
products. Violations shall be reported to the Police Department.
   (B)   Said sign(s) shall be plainly visible and shall measure at least 8 ½
inches in height and 11 inches in width. Lettering on said sign(s) shall be at
least ½ inch in height. Said signs shall also inform the public that the
Village Police Department is to be contacted should the law be violated.
   (C)   The signage requirement set forth in this section shall not apply to
any medical cannabis cultivation center or dispensary which operates
exclusively under a license issued pursuant to the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.).
(Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129A.09 ADVERTISEMENT PROHIBITED.
   Cannabis business establishments cannot advertise cannabis or a cannabis-
infused product in any form or through any medium:
   (A)   Within 1,000 feet of school grounds, playground, hospital, healthcare
facility, recreation center or facility, child care center, public park or
library, or any arcade that admits persons under the age of 21;
   (B)   On or in a public transit vehicle or public transit shelter;
   (C)   On or in a publicly-owned or publicly-operated property; or
   (D)   Which contains information that:
      (1)   Is false or misleading;
      (2)   Promotes excessive consumption; or
      (3)   Depicts a person under 21 years of age consuming cannabis.
   (E)   This includes the image of a cannabis leaf or any image designed or
likely to appeal to minors, including cartoons, toys, animals or children, or
any other likeness to images, characters or phrases that are popularly used to
advertise to children, or any imitation of candy packaging or labeling or that
promotes consumption of cannabis.
(Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129A.10 LOCATION RESTRICTION.
   A cannabis business establishment shall not be located within 1,500 feet of
the property line of any pre-existing cannabis business establishment located
within or outside the village. Cannabis business establishments shall abide by
all other location restrictions contained in this chapter, the village's zoning
ordinance or the act.
(Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129A.11 OTHER RESTRICTIONS ON CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   Hours of operation. Cannabis dispensing organizations shall operate
only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
   (B)   No cannabis odors shall be detectable outside of the cannabis
dispensing organizations.
   (C)   Product display. No products sold by cannabis dispensing organizations
shall be visible from the public street, sidewalk or other public place.
   (D)   A dispensing organization may only accept cannabis deliveries into a
restricted access area. Deliveries may not be accepted through the public or
limited access areas unless otherwise approved under the Act or Medical
Cannabis Act.
   (E)   A dispensing organization must include the legal name of the
dispensary on the packaging of any cannabis product it sells.
   (F)   Dispensing organizations are prohibited from selling any product
containing alcohol except tinctures, which must be limited to containers that
are no larger than 100 milliliters.
   (G)   Dispensing organizations shall not:
      (1)   Sell cannabis, cannabis concentrate or cannabis-infused products in
combination or bundled with each other or any other items for one price, and
each item of cannabis, concentrate or cannabis-infused product must be
separately identified by quantity and price on the receipt.
      (2)   Sell clones or any other live plant material.
      (3)   Have fewer than 2 people working at the dispensary at any time
while the dispensary is open.
      (4)   Operate a dispensary if its video surveillance equipment is
inoperative.
      (5)   Operate a dispensary if the point-of-sale equipment is inoperative.
      (6)   Operate a dispensary if the state's cannabis electronic
verification system is inoperative.
      (7)   Enter into agreements to allow persons who are not dispensing
organization agents to deliver cannabis or to transport cannabis to purchasers.
      (8)   Operate drive-through windows.
      (9)   Allow for the dispensing of cannabis or cannabis-infused products
in vending machines.
      (10)   Transport cannabis to residences or other locations where
purchasers may be for delivery.
      (11)   Produce or manufacture cannabis.
      (12)   Accept a cannabis product from an adult use cultivation center,
craft grower, infuser, dispensing organization or transporting organization
unless it is pre-packaged and labeled in accordance with the act and any rules
that may be adopted pursuant to the act.
      (13)   Obtain cannabis or cannabis-infused products from outside the
State of Illinois.
      (14)   Sell cannabis or cannabis-infused products to a purchaser unless
the dispensary organization is licensed under the compassionate use of medical
cannabis pilot program, and the individual is registered under the
compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program or the purchaser has been
verified to be over the age of 21.
      (15)   Violate any other requirements or prohibitions set by state rules.
(Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019; Am. Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129A.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Building and Code Enforcement Department and Joint Commission for
Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing created under Chapter 129B of
this Code, acting in conjunction with the Village Manager and the Police
Department, shall be responsible for the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   The Building and Code Enforcement Department and the Police Department
shall conduct random, unannounced inspection at cannabis business
establishments to ensure compliance with this chapter and state law.
   (C)   The Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis along with the Village
Manager and Police Department, shall promulgate reasonable rules and
regulations consistent with this chapter to provide for the enforcement of this
chapter. The rules and regulations shall establish procedures for
administrative action against those who violate the chapter and for a method of
administrative adjudication of the violation or violations.
   (D)   Any such rules and regulations promulgated under this chapter shall be
filed in the Building and Code Enforcement Department's principal office and
with the Village Clerk. A copy of said rules and regulations shall be made
available for public inspection upon request.
(Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
CHAPTER 129B: JOINT COMMISSION FOR TOBACCO AND
CANNABIS REGULATION AND LICENSING
Section
   
129B.01   Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing
   
129B.02   Commissioner of the Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis
§ 129B.01 JOINT COMMISSION FOR TOBACCO AND CANNABIS REGULATION AND LICENSING.
   (A)   Created/membership. There is created a Joint Commission for Tobacco
and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing. The members of the Local Liquor Control
Commission shall also serve as the members of the Joint Commission for Tobacco
and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing. Appointments and terms will be as
prescribed under §
117.03 of this Code.
   (B)   Chairperson. The Commissioner for the Joint Commission for Tobacco and
Cannabis Regulation and Licensing shall act as chairperson for the purpose of
presiding over meetings conducted by the Commission.
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis
Regulation and Licensing shall have and exercise the following duties as
directed by the Commissioner of the Joint Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis
Regulation and Licensing:
      (1) To review applications and the investigation of applicants for
tobacco licenses, and to submit findings and recommendations to the
Commissioner on applications and related matters either through an oral vote or
by setting forth in writing its conclusions regarding such applications;
      (2)   To perform its duties as prescribed under §
129A.12;
      (3)   To participate on an advisory;
      (4)   To keep written records of its meetings and proceedings which shall
be open for public inspection in accordance with the Freedom of Information
Act; and
      (5)   Such other duties as determined by the Commissioner or the Board of
Trustees.
(Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
§ 129B.02 COMMISSIONER OF THE JOINT COMMISSION FOR TOBACCO AND CANNABIS.
   (A) Designation. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner, as appointed
pursuant to §
117.02 of this Code shall also serve as the Commissioner for the Joint
Commission for Tobacco and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing for and on behalf
of the Village.
   (B)   Functions. The Commissioner shall be responsible for overseeing the
administration and enforcement of the Village's regulations regarding tobacco
and cannabis as provided in
Chapters 116 (Tobacco) and
129A (Cannabis Business Establishments).
   (C)   Powers and duties. The Commissioner for the Joint Commission for
Tobacco and Cannabis shall have and exercise all the powers and duties
necessary to administer and enforce the Village's regulations regarding tobacco
and cannabis as prescribed in
Chapters 116 (Tobacco) and
129A (Cannabis Business Regulations), including but not limited to the
Village's tobacco licensing program.
   (D)   Records. The Village Clerk shall keep or cause to be kept a complete
record of all licenses issued by the Commissioner of the Joint Commission for
Tobacco and Cannabis under this chapter and shall furnish the Chief of Police
and Building Director with a copy. Upon the issuance of any new license. or the
revocation of any old license, the Clerk shall give written notice of such
action to the Chief of Police and Building Director within 48 hours of being
notified by the Commissioner of such action. The Village Clerk shall act as
custodian of all records for the Commissioner of the Joint Commission for
Tobacco and Cannabis and shall keep a record of all proceedings, transactions,
communications and official acts of the Commissioner, and shall perform such
other duties as they may prescribe.
(Ord. CO-2022-23, passed 11-1-2022)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
Chapter
   
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
   
131.   PROSTITUTION AND PROSTITUTION-FREE ZONES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
Offenses Pertaining to Property
   
130.01   Barbed wire fences
   
130.02   Graffiti
   
130.03   Littering
   
130.04   Defacing buildings
   
130.05   Vandalism
   
130.06   Criminal trespass to real property
   
130.07   Damage to or theft of public property
   
130.08   Spray paint; sale and possession
Offenses Against Public Order
   
130.20   Disorderly conduct
   
130.21   (Reserved)
   
130.22   Curfew
   
130.23   Loitering
   
130.24   No loitering zones
   
130.25   Gang loitering
   
130.26   Narcotics-related loitering
   
130.27   Truancy
   
130.28   Panhandling/aggressive panhandling
Offenses Against Public Justice and Administration
   
130.35   Impersonating or interfering with Village officers
   
130.36   Prisoner’s escape
Offenses Against Public Morals
   
130.50   Gambling
   
130.51   Delivering wagers
   
130.52   Houses of ill fame; disorderly houses
   
130.53   Obscene material
   
130.54   Unlawful adult entertainment
Offenses Against Public Health and Safety
   
130.65   Fireworks
   
130.66   Fires
   
130.67   Pollution
Weapons
   
130.80   Firearms
   
130.81   Weapons
   
130.82   Air rifles and toy weapons
Drug-Related Offenses
   
130.90   Drug paraphernalia
   
130.91   Synthetic alternative drugs
   
130.92   Possession of cannabis
 
   
130.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Aggravated fleeing and eluding a peace officer; impoundment, see §
99.26
OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
§ 130.01 BARBED WIRE FENCES.
   No person shall maintain any fence containing barbed wire along or near any
public sidewalk.
(1997 Code, § 42.06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.02 GRAFFITI.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      GRAFFITI. Any sign, symbol, marking, drawing, name, initial, word,
diagram, sketch, picture or letter placed upon the real or personal property of
an owner of property without the owner’s express, written permission; provided
that GRAFFITI shall not include any sign permitted by the Village Code.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN. A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the
person of a minor, or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been
placed by a court.
      MINOR. A person who is 11 years of age or above, but not yet 18 years of
age.
   (B)   Acts prohibited. It shall be unlawful:
      (1)   For any person to place graffiti upon the real or personal, public
or private property of another.
      (2)   For the owner and/or occupant of fixed real or personal property
located within the public view to place or give permission to place graffiti on
such real or personal property, if the graffiti incites violence by referring
to gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses obscenity by referring to
sexual activity or contains defamatory material about a public or private
person.
      (3)   For any person to possess, while in any public building or facility
or while on public property, any of the following materials with the intent to
use such materials to violate divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) above: spray paint
containers, paint, ink, marking pens containing non-water soluble fluid,
brushes, applicators or other materials for marking, scratching or etching.
   (C)   Nuisance declared. It is declared a nuisance to place graffiti, or
permit graffiti to exist, upon any personal, public or private property of
another.
   (D)   Duty of property owner or possessor.
      (1)   Prompt removal. Upon notice, set forth in division (D)(3) below,
the owner or party in possession of any such real or personal property or
structure upon which graffiti is present shall abate the nuisance within 24
hours in accordance with §
92.22 of this Code. All exterior surfaces shall be kept clean and free of
graffiti.
      (2)   Extenuating circumstances for good cause. Surfaces which have been
exposed to graffiti shall be cleaned, painted or in some manner covered, so as
to effect the complete removal of the graffiti from that surface and return the
surface to its prior condition within 24 hours or receipt of the violation
notice in accordance with division (D)(3) below to the owner unless extenuating
circumstances for good cause shown prevent work from being done, in which case
the Chief of Police, Building Director or some other Village official whom the
President shall designate may give an extension for the removal of graffiti.
      (3)   Notice. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police, Building
Director or some other Village official whom the President shall designate to
serve or cause to be served the notices required in this division (D).
   (E)   Responsibility of parent or legal guardian. 
      (1)   Parental and legal guardian liability. If a minor engages in
conduct that violates any provision of this section, and such minor is
unemancipated and resides with their parent or legal guardian, such parent or
legal guardian shall be strictly liable under this section regardless of
whether the parent or legal guardian has actual knowledge of the minor’s
unlawful conduct and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in division
(F) below if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The minor has been either adjudicated to be in violation of this
section or has incurred nonjudicial sanctions from any peace officer, police
officer, or conservator of the peace resulting from an admission of guilt to an
offense under this section.
         (b)   The parent or legal guardian has received a written notice by
certified mail, return receipt requested, or by personal service in
substantially the following form:
   LEGAL NOTICE
To: (Parents’ or Legal Guardians’ Names)
From: Village of Maywood
You are hereby notified that (minor’s name) has been involved in the commission
of (specify offense), which is a violation of the Village Code. If your minor
child is again involved in a violation of Village ordinances involving
graffiti, you will be charged with Parental and Legal Guardian
Irresponsibility. Conviction for said offense can result in a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $3,000. You are hereby notified that you must exercise
proper parental responsibility over said minor by controlling his or her
unlawful conduct.
         (c)   The minor, within 2 years of the receipt of the notice by the
parent or legal guardian, has been either adjudicated to have committed, has
been charged with the violation (except if found to be not guilty), or has
admitted to have committed any violation of this section.
      (2)   Limitation on liability. Provided, however, that no order imposing
a fine and/or restitution pursuant to division (F) below shall exceed $3,000 in
the aggregate.
   (F)   Penalty. The following penalties apply to this section:
      (1)   Fine. Penalty for violating division (B) of this section shall,
upon conviction, consist of a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $750 for
each offense.
      (2)   Failure to remove graffiti. Penalty for conviction for failure to
remove graffiti as set forth in division (D)(1) above shall be a fine or not
less than $100 nor more than $750 for each offense and for the costs incurred
by the Village or its agents to abate the nuisance as set forth in division (F)
(7) below. Each day such failure continues shall be considered a separate
offense and fines shall be assessed accordingly.
      (3)   Public service work. Public service work, including but not limited
to cleaning graffiti at
locations within the Village may be required by the court for persons convicted
of any violation pursuant to this section up to 1,500 hours of community
service under the procedures set forth in 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.1.
      (4)   Gang membership. Any person convicted of any violation pursuant to
this section who is also found to have been a member of a street gang, as
defined under the Illinois Street Gang Terrorism Omnibus Prevention Act, 740
ILCS 147/1 et seq., at the time the offense is committed and who is found to
have violated any offense set forth in this section in conjunction with gang-
related activities shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000 in addition to the other penalties listed in
this section or any other local, state or federal laws.
      (5)   Parent or legal guardian. If a parent or legal guardian is found
liable under division (E) of this section, the parent or legal guardian shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $750 and payment of
restitution in the amount of the actual costs incurred by the property owner to
abate, remediate, repair or remove the effects of the graffiti.
      (6)   Restitution. In addition to any other penalties set forth in this
division (F), the offender may also be ordered by the court for the restitution
to the property owner for the cost of restoring the property to its condition
before the graffiti was applied.
      (7)   Lien. All costs incurred by the Village or its agents related to
the abatement of the public nuisance of graffiti shall be recoverable as a lien
against the property pursuant to the procedures set forth in §§
92.22 and
92.23 of this Code.
(1997 Code, § 42.08) (Am. Ord. C0-76-07, passed 6-13-1996; Am. Ord. C0-09-05,
passed 2-17-2009; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2024-37, passed 9-10-2024) Penalty, see § 130.99
Cross-reference:
   Commission on Graffiti, see § 31.45
   Disorderly street gang conduct, see §
130.20
§ 130.03 LITTERING.
   (A)   No person shall litter any public or private property with paper or
other debris or foreign matter. Any stored or transported materials susceptible
to blowing or scattering shall be adequately covered or protected to prevent
littering.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $500 for the first offense.
In the event any person violating the provisions of this section is unable to
pay the stated fine, they shall be punished by performing community service of
not less than 8 hours and not more than 40 hours for the first offense.
Offenses in excess of 1 shall be punishable as a misdemeanor by imprisonment or
community service not exceeding 6 months or by a fine of $750. Each day that a
violation of this section continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1997 Code, § 42.09) (Ord. —, passed 9-8-1994; Am. Ord. C0-00-32, passed 12-4-
2000)
§ 130.04 DEFACING BUILDINGS.
   No person shall write, print or paint with chalk, ink, paint, spray paint or
other material, any obscene words, language or expression upon any building,
tenement, fence, wall or other place, or draw or paint on the same any picture
or representation of anything of an immodest or vulgar character.
(1997 Code, § 42.17) (Am. Ord. CO-2024-37, passed 9-10-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 VANDALISM.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACTS OF VANDALISM. Any of the following acts:
         (a)   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly damaging or destroying any
property of another person without their consent; or
         (b)   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly by means of fire or
explosive device damage, debasing or destroying any property of another person;
or
         (c)   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly starting a fire on land of
another person without their consent; or
         (d)   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly depositing on the land or
in the building of another person, without their consent, any stink bomb, or
any offensive smelling compound and thereby interfering with the use and
occupancy by another of the land or building; or
         (e)   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly and without authority
entering into orobtaining control over any building, house trailer, motor
vehicle, aircraft, or water craft or any part thereof of another person without
their consent; or
         (f)   Maliciously, recklessly, or knowingly damage, destroy, or deface
the property of another person, including public property, through the use of
any aerosol container of paint.
      LEGAL GUARDIAN. Includes a foster parent, a person appointed guardian of
a person, or given custody of a minor by a Circuit Court of this state, but
does not include a person appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor, or
appointed guardian, or given custody of a minor under the Illinois Juvenile
Court Act.
      MINOR. A person who is above the age of 11 years, but not yet 18 years of
age.
      PARENT. The lawful father and mother of a minor child, whether by birth
or adoption.
      PROPERTY. Any real estate, including improvements thereon, and tangible
personalty.
      RESTITUTION. Paying to a person who owns property damaged or destroyed by
an act of vandalism an amount equal to the damages incurred as a result of the
act of vandalism and shall also include undertaking at the direction of the
Police Department Juvenile Officer tasks designed to correct damage resulting
from acts of vandalism or other work which will provide a benefit to the
Village and its citizens.
   (B)   Participation in police social worker program. Within 30 days after a
minor who has engaged in an act of vandalism is taken into custody by the
Police Department, the minor shall be required to begin participation in the
Police Social Worker Program.
   (C)   Restitution required. A minor who has engaged in an act of vandalism
is required within 90 days after being taken into custody to provide
restitution.
   (D)   Parents or legal guardians responsible. The parents or legal guardians
of a minor who engaged in acts of vandalism are responsible for insuring that
the minor participates in the Police Social Worker Program as required by
division (B) of this section and provides restitution as required by division
(C) of this section.
   (E)   Penalties. Any minor who engages in an act of vandalism and is found
liable upon entry of an administrative or judicial finding that an offense of
vandalism has occurred shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not
more than $750 for each offense. Any minor who engages in an act of vandalism
and who fails to participate in the Police Social Worker Program as required by
division (B) of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.
Any minor who engages in an act of vandalism and who fails to provide
restitution as required by division (C) of this section shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $500. The parent or legal guardian of a minor shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $500 if the minor engaged in an act of
vandalism fails to participate in the Police Social Worker Program as required
by division (B) of this section and fails to provide restitution as required by
division (C) of this section.
(1997 Code, § 42.20) (Ord. 77-15, passed 4-22- 1977; Am. Ord. CO-2024-37,
passed 9-10-2024)
§ 130.06 CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Whoever:
      (1)   Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains within or
on a building; or
      (2)   Enters upon the land of another, after receiving, prior to such
entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such entry is forbidden; or
      (3)   Remains upon the land of another, after receiving notice from the
owner or occupant to depart; or
      (4)   Enters a prostitution-free zone within the Village during an
exclusion period in violation of an exclusion notice issued to such person
pursuant to
Chapter 131 of this Code.
For purposes of division (A)(1) above, this section shall not apply to being in
a building which is open to the public while the building is open to the public
during its normal hours of operation; nor shall this section apply to a person
who enters a public building under the reasonable belief that the building is
still open to the public.
   (B)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the
meaning of division (A) above if they have been notified personally, either
orally or in writing including a valid court order, or if a printed or written
notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the
main entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof.
   (C) This section does not prohibit a person from entering a building or upon
the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of this division
(C), EMERGENCY means a condition or circumstance in which an individual is or
is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent danger of serious bodily
harm or in which property is or is reasonably believed to be in imminent danger
of damage or destruction.
   (D)   A person is not prohibited from entering a prostitution-free zone
during an exclusion period for the purposes set forth in §
131.06(C) of the Code or if that person was in the zone in compliance with the
terms of a variation issued under §
131.10 of the Code.
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Prostitution and prostitution-free zones, see
Ch. 131
§ 130.07 DAMAGE TO OR THEFT OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, PUBLIC PROPERTY means
anything of value owned or purchased by the Village or other unit of local
government, including but not limited to vehicles, equipment, supplies,
fixtures, personal property, furniture, computers and related software and
components, telephones and other communication devices, cabinets, files,
documents, real estate, money, commercial instruments, written instruments
representing or embodying rights concerning anything of value, labor or
services, things affixed to or found on land or part of or affixed to any
building, structure or other infrastructure of the Village or other unit of
local government, as well as any utilities such as electricity, gas or water.
   (B)   Damage. It shall be unlawful for anyone to injure, deface or interfere
with any public property without proper authority from the governing public
body.
   (C)   Theft. It shall be unlawful for anyone to take, use, convert, collect,
obtain or possess any public property for personal or private use or for any
other use without proper authority from the governing public body.
   (D)   Fines and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
section shall be fined not less than $100 and not more than $1,000 for each
offense. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
(Ord. CO-2012-02, passed 1-17-2012)
§ 130.08 SPRAY PAINT; SALE AND POSSESSION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
      SPRAY PAINT. Any aerosol-propelled paint or any device designed to expel
paint by means of a compressed gas.
   (B)   Sale of spray paint to minors prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, business, corporation,
partnership, or entity to sell, give away, deliver, transfer, or offer to sell
any container of spray paint to a person aged 18 years or less within the
Village of Maywood.
      (2)   For purposes of preventing violations of this section, any entity
in division (B)(1) may refuse to sell spray paint to any person under the age
of 18.
      (3)   For the purposes of preventing violations of this section, any
entity in division (B)(1) shall first obtain bona fide evidence of the identity
and age of majority through verified documentation, including but not limited
to identification issued by a federal, state, or local government entity
showing the age and identity of the individual.
   (C)   Possession of spray paint by minors prohibited.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to
possess any container of spray paint within the Village of Maywood.
      (2)   It shall be an affirmative defense that the person possessing the
spray paint is on private property that is their usual place of residence.
      (3)   It shall be an affirmative defense that the person possessing spray
paint is on school grounds and engaged in a function sanctioned or supervised
by a teacher or other school official.
   (D)   General penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section
subject to the general penalty provision at § 10.99 (General Penalty) of this
Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. CO-2024-37, passed 9-10-2024)
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
§ 130.20 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall engage in disorderly conduct in the Village. Any of
the following acts constitute disorderly conduct:
      (1)   Making, aiding or assisting in making any improper noise, riot,
disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to a breach of the peace;
      (2)   Assaulting, striking or deliberately injuring another person;
      (3)   Engaging in or aiding or abetting any fight, quarrel or other
disturbance;
      (4)   Intentionally disturbing any religious service, funeral, public or
private meeting, place of amusement, or assembly of persons;
      (5)   Resisting or obstructing the performance of one known to be a
police officer or any authorized act within the police officer's official
capacity, or impersonating a police officer;
      (6)   Assisting any person in custody of police to escape or furnishing
any weapon, drugs or liquor to any such person;
      (7)   Assembling with 2 or more other persons for the purpose of using
force or violence to disturb the public peace;
      (8)   Failing to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known to be
a peace officer, where 3 or more persons are committing acts of disorderly
conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial
harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm;
      (9)   Engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money
or other valuable thing, or other scheme to obtain money or other value;
      (10)   Giving any false alarm of fire, danger or disturbance to any
person, or false information to any peace officer or fireman or any Village
officer;
      (11)   Engaging in obscene or indecent activities or entertainment, or
any lewd or lascivious behavior, or appearing in public in a state of nudity;
      (12)   Prostitution and gaming houses.
         (a)   Maintaining a house of ill fame or gaming house;
         (b)   Being in a house of ill fame or gaming house;
         (c)   Engaging in or soliciting unlawful sexual actions;
         (d)   Knowingly taking, directing or transporting, or offering to
take, direct or transport, any person for immoral purposes to any other person;
         (e)   Knowingly assisting any person by any means to seek or to find
any prostitute or other person engaged in immoral practices, or any brothel,
bawdy house or any other place of ill fame; or
         (f)   Responding to beckoning of a prostitute in a public place by
inquiring about, negotiating for, accepting an offer of or engaging in an act
of prostitution, or by allowing another into his or her motor vehicle for
purposes of inquiring about, negotiating for, accepting an offer of or engaging
in an act of prostitution;
      (13)   Using any obscene, profane, threatening or inciting language in
any public place;
      (14)   Throwing stones or missiles in public places or at any person or
property, or using, brandishing or threatening to use any missile, or dangerous
weapon or object;
      (15)   Damaging or defacing trees, bushes, gardens, fences, windows,
signs, buildings, monuments or vehicles or engaging in any acts of vandalism;
      (16)   Abusing, beating or cruelly injuring any animal, or attempting to
kill or wound any bird other than a sparrow, crow or blackbird.
      (17)   Appearing on any public property (including streets, sidewalks or
busses) in the Village of Maywood, in a state that exposes any portion of a
person’s buttocks, pubic area, genitals and/or undergarments. Pants and shorts
worn by any person, regardless of age, shall be secured at the waist to prevent
the pants or shorts from being worn in a manner that exposes the person’s
buttocks, pubic area, genitals and/or the person’s undergarments.
         (a)   If a violation of this subsection occurs, a citation shall be
issued to the person and the person shall be subject to a civil penalty of not
less than $25 on the first offense, not less than $100 for a second offense and
not less than $250 for each subsequent offense. In addition to the civil
penalty, the court may order such person to participate in up to 40 hours of
court approved community service activities. A violation of this section shall
not be deemed a criminal offense; and thus, violators shall not be subject to
arrest, imprisonment or other criminal penalty for violation of this section.
         (b)   If the person violating this subsection is under the age of 18
(“minor”), the parents or legal guardians of that minor will be sent notice of
the violation, which shall include notice that any subsequent violations by the
minor will subject the parents or legal guardians to fines. If the minor
commits a subsequent offense, the parent or legal guardian shall be subject to
a civil penalty of $100 for the second offense and $250 for each subsequent
offense.
   (B)   Disorderly street gang conduct.
      (1)   For the purpose of this subsection, STREET GANG or GANG is defined
as any ongoing organization, association in fact or group of 3 or more persons,
whether formally or informally organized, or any sub-group or affiliated group
thereof, having as one of its activities the commission of criminal or illegal
acts, including by way of example only and not in anyway limiting or specifying
illegal drug distribution, and whose members individually or collectively
engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal or illegal acts, and which
group frequently, though not necessarily, claim 1 or more particular geographic
territory or "turf' exclusively as its realm of influence and operations.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to knowingly
use, display or wear colors, emblems or insignia on or about their person in
public for the purpose of promoting any street gang activity.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person within the Village to knowingly
do or make any act, utterance, gesture or display for the purpose of
communicating membership of, affiliation with, association with, support of,
identification with, sympathy toward or affront or insult toward any street
gang, or with actual knowledge that the subject act, utterance, gesture or
display is used and recognized as communicative of street gang membership,
affiliation, association, support, identification, sympathy or affront.
      (4)   Any person violating this division (B) shall be fined not less than
$400 for each offense and be responsible for the Village’s cost of prosecution,
including attorney fees incurred by the Village. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
   (C)   Intoxicating liquor.
      (1)   Any police officer having personal knowledge or reasonable
information that intoxicating liquors are being kept in violation of law in any
place shall search such suspected place, and if such police officer finds upon
the premises intoxicating liquors he shall seize the same, together with the
vessels in which they are contained and all implements and furniture used in
connection with such liquors in the illegal keeping, bargaining, selling,
exchanging, giving away or carrying the same, and any wagon, automobile,
vehicle, contrivance, thing or device used in conveying the liquors or kept for
the purpose of violating this division (C), and shall arrest any person or
persons in charge of such place, or aiding in any manner in carrying on the
business conducted in such place.
      (2)   Consumption or possession of any alcoholic liquors, including beer
and wine, at any time in any public park, street, alley or public place owned,
controlled or operated by the Village is prohibited.
      (3)   Any person violating this section shall be fined not less than $400
for each offense and be responsible for the Village’s costs of prosecution,
including attorney fees incurred by the Village. Each day that a violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense.
   (D)   Loitering.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any
thoroughfare, place open to the public or private place in a manner under
circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in drug related activity
contrary to any of the provisions of this Code or the State of Illinois
Criminal Code of 1961, as amended.
      (2)   Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such purpose is "manifested" shall include but not be limited to:
         (a)   Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller.
For purposes of this provision, a KNOWN UNLAWFUL DRUG USER, POSSESSOR OR SELLER
is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been
convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use,
possession or sale of any of the controlled substances referred to in the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended, or such person who has been
convicted of any violation of the provisions of the Illinois Criminal Code of
1961, as amended, or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of
this state or of any other state; or a person who displays the physical
characteristics of drug intoxication or usage, such as "needle tracks" or a
person who possesses drug paraphernalia as defined in the Illinois Municipal
Code of 1961, as amended; or
         (b)   Such person is currently subject to an order prohibiting his
presence in a high drug activity geographic area; or
         (c)   Such person behaves in a manner as to raise reasonable suspicion
that he is about to engage in or is then engaged in any unlawful drug related
activity, including, by way of example only, such person acting as a "lookout";
or
         (d)   Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member
of a "gang" or association which has as one of its purposes illegal drug
activity; or
         (e)   Such person transfers small objects or packages for currency in
a furtive fashion; or
         (f)   Such person takes flight upon the appearance of a police
officer; or
         (g)   Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal upon himself or
herself any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug
related activity; or
         (h)   The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of
unlawful drug use and trafficking; or
         (i)   The premises involved have been reported to law enforcement as a
place of suspected gang activity; or
         (j)   Such person possesses any instrument, article or thing whose
customary or primary purpose is for the sale, administration or use of
controlled substances such as, but not limited to, crack pipes, push wires,
chore boys, hand scales, hypodermic needles, razor blades or other cutting
tools;
         (k)   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug
user, possessor or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant
for a crime involving drug-related activity.
(1997 Code, § 42.01) (Am. Ord. CO-96-06, passed 6-13-1996; Am. Ord. C0-09-07,
passed 3-3-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2012-37, passed 10-2-2012)
Cross-reference:
   Graffiti, see §
130.02
§ 130.21 (RESERVED)
§ 130.22 CURFEW.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a curfew violation for a person under the age
of 18 years (hereinafter, "child") to be present at any public assembly or in
or upon any public building, park, sidewalk, street, highway, alley or other
lands used for public purposes, or in any public place of business or amusement
in the Village:
      (1)   Between the hours of 11:00 p.m. Friday to 6:00 a.m. Saturday, and
11:00 p.m. Saturday to 6:00 a.m. Sunday; and
      (2)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, and 6:
00 a.m. on the following day.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to a child who is:
      (1)   Accompanied and supervised by a parent, legal guardian or legal
custodian;
      (2)   Accompanied by a responsible companion at least 18 years of age
approved by the child's parent, legal guardian or legal custodian;
      (3)   Engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of this State
authorize a child less than 17 years of age to perform;
      (4)   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
         (a)   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
         (b)   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights
protected under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or
Article I, Sections 3, 4, and 5 of the Illinois Constitution of 1970, or both,
such as freedoms of religion and speech and the right of assembly, to include,
but not be limited to:
            1.   A religious event, including, but not limited to, prayer and
vigil services; or
            2.   A political event, including, but not limited to, observing or
influencing a legislative session and attending a political rally or event;
         (c)   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that
provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision
of 1 or more adults; or
      (5)   Engaged in interstate or international travel from a location
outside the state to another location outside the state with the permission of
a parent or legal guardian.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, or other person,
having the legal care and custody of any child under the age of 18 years, to
knowingly allow or permit such child, ward, or other child under such age,
while having such legal custody, to go or be in or upon any public building,
park, sidewalk, street, highway, alley or other lands used for public purposes,
or in any public place of business or amusement in the Village within the time
prohibited in division (A).
   (D)   Any police officer may stop and question any child suspected of
violating the provisions of this section. Prior to arresting or citing a child
for curfew, or taking a child into custody, the police officer must make
reasonable inquiry to determine whether any of the exceptions contained in
division (B) apply, in addition to the age and time requirements set forth in
division (A). An officer shall issue a citation or make an arrest for curfew or
take a child into custody only if the officer has reasonable grounds to believe
that the child has violated division (A) and that no exceptions apply. Upon
taking a child under 18 years of age into custody, the police officer shall
immediately communicate with the parent, legal guardian, or legal custodian of
that child. Each member of the police force is authorized to arrest, without
warrant, any child violating the provisions of this section and retain such
child until he or she is turned over to the custody of the parent, legal
guardian, or other person having legal care and custody of such child.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the juvenile officer, upon arrest of any
child, where the parent or guardian has refused to become responsible for the
child, for violation of the provisions of this section, to inquire into the
facts of the arrest and the conditions and circumstances of such child and to
cause the proper proceedings to be taken as provided by law in such case.
   (F)   Violations of curfew, as set forth in division (A) of this section, or
parental responsibility, as set forth in division (C) of this section, are
punishable by a fine of between $100 and $750 for a first offense, and between
$200 and $1,000 for second or subsequent offenses. In lieu of the fines set
forth herein, a judge or hearing officer adjudicating the matter may impose a
term of community service to be performed either through a program administered
by the Village, if available, or at a not-for-profit organization within the
Village. Where a defendant fails to perform community service as ordered, the
term of community service may be increased or converted to a fine.
(1997 Code, §42.19) (Ord. 60-19, passed 12-8-1960; Am. Ord. 75-2, passed 4-10-
1975; Am. Ord. C0-04-19, passed 6-21-2004; Am. Ord. 32, passed 9-19-2006)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.23 LOITERING.
   It shall be unlawful to:
   (A)   Stand, sit or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk,
street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or private property utilized for
public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the free passage of
pedestrians thereon or so as to prevent the free access to the entrance to any
building, portion thereof, or tenant space, open to the public; or
   (B)   Loiter or prowl in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for
law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety
of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be
considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the
actor takes flight upon appearance of a peace officer, refuses to identify
himself or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight
by the actor or other circumstances makes an impracticable, a peace officer
shall prior to any arrest for an offense under this division (B) afford the
actor an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by
requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No
person shall be convicted of an offense under this division (B) if the peace
officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if it appears at trial
that the explanation given by the actor was true and, if believed by the peace
officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm.
   (C)   Anyone found in violation of this section shall be fined not more than
$750 for each violation.
(Ord. C0-03-05, passed 2-3-2003)
§ 130.24 NO LOITERING ZONES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to stand, sit or lie in or upon any public or
quasi-public sidewalk, street, curb, crosswalk, walkway area, mall or private
property utilized for public use, for a continuous period of more than 5
minutes in an area determined by the Village to be a “No Loitering Zone” and
clearly designated as such by the placement of signs and other indicators
clearly establishing that such area is a no loitering zone.
   (B)   No loitering zones shall be determined by the Chief of Police in his
or her discretion, based on requests of residents or business owners, previous
history and reports of loitering and the experience of the Police Department of
an area as a problem area. Areas designated by the Chief of Police as no
loitering zones shall be designated as such by the placement of signs clearly
indicating that no loitering is allowed on the public or quasi-public sidewalks
or other public areas marked as no loitering zones. The Police Department shall
maintain and make available to the public a list of locations currently
designated as no loitering zones.
   (C)   Anyone found in violation of this section shall be fined not more than
$750 for each violation.
(Ord. C0-03-22, passed 9-8-2003; Am. Ord. C0-07-40, passed 10-16-2007)
§ 130.25 GANG LOITERING.
   (A)   Whenever a police officer observes a member of a criminal street gang
engaged in gang loitering with 1 or more other persons in any public place
designated for the enforcement of this section under division (B), the police
officer shall, subject to all applicable procedures promulgated by the Chief of
Police: inform all such persons that they are engaged in gang loitering within
an area in which loitering by groups containing criminal street gang members is
prohibited; order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from
within sight and hearing of the place at which the order was issued; and inform
those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they fail to obey the
order promptly or engage in further gang loitering within sight or hearing of
the place at which the order was issued during the next 3 hours.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall by written directive designate areas of the
Village in which the Chief has determined that enforcement of this section is
necessary because gang loitering has enable criminal street gangs to establish
control over identifiable areas, to intimidate others from entering those
areas, or to conceal illegal activities. Prior to making a determination under
this division, the Chief of Police shall consult as he deems appropriate with
persons who are knowledgeable about the effects of gang activity in areas in
which the ordinance may be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be
limited to, members of the Department of Police with special training or
experience related to criminal street gangs; other personnel of that department
with particular knowledge of gang activities in the proposed designated area;
elected and appointed officials of the area; community-based organizations; and
participants in the Maywood Community Alternative Policing Strategy who are
familiar with the area. The Chief shall develop and implement procedures for
the periodic review and update of designations made under this division.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall by written directive promulgate procedures
to prevent the enforcement of this section against persons who are engaged in
collective advocacy activities that are protected by the Constitution of the
United States or the state.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      (1)   GANG LOITERING means remaining in any 1 place under circumstances
that would warrant a reasonable person to believe that the purpose or effect of
that behavior is to enable a criminal street gang to establish control over
identifiable areas, to intimidate others from entering those areas, or to
conceal illegal activities.
      (2)   CRIMINAL STREET GANG means any ongoing organization, association in
fact or group of 3 or more persons, whether formal or informal, having as 1 of
its substantial activities the commission of one or more of the criminal acts
enumerated in subsection (3), and whose members individually or collectively
engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity.
      (3)   CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY means the commission, attempted commission
or solicitation of the following offenses provided that the offenses are
committed by two or more persons, or by an individual at the direction of, or
in association with, any criminal street gang, with the specific intent to
promote, further or assist in any criminal conduct by gang members: the
following sections of the Criminal Code of 1961: 720 ILCS 5/9-1 (murder), 720
ILCS 5/9-3.3 (drug-induced homicide), 720 ILCS 5/10-1 (kidnapping), 720 ILCS 5/
10-4 (forcible detention), 720 ILCS 5-11/1.30 (aggravated criminal sexual
assault), 720 ILCS 5/12-2(a)(13) (aggravated assault - discharging firearm),
720 ILCS 5/12-4 (aggravated battery), 720 ILCS 5/12-4.1 (heinous battery), 720
ILCS 5/12-4.2 (aggravated battery with a firearm), 720 ILCS 5/12-4.3
(aggravated battery of a child), 720 ILCS 5/12-4.6 (aggravated battery of a
senior citizen), 720 ILCS 5/12-6 (intimidation), 720 ILCS 5/12-6.1 (compelling
organization membership of persons), 720 ILCS 5/19-6 (home invasion), 720 ILCS
5/18-1 (robbery), 720 ILCS 5/18-2 (armed robbery), 720 ILCS 5/19-1 (burglary),
720 ILCS 5/19-3 (residential burglary), 720 ILCS 5/19-5 (criminal fortification
of a residence or building), 720 ILCS 5/20-1 (arson), 720 ILCS 5/20-1.1
(aggravated arson), 720 ILCS 5/20-2 (possession of explosives or explosive or
incendiary devices), 720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(6), (a)(7), (a)(9) or (a)(12) (unlawful
use of weapons), 720 ILCS 5/24-1.1 (unlawful use or possession of weapons by
felons or persons in the custody of the Department of Corrections facilities),
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2 (aggravated discharge of a firearm), 720 ILCS 5/25-1(a) (mob
action - violence), 720 ILCS 5/33-1 (bribery), 720 ILCS 5/33A-2 (armed
violence); the Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/5, 5.1, 7 or 9 where the
offense is a felony (manufacture or delivery of cannabis, cannabis trafficking,
calculated criminal cannabis conspiracy and related offenses), or Illinois
Controlled Substances Act 720 ILCS 570/401, 401.1, 405, 406.1, 407 or 407.1
(illegal manufacture or delivery of a controlled substance, controlled
substance trafficking, calculated criminal drug conspiracy and related
offenses).
      (4)   PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY means 2 or more acts of criminal
gang activity of which at least 2 such acts were committed within 5 years of
each other.
      (5)   PUBLIC PLACE means the public way and any other location open to
the public, whether publicly- or privately-owned.
   (E)   Any person who fails to obey promptly an order issued under division
(A), or who engages in further gang loitering within sight or hearing of the
place at which such an order was issued during the 3-hour period following the
time the order was issued, is subject to a fine of not less than $100 and not
more than $500 for each offense, or may be required to perform up to 120 hours
of community service pursuant to any community service program established or
authorized by this Code.
(Ord. C0-02-10, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 130.26 NARCOTICS-RELATED LOITERING.
   (A)   Whenever a police officer observes 1 or more persons engaged in
narcotics-related loitering in any public place designated for the enforcement
of this section under division (B), the police officer shall inform all such
persons that they are engaged in loitering within an area in which such
loitering is prohibited; order all such persons to disperse and remove
themselves from within sight and hearing of the place at which the order was
issued; and inform those persons that they will be subject to arrest if they
fail to obey the order promptly or engage in further narcotics-related
loitering within sight or hearing of the place at which the order was issued
during the next 3 hours.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall by written directive designate areas of the
Village in which enforcement of this section is necessary because the areas are
frequently associated with narcotics-related loitering. Prior to making a
determination under this division, the Chief shall consult as he or she deems
appropriate with persons who are knowledgeable about the effects of narcotics-
related activity in areas in which the ordinance may be enforced. Such persons
may include, but need not be limited to, members of the Department of Police
with special training or experience related to narcotics-related activity;
other personnel of that department with particular knowledge of narcotics-
related activities in the proposed designated area; elected and appointed
officials of the area; community-based organizations; and participants in the
Maywood Community Alternative Policing Strategy who are familiar with the area.
The Chief shall develop and implement procedures for the periodic review and
update of designations made under this division.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      (1)   NARCOTICS-RELATED LOITERING means remaining in any 1 place under
circumstances that would warrant a reasonable person to believe that the
purpose or effect of that behavior is to facilitate the distribution of
substances in violation of the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550) or the
Illinois Controlled Substances Act (720 ILCS 570).
      (2)   PUBLIC PLACE means the public way and any other location open to
the public, whether publicly or privately owned.
   (D)   (1)   Any person who fails to obey promptly an order issued under
division (A), or who engages in further narcotics-related loitering within
sight or hearing of the place at which such an order was issued during the 3-
hour period following the time the order was issued, is subject to a fine of
not less than $100 and not more than $500 for each offense, or imprisonment for
not more than 6 months for each offense, or both. A second or subsequent
offense shall be punishable by a mandatory minimum sentence of not less than 5
days imprisonment.
      (2)   In addition to or instead of the above penalties, any person who
violates this section may be required to perform up to 120 hours of community
service pursuant to any community service program established or authorized by
this Code.
(Ord. C0-02-10, passed 4-15-2002)
§ 130.27 TRUANCY.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
      (1)   LEGAL GUARDIAN. Includes any foster parent, or any person appointed
guardian, or otherwise awarded custody of a minor by a court of law in this
state, or any person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the
Juvenile Court Act (705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.), but shall not include any person
appointed guardian only to the estate of a minor.
      (2)   PARENT. The father or mother of a minor child, whether by birth or
adoption. In the event that the minor's parents are divorced or separated
within the meaning of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act
(750 ILCS 5/101 et seq.), the parent having lawful physical custody of the
minor shall be deemed to be the parent authorized to give consent as required
by this section.
      (3)   VALID CAUSE. For absence of attendance at school during enrollment
hours includes illness, observance of a religious holiday, death in the
immediate family, family emergency, and shall include such other situations
beyond the control of the student as determined by the Board of Education in
each district, or such other circumstances which cause reasonable concern to
the parent for the safety or health of the student.
   (B)   Truancy prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person under the age
of 18 years of age enrolled in a public, private or parochial school within the
corporate limits of the Village, to absent himself or herself from attendance
at school during the hours in which he or she is enrolled without valid cause
or the permission of a parent, legal guardian, or the school in which they are
enrolled. Any person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty of
the offense of truancy and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this
section.
   (C)   Defenses. In addition to being absent for valid cause as defined
herein, a minor shall not be considered truant where he or she is:
      (1)   Accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or school official;
      (2)   Engaged in approved school related activities;
      (3)   Engaged in lawful employment, provided that the school board of the
public school district in which the child resides has recommended the
employment and has certified the facts concerning such employment;
      (4)   Physically or mentally unable to attend school due to a disability
and such disability has been certified in accordance with Section 26-1(2) of
the Illinois School Code (105 ILCS 5/26-1(2)); or
      (5)   Subject to any other defense and/or exception set forth in the
Illinois School Code (105 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.) for compulsory attendance or
enrollment in school.
   (D)   Authority to stop and detain. Any police officer who witnesses a
person whom the officer reasonably believes to be in violation of this section
may stop and detain the person for the purpose of verifying the person's
identify, age, school enrollment and authority to be absent from school. The
police officer shall immediately inform the person of the reason for the
detention and that he or she will be released upon verification of
authorization to be absent from school other than to transport the student to
school or to his or her parent or legal guardian, the person shall not be
removed from the scene of the investigatory stop unless he or she refuses to
provide the officer with the necessary information. If the officer determines
that the person is in violation of this section, he shall, if practical,
transport the offender to school authorities or to the child's parent or legal
guardian.
   (E)   Parental responsibility. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal
guardian or other person to permit a person in his or her custody or control to
commit the offense of truancy.
   (F)   Contributing to the delinquency. It shall be unlawful for any person
18 years of age or older to perform any act of commission or omission which act
encourages or contributes to the truancy of any person.
   (G)   Penalties. Violations of divisions (B), (E) or (F) of this section are
punishable by a fine of between $100 and $750 for a first offense, and between
$200 and $1,000 for second or subsequent offenses. In lieu of the fines set
forth herein, a judge or hearing officer adjudicating the matter may impose a
term of community service to be performed either through a program administered
by the Village, if available, or at a not-for-profit organization within the
Village. Where a defendant fails to perform community service as ordered, the
term of community service may be increased or be converted to a fine. In
addition to or in lieu of the penalties set forth hereinabove, the parent of a
truant in violation of division (E) of this section may be required to
participate in a 'parenting' program, a list of which available programs will
be maintained by the Village.
(Ord. 32, passed 9-19-2006)
§ 130.28 PANHANDLING/AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PANHANDLING. Any act by which 1 person asks, begs or solicits from
another or others in person, by requesting an immediate donation of money or
other thing of value. PANHANDLING includes the spoken, written or printed word
or such other act conducted with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation
of money or thing of value.
      AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING.  
         (a)   Panhandling which is accompanied by 1 or more of the following:
            1.    Approaching, speaking to, or following a person in such a
manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm or the commission
of a criminal act upon the person, or upon property in the person's immediate
possession;
            2.   Touching another person in the course of panhandling without
that person's consent;
            3.   Repeatedly panhandling from a person, or following the person,
after the person has made a negative response;
            4.   Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe passage of
a person or a vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a person to
take evasive action to avoid physical contact.
         (b)   AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING does not include passively panhandling
without engaging in the acts specified in this subsection.
      PLACE OPEN TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC.  Any public place as defined by §
10.13 of this Code.
   (B)   Aggressive panhandling prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
engage in aggressive panhandling in any place open to the general public.
   (C)   Panhandling prohibited in specific locations. It is unlawful for any
person to engage in panhandling:
      (1)   Within 10 feet of any automatic teller machine (ATM);
      (2)   In any public transportation vehicle or at any bus or train
station;
      (3)   Within 10 feet of any official sign indicating a bus stop;
      (4)   On private property or residential property, if the owner, tenant
or occupant has asked the person not to panhandle on the property or has posted
a sign prohibiting soliciting.
   (D)   Panhandling from operator or occupant of motor vehicle. It is unlawful
for any person to panhandle from any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle in
a lane of traffic on a public street within the Village.
(Ord. C0-07-40, passed 10-16-2007)
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
§ 130.35 IMPERSONATING OR INTERFERING WITH VILLAGE OFFICERS.
   (A)   No person shall falsely represent himself to be an officer of the
Village or shall, without being duly authorized, exercise or attempt to
exercise any of the duties, functions or powers of a Village officer or shall
hinder, obstruct, resist or otherwise interfere with any Village officer in the
discharge of his official duties.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously
torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog
used by the Police Department of the Village in the performance or the
functions of such department or to interfere with or meddle with any such dog
while being used by the Department or any member or officer thereof in the
performance of any functions or duties of the Department or such officer or
member.
(1997 Code, § 42.14) (Ord. 80-10, passed 6-26-1980)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.36 PRISONER’S ESCAPE.
   No person shall help or attempt to help any person to escape from the
custody of any Village officer. No person shall aid, abet or encourage the
escape from prison of any person legally committed thereto or shall supply, or
attempt to supply, any such person with any weapon or intoxicating liquors or
with any implement or means of escape while in prison or in the legal custody
of any officer of the Village.
(1997 Code, § 42.18)
Penalty, see § 10.99
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
§ 130.50 GAMBLING.
   (A)   Maintaining house. No person shall set up, keep or maintain, or permit
to be set up, kept or maintained, in any house or place within the Village,
occupied or controlled by him, any instrument, device or thing for the purpose
of gambling, or with which money or property or anything representing money or
property, or anything of value, shall in any manner be wagered.
   (B)   Inmates of houses. No person shall be a frequenter, visitor, inmate,
doorkeeper, solicitor, runner, agent, or abettor of or for any house or any
place where any instrument or device for gambling is kept, whereon or with
which money or property may be placed for wager.
   (C)   House nuisances. Every house, room, building or premises kept or used
for the purpose of permitting persons to gamble for any valuable thing is
declared to be a common nuisance and shall be abated as such upon the order of
the Chief of Police.
   (D)   Playing games of chance. No person shall deal, play or engage in any
device or game of chance or hazard, either as banker, dealer or otherwise, nor
shall any person bet on any game others may be playing for the purpose of
gambling.
   (E)   Possessing devices. No person shall bring into the Village, or have in
his possession in the Village for the purpose of gambling, any table, thing or
device of any kind or nature, whereon or with which money, or any other thing
of value may in any manner be wagered.
   (F)   Lotteries. No person shall keep, maintain or manage or aid in keeping,
maintaining, directing or managing any lottery or device for the drawing or
disposing of money or any other property. This shall not apply to the state
operated lottery.
   (G)   Exposing devices. No person shall expose in any street or other public
place within the Village any table or device upon or by which any game of
chance or hazard can be played.
   (H)   Suppression. It shall be the duty of members of the Police Department
to give information to the Chief of Police of each house or other place within
the Village wherein games, devices, tables, instruments or things for the
purpose of gambling are or may be set up or maintained, and the police officers
shall take all lawful means to suppress and prevent the playing at such tables,
games or devices; and for this purpose, when, and as often as any of them shall
have reasonable cause to suspect that any such table, game or device is set up,
kept or maintained, he shall immediately make complaint thereof before a
magistrate and obtain a warrant authorizing him to enter such house or other
place or any room within the same; and the police officer shall thereupon have
authority to demand entry therein.
   (I)   Seizure and destruction of devices. It is the duty of every member of
the Police Department to seize any table, instrument, device or thing used for
the purpose of gambling; and all such tables, instruments, devices or things
shall be destroyed upon the order of the Chief of Police.
   (J)   Exception. The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply
to the location, maintenance or operation of any device lawfully licensed and
operated as authorized by
Chapter 125 of this Code and pursuant to the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et
seq.
(1997 Code, § 42.11) (Am. Ord. CO-2013-37, passed 6-4-2013)
§ 130.51 DELIVERING WAGERS.
   (A)   All betting, wagering, speculating, pool-selling, or bookmaking upon
any horse race or other races, or the result thereof, and all gambling and
every game of chance of any nature whatsoever within the Village is prohibited.
   (B)   No person shall engage either directly or indirectly in the business
of delivering wagers or bets. No person shall as a business accept anything of
value to be wagered or to be transmitted or delivered for wager to any race
track or race course. It is unlawful for any person to be the owner, lessee, or
occupant of any premises, and to knowingly permit the same to be used or
occupied for the business of delivering wagers or bets. As used herein PERSON
shall mean and include any individual, partnership, association, joint stock
association or trust, corporation, or other business entity, whether
incorporated or not.
   (C)   The maintenance of any such premises as described in division (B) of
this section is declared to be a public nuisance.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any premises within the Village to exhibit or
display signs, notices, murals, painted illustrations or other items of
advertisement or displays signifying that the premises are used or occupied for
the business of delivering wagers or bets. Any such existing signs or displays
are hereby ordered removed forthwith.
   (E)   (1)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $500 for the first
offense.
      (2)   Offenses in excess of one shall be punishable as a misdemeanor by
imprisonment not exceeding 6 months, or by fine, or by both fine and
imprisonment.
      (3)   The aforementioned penalties are not exclusive and are not in any
way intended to affect the powers of a municipality to abate a public nuisance.
Each day that a violation of this section continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
   (F)   The prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to the
location, maintenance or operation of any device lawfully licensed and operated
as authorized by
Chapter 125 of this Code and pursuant to the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et
seq.
(1997 Code, § 42.12) (Ord. 76-14, passed 12-21-1976; Am. Ord. CO-2013-37,
passed 6-4-2013)
§ 130.52 HOUSES OF ILL FAME; DISORDERLY HOUSES.
   No person shall keep or maintain a house of ill fame or assignation or place
for the practice of prostitution or lewdness. No person shall lease to another
any house, room or other premises or place in whole or in part, for any of the
uses and purposes set forth in this section. No person shall patronize or be an
inmate of the same nor let, own or be interested in any house, room or other
premises for any such purpose or shall keep a common, ill-governed, disorderly
house to the encouragement of gaming, drinking or drug use, fornication,
prostitution or other misbehavior.
(1997 Code, § 42.13) (Am. Ord. C0-09-07, passed 3-3-2009)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.53 OBSCENE MATERIAL.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
      PUBLICATION OR OTHER ARTICLE. Any representation, description or
embodiment, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Writings and pictures, whether or not printed;
         (b)   Photographs and photographic film, developed or undeveloped;
         (c)   Phonograph records and other sound recordings; and
         (d)   Sculptures.
      OBSCENE. If, considered as a whole, its predominant appeal is to prurient
interest; that is, a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex or excretion,
and if it goes substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description
or representation of such matters.
      SALE OR EXHIBITION. Includes circulation, distribution, giving away and
all other forms of dissemination.
   (B)   The sale or exhibition of any publication or other article, obscene as
judged with reference to ordinary adults, is declared to be a public nuisance,
and is prohibited.
   (C)   The sale or exhibition to any person under the age of 18 years of any
publication or other article, obscene as judged with reference to ordinary
persons of the age of the person to whom the sale or exhibition is made, is
declared to be a public nuisance, and is prohibited.
   (D)   No person shall with knowledge of the nature or contents thereof sell,
offer to sell, exhibit, or offer to exhibit to any other person any publication
or other article which is obscene as judged with reference to ordinary adults.
   (E)   No person shall with knowledge of the nature or contents thereof sell,
offer to sell, exhibit or offer to exhibit to any other person under the age of
18 years any publication or other article which is obscene as judged with
reference to ordinary persons of the age of the person to whom such publication
or other article is sold, offered for sale, exhibited, or offered for
exhibition.
(1997 Code, § 42.15) (Ord. 62-3, passed 3-29-1962)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.54 UNLAWFUL ADULT ENTERTAINMENT.
   No property owner, lessee or other individual or entity shall allow, permit,
approve of, host, organize or sponsor, without having obtained any required
zoning and business licensing approvals, any obscene or indecent activities or
entertainment, including but not limited to any lewd or lascivious behavior,
and/or nude or semi-nude entertainment, on any lot or within any building
located within the corporate boundaries of the Village. A violation of this
section is deemed to constitute a public nuisance and shall result in a penalty
of not less than $3,000 for a first offense and for each subsequent offense.
Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. CO-2021-18, passed 8-17-2021)
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 130.65 FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
separate meaning.
      FIREWORKS. Any explosive composition or any substance or combination of
substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion,
deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in
which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath
to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, bombs
or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any
explosive compound; or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects. The
term "fireworks" shall not include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices;
sparklers, trick noisemakers known as "party poppers," "booby traps,"
"snappers,” "trick matches," "cigarette loads" and "auto burglar alarms," toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps
containing twenty-five hundredths grains or less of explosive compound are
used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact
with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic
caps which contain less than twenty-five hundredths grains of explosive
mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
      PYROTECHNIC or PYROTECHNICS. Fireworks as defined herein, smoke machines,
fog machines, light show displays utilizing lasers and other materials or
combination of materials utilized or intended to be utilized to generate or
simulate light beams, explosions, smoke or noise. Pyrotechnics do not include
any item which is excluded from the definition of fireworks as set forth
herein.
      PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY. Any use of pyrotechnics which occurs on property
that is not owned by the Village.
      PYROTECHNIC DISPLAY LICENSE. A license which is issued by the Village
Building and Code Enforcement Department pursuant to division (B) of this
section which permits a person to present a pyrotechnic display.
      PYROTECHNIC OPERATOR. Each company, association or person who will have
direct supervision over a pyrotechnic display, or direct supervision of a
component of a pyrotechnic display, such as furnishing the pyrotechnic
materials or providing or operating the equipment to be used in a pyrotechnic
display. Persons who are employees of a pyrotechnic operator shall not be
considered to be separate pyrotechnic operators.
      SMOKE MACHINE. A machine which generates smoke, haze or a similar
airborne substance which is intended to simulate smoke or haze. SMOKE MACHINES
include, but are not limited to, machines commonly referred to as "haze
machines."
   (B)   License required.
      (1)   Pyrotechnic display licenses shall be issued by the Village
Community Development Department. The Building Director shall designate the
Community Development Department personnel who are authorized to issue
pyrotechnic display licenses as provided in this chapter. Licenses once granted
by the Building Director are not transferable.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to present a pyrotechnic
display or use pyrotechnics in any manner within the Village, except on
property that is owned by the Village, unless the Community Development
Department has issued a pyrotechnics display license which permits the
pyrotechnic display or use of pyrotechnics.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in control of any
property, other than property owned by the Village, to permit a pyrotechnic
display to occur on the property or to allow pyrotechnics to be used on the
property unless a pyrotechnics display license has been issued for such use by
the Community Development Department.
   (C)   Compliance with applicable laws required. No pyrotechnic display
license shall be issued unless the applicant has complied with the provisions
of this section and has established that the pyrotechnic display or other use
of pyrotechnics will comply with all other applicable laws, rules and
regulations. As a condition for issuance of a pyrotechnic display license, the
person applying for the license shall be required to establish that all permits
required by other governmental bodies having jurisdiction over the use of
pyrotechnics and pyrotechnic displays have either been issued or will be issued
prior to the time the pyrotechnic display or use of pyrotechnics is scheduled
to occur.
   (D)   License application. All applications for pyrotechnic display license
shall be made in writing. The Community Development Department may require that
an application for a pyrotechnic display license be made on a form provided by
the Community Development Department. All applications for a pyrotechnic
display license must include a written plan which describes in detail the type
of pyrotechnics that will be used, the equipment that will be used and the
precautions that will be taken to minimize the likelihood of personal injury or
property damage. The plan shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name of the person, group or organization sponsoring the
pyrotechnic display;
      (2)   The date(s) and time(s) of the pyrotechnic display;
      (3)   The exact location where the pyrotechnic display will occur;
      (4)   The names and address of all pyrotechnic operators who will be
involved with the pyrotechnic display;
      (5)   The license number and date of issuance of all licenses that have
been issued to the pyrotechnic operator(s) and to any employees or agents of
the pyrotechnic operators who will be furnishing pyrotechnics or equipment for
the pyrotechnic display or who will be directly involved in the presentation of
the pyrotechnic display, including operating any equipment that is used in
presenting the pyrotechnic display;
      (6)   The date and number of all licenses and permits that have been
issued by other governmental units for the pyrotechnics display or if such
licenses or permits have been applied for but not issued, the date and status
of the application;
      (7)   An insurance certificate or other proof establishing that each
pyrotechnic operator has obtained the insurance coverage required by division
(H) of this section;
      (8)   The types and amounts of pyrotechnics and the equipment that will
be used in the pyrotechnic display and an outline of the number of persons who
will be working on the pyrotechnic display and what each person's
responsibility or duties will be with respect to the pyrotechnic display;
      (9)   A description of the pyrotechnic operator's experience with the
types of pyrotechnics and the equipment that will be used in the pyrotechnic
display;
      (10)   A diagram of the grounds or facilities at which the pyrotechnic
display will occur. This diagram must show the point at which any pyrotechnics
are to be wired or set off, the fallout radius for each pyrotechnic device to
be used in the pyrotechnic display and the lines behind which the audience for
the pyrotechnics display shall be restrained;
      (11)   The manner and place where the pyrotechnics and the equipment to
be used in the pyrotechnics display will be stored during the period before and
after the pyrotechnics display;
      (12)   A description of the safety measures that will be taken to reduce
the likelihood that persons or property will be injured or damaged during the
pyrotechnic display, including, the measures that will be taken to protect
against personal injury or property damage in the event of a pyrotechnic device
or the equipment used in the pyrotechnic display malfunctions.
   (E)   License fee. Except as provided in the following sentence, the fee for
a pyrotechnic display license shall be $250 plus $50 each day after the first
day during which the pyrotechnics display is to be presented, provided that the
total license fee for a specific pyrotechnics display shall not exceed $750. If
the only pyrotechnic device to be used in a pyrotechnics display to be covered
by a pyrotechnics display license is a smoke machine, then the license fee for
the pyrotechnics display license shall be $25 per day.
   (F)   Rules and regulations. The Building Director shall be authorized to
issue rules and regulations relating to the use pyrotechnics in the Village,
provided that such rules and regulations shall not be less stringent than any
applicable state or federal law, rule or regulation. The Building Director is
also authorized to issue rules and regulations relating to the issuance of
pyrotechnics display licenses.
   (G)   Inspections. All pyrotechnics, pyrotechnic devices and equipment that
are intended to be used in a pyrotechnic display for which a pyrotechnics
display license has been issued or applied for shall be made available upon
request for inspection by authorized representatives of the Village Community
Development Department and Fire Department. The premises for which a
pyrotechnic display license has been applied for or issued shall be open for
inspection by authorized representatives of the Village’s Building and Code
Enforcement Department and Fire Department at all reasonable times, including,
but not limited to, during the period which begins 3 hours before the
pyrotechnics display is scheduled to begin and ends 1 hour after the
pyrotechnic display concludes.
   (H)   Insurance protection against all liabilities. All pyrotechnics
operators who are involved in a pyrotechnics display for which a pyrotechnics
display license is issued, or applied for, shall carry insurance insuring
against liabilities, judgment, costs, damages and expenses which may accrue
against, be charged to or recovered from the pyrotechnics operator by reason or
on account of damage to property of, injury to or death of any person arising
from the pyrotechnics display. This insurance shall be carried with insurers
authorized to do business in the state. The policy or policies shall be in the
following kinds and amounts:
      (1)   Comprehensive public liability insurance - $1,000,000 per person
and $5,000,000 per occurrence, or such higher policy limits as may be required
by another applicable law, rule or regulation;
      (2)   Comprehensive property damage insurance - $1,000,000 per occurrence
or such higher policy limits as may be required by another applicable law, rule
or regulation.
   (I)   Penalty. Any person who violates any terms or provisions of this
section, or any regulation issued by the Building Director pursuant to division
(F) of this section, shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not less
than $250 nor more than $1500 for each offense. Each separate 24-hour period or
part thereof in which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   (J)   Home rule legislation. 
      (1)   This section and each of its terms shall be the effective
legislative act of a home rule municipality without regard to whether such
section should:
         (a)   Contain terms contrary to the provisions of current or
subsequent non-preemptive state law; or
         (b)   Legislate in a manner or regarding a matter not delegated to
municipality by state law.
      (2)   It is the intent of the corporate authorities of the Village that
to the extent that the terms of this section should be inconsistent with any
non-preemptive state law, that this section shall supersede state law in that
regard within its jurisdiction.
(1997 Code, § 42.04) (Am. Ord. C0-99-14, passed 6-24-1999; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 130.66 FIRES.
   No person shall start or maintain any fire in any street, sidewalk, park or
public place, or any place within 30 feet of any building or structure.
(1997 Code, § 42.05)
§ 130.67 POLLUTION.
   No person shall pollute the air or any water course by excessive discharge
of waste products or foreign matter.
(1997 Code, § 42.10)
WEAPONS
§ 130.80 FIREARMS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes set forth in this §
130.80 (Firearms), §
130.81 (Weapons), §
111.34 (Weapons and Firearms Sale), and §
111.35 (Gunsmiths and Gun Shops) of the Village Code, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings, and are hereby defined, as follows.
      AMMUNITION. Any self-contained cartridge, shot, bullet or projectile by
whatever name known, which is designed to be used, or adaptable to use, in a
weapon and shot or discharged therefrom.
      ANTIQUE FIREARM. Any firearm manufactured on or before 1898 or any
replica thereof, if such replica is not designed or redesigned for using and
discharging ammunition, and any other firearm which, although designed as a
weapon, the Department of Law Enforcement of the State of Illinois finds, bv
reason of the date of its manufacture, value, design and other characteristics
is primarily a collector’s item that is not likely to be used as a weapon.
      ASSAULT AMMUNITION FEEDING DEVICE.
         (a)   Any magazine, belt, drum, feed strip or similar device that has
a capacity of, or can be readily restored or converted to accept, more than 10
rounds of ammunition: or
         (b)   Any combination of parts from which a device described in the
above clause can be assembled.
      ASSAULT WEAPON.
         (a)   Any of the weapons (or types, replicas, or duplicates in any
caliber of the weapons, regardless of manufacturer) known as:
            1.   A.A. Arms AP-9;
            2.   Algimec Agmi;
            3.   Armalite AR-180;
            4.   Australian Automatic Arms SAP Pistol;
            5.   Australian Automatic Arms SAR;
            6.    Auto-Ordinance Thompson type;
            7.   Avtomat Kalashnikov AK-47 type (including all models of the
Norinco, Mitchell and Poly Tech);
            8.   Barrett Light-Fifty model 82A1;
            9.   Beretta AR-70 (SC-70);
            10.   Beretta BM-59;
            11.   Bushmaster Auto Rifle and Auto Pistol;
            12.   Calico models M-900, M-950 and 100-P;
            13.   Chartered Industries of Singapore SR-88;
            14.   Claridge High Tech;
            15.   Colt AR-15 and Sporter;
            16.   Daewoo K-1, K-2, Max-1 and Max-2;
            17.   Encom MK-IV, MP-9 and MP-45;
            18.   Fabrique Nationale FN/FAL, FN/LAR or FN/FNC;
            19.   FAMAS MAS 223;
            20.   Feather AT-9 and Mini-AT;
            21.   Federal XC-900 and XC-450;
            22.   Franchi SPAS-12 and LAW-12;
            23.   Galil AR and ARM;
            24.   Heckler & Koch HK-91, HK-93, HK-94, PSG-1, SP-89;
            25.   Holmes Mp-83;
            26.   Intratec TEC-9, TEC-DC-9, TEC-22 and Scorpion;
            27.   Iver Johnson Enforce Model 3000;
            28.   Iver Johnson PM30 Paratrooper;
            29.   M14S type;
            30.   MAC 10, M-10, MAC-11 and MAC-11 Carbine type;
            31.   Ruger Mini-14/5F (folding stock only) and Mini-14/5RF;
            32.   Scarab Skorpion;
            33.   SIG 57 AMT, SIG 550SP, SIG 551SP, SIG PE-57 types and 500
series;
            34.   Spectre Auto Carbine and Auto Pistol;
            35.   Springfield Armory BM59, SAR-48 and G-3;
            36.   Sterling MK-6 and MK-7 and SAR types;
            37.   Stevr AUG;
            38.   Street Sweeper and Striker 12 revolving cylinder shotguns;
            39.   SWD M-10, M-11. M-11/9, M-12;
            40.   Valmet M63, M71S, M76 or M78;
            41.   USAS-12;
            42.   UZI Carbine, Mini-Carbine and Pistol;
            43.   Weaver Arms Nighthawk;
            44.   Wilkinson "Linda" Pistol.
      (2)   Any semi-automatic rifle that has a fixed magazine that can hold
more than 8 rounds or an ability to accept a detachable magazine and has at
least 2 of the following:
         (a)   A folding or telescoping stock;
         (b)   A pistol grip that protrudes beneath the action of the weapon
and which is separate and apart from the stock:
         (c)   A bayonet mount;
         (d)   A flash suppressor:
         (e)   A barrel with a threaded muzzle:
         (f)   A grenade launcher.
      (3)   Any semi-automatic pistol that has an ability to accept a
detachable magazine and has at least 2 of the following:
         (a)   An ammunition magazine that attaches to the pistol outside of
the pistol grip:
         (b)   A barrel having a threaded muzzle:
         (c)   A shroud that is attached to, or partially or completely
encircles the barrel and which permits the shooter to hold the firearm with the
no-trigger hand without being burned:
         (d)   A manufactured weight of 50 ounces or more when the pistol is
unloaded:
         (e)   A semi-automatic version of an automatic firearm.
      (4)   Any semi-automatic shotgun that has either a fixed magazine with a
capacity in excess of 5 rounds or an ability to accept a detachable magazine
and, in addition, has at least 1 of the following:
         (a)   A folding or telescoping stock:
         (b)   A pistol grip that protrudes beneath the action of the firearm
and which is separate and apart from the stock.
      FIREARM DEALER.: Any person engaged in the business of sale, rental or
other transfer of firearms at wholesale or retail, including any person
operating as a pawn broker.
      FIREARMS. For the purpose of this Code, FIREARMS are: pistols, revolvers,
guns and small arms of a size and character that may be concealed on or about
the person, commonly known as handguns, assault weapons, rifles, shotguns and
all other arms designed to discharge ammunition.
      FOID. Firearm Owners Identification Card Act, 430 ILCS 65/13.1.
      LICENSED FIREARM COLLECTOR. Any person licensed as a collector bv the
Secretary of the Treasury of the United States under and by virtue of Title 18,
United States Code, Section 923: provided however, that a copy of said license
is filed with the Chief of Police.
      PEACE OFFICER. Any person appointed by a governmental agency on a full
time basis as a law enforcement official who is vested by law within the said
governmental jurisdiction with all the powers
possessed by police officers, including the power to make arrests on view of or
under warrants for violations of state statutes and Village and county
ordinances.
      PERSON. Any individual, corporation, company, association, firm,
partnership, club society, organization, or joint stock company.
      WEAPONS. For the purpose of this Code weapons are: billy club, blackjack,
bowie knife, dagger, dirk, derringer, metal knuckles, switchblade, knife,
razor, slingshot. stiletto, or other things of deadly character that are not
firearms.
   (B)   Unlawful to possess or carry: exceptions.
      (1)   Assault weapon ban. Within the Village, it shall be unlawful for
anv person to possess or carry, or for any person to permit another to possess
or carry on his or her land, in any vehicle or in his or her place of business
any assault weapon or assault ammunition feeding device: provided that this
section shall not apply to persons identified under divisions (B)(2)(a) through
(g) below.
      (2)   Within the Village, it shall be unlawful for any person to carry
any firearm in any vehicle or permit same to be carried in any vehicle to which
such person is the title owner of record or on or about his or her person,
except that a person may carry any firearm when on his or her land or in his or
her abode or fixed place of business: provided that this section shall not
apply to:
         (a)   Peace officers or any person summoned by any such officers to
assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while he or she is actually
engaged in assisting such officer;
         (b)   Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted
of an offense: provided, however, that this exemption shall apply to the
carrying of a firearm only while one is engaged in the performance of his or
her official duty or while commuting between his or her home and place of
employment;
         (c)   Members of the armed services or reserve forces of the United
States or the Illinois national guard or organized militia: provided, however,
that this exemption shall apply to the carrying of a firearm only while one is
engaged in the performance of his or her official duty;
         (d)   Special agents employed bv a railroad or a public utility to
perform police functions, watchmen, security guards and auxiliary police
officers appointed under §
32.05 (Auxiliary Police Officers) of this Code; provided, however that this
exemption shall apply to the carrying of a firearm only while one is actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of his or her employment or while
commuting between his or her home and place of employment; and provided further
that said security guards are in full compliance with appropriate provisions of
720 ILCS 5/24-2(a)(4) and other applicable laws and that said auxiliary police
officers are in full compliance with §
32.05 (Auxiliary Police Officers) of this Code and other applicable laws;
         (e)   Agents and investigators of the Illinois Crime Investigating
Commission authorized by the Commission to carry firearms: provided, however,
that this exemption shall apply to the carrying of a firearm only while one is
on duty in the course of anv investigation for the Commissioner;
         (f)   Manufacture, transportation or sale of firearms to persons
authorized under law to possess such;
         (g)   Duly authorized military or civil organizations while parading,
with the special permission of the Governor;
         (h)   Licensed hunters or fishermen while commuting to or from
established game areas, provided that he or she complies with division (B)(2)
(i) below;
         (i)   Transportation of firearms broken down in a nonfunctioning state
or unloaded with neither the firearm nor any ammunition readily or directly
accessible from the passenger compartment of the transporting vehicle:
provided, that in the case of a vehicle without a compartment separate from the
driver’s compartment, the firearm or ammunition shall be contained in a locked
container other than the glove compartment or console: provided, however, that
the transportation of assault weapons must not originate or terminate within
the Village to qualify as an exception to this section;
         (j)   Antique firearms;
         (k)   Licensed firearm collectors;
         (l)   Members of established theater organizations located in Maywood
and performing a regular performance schedule to the public, utilizing only
blank ammunition in the discharge of weapons only during rehearsals, classes or
performances; provided further that said organization maintains possession and
control over these firearms in a safe place with a designated member of the
organization when the weapons are not in use.
      (3)   Any firearm carried pursuant to the exemptions of divisions (A)(2)
(f) through (g) above shall be carried unloaded, and anyone possessing a
firearm pursuant to exemptions of divisions (A)(2)(j), (k) and (l) above shall
not possess or carry any ammunition therefor.
   (C)   No person shall discharge any firearms or do any hunting in the
Village. This shall not apply to the exemptions of divisions (A)(2)(a) through
(e) above.
(1997 Code, § 42.02) (Am. Res. R-2013-08, passed 3-13-2013)
§ 130.81 WEAPONS.
   (A)   Carrying. A person who is not a law enforcement officer or a Village
officer shall not carry about his person any switchblade, knife, razor,
slingshot, metal knuckles or any other weapon.
   (B)   Transfer to minor. No person shall sell, give or transfer any such
weapon to any minor person.
   (C)   Air rifles, paint ball guns. No person shall fire or discharge on any
street, public parkway, public alley or other public place or way in the
Village any air rifle, as defined in §
130.82, paint ball gun, or similar device.
   (D)   Confiscation of weapons. In addition to any other penalty that may be
imposed for violation of this section, weapons used in violation of this
section shall be forfeited to and confiscated by the Village.
(1997 Code, § 42.03) (Am. Ord. CO-06-45, passed 12-19-2006; Am. Res. R-2013-08,
passed 3-13-2013)
§ 130.82 AIR RIFLES AND TOY WEAPONS.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      (1)   AIR RIFLE. Includes any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring
pistol, B-B gun, pellet gun or any implement that is not a firearm which impels
a pellet constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard materials with
a force that reasonably is expected to cause bodily harm.
      (2)   DEPARTMENT or POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Village of Maywood Police
Department.
      (3)   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, company, association, firm,
partnership, club, society or joint stock company.
   (B)   Possession prohibited. Ninety days from the effective date of this
section, no person shall possess, in the Village, any air rifle, unless the
same has been rendered permanently inoperative. This provision does not apply
to or affect the following:
      (1)   Peace officers or any person summoned by any peace officer to
assist in making arrests or preserving the peace while such person is actually
engaged in assisting such officer and if such air rifle was provided by the
peace officer.
      (2)   Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted
of an offense, while in the performance of their official duty, or while
commuting between their homes and places of employment.
      (3)   Members of the Armed Services, Reserve Forces of the United States,
Illinois National Guard, or the Reserve Officers Training Corps, while in the
performance of their official duties.
      (4)   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public utility to
perform police functions; guards of armored car companies; licensed private
detectives; watchmen and security guards actually and regularly employed in the
commercial or industrial operation for the protection of persons employed and
private property related to such commercial or industrial operation.
      (5)   Agents and investigators of the Illinois Legislative Investigating
Commission authorized by the Commission to carry such weapons.
      (6)   Licensed firearm collectors, as that term is defined in 18 U.S.C. §
921, provided however that any air rifles transported by such licensed gun
collectors shall be either:
         (a)   Broken down in a non-functioning state; or
         (b)   Unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box, shipping
box, or other container by a person who has been issued a currently valid
Firearm Owner's Identification Card.
      (7)   Licensed gun clubs, provided the gun club has premises from which
it operates and maintains possession and control of air rifles used by its
members, and has procedures and facilities for keeping such air rifles in a
safe place, under the control of the club's chief officer, at all times when
they are not being used for target shooting or other sporting or recreational
purposes at the premises of the gun club; and gun club members while such
members are using their air rifles at the gun club premises.
      (8)   Transportation of air rifles by persons from a licensed gun club to
another licensed gun club or transportation from a licensed gun club to a gun
club outside the limits of the Village; provided however that the
transportation is for the purpose of engaging in competitive target shooting or
for the purpose of permanently keeping the said air rifle at such new gun club;
and provided further that at all times during such transportation said air
rifle shall have trigger locks securely fastened to the air rifle.
      (9)   Guns commonly known as paint ball guns, which are guns powered by
compressed gas and which fire paint pellets or capsules, where such guns are
either within a residence or are being transported in the trunk or other non-
passenger area of a vehicle. Possession of a paint ball gun outside of a
residence, unless such gun is being transported in the trunk or other non-
passenger area of a vehicle, is prohibited.
   (C)   Disposal of prohibited weapons. No person who, prior to the effective
date of this section, was legally in possession of an air rifle prohibited by
this section, shall be arrested or prosecuted on a charge of violating any
provision hereof for 90 days from the effective date of this section. Such
person shall have 90 days from the effective date hereof to do any of the
following without being subject to arrest or prosecution:
      (1)   Voluntarily and peaceably deliver and abandon to the Police
Department any air rifle. Delivery under this section may be made at the
headquarters of the Police Department or by summoning a police officer to the
person's residence or place of business. Every air rifle to be delivered and
abandoned to the Police Department under the section shall be unloaded and
securely wrapped in a package and in the case of delivery to the Police
Department, the package shall be carried in open view. No person who delivers
and abandons an air rifle under this section shall be required to furnish
identification, photographs, or fingerprints. No amount of money shall be paid
for any weapon delivered or abandoned under this section.
      (2)   Permanently remove the air rifle from within the limits of the
Village.
   (D)   Destruction of confiscated weapons. Whenever any air rifle is
surrendered or confiscated pursuant to this section, the Department shall
ascertain whether such item is needed as evidence in any matter. If the item is
not required for evidence it shall be destroyed at the direction of the Police
Chief or his or her designee. A record of the date and method of destruction
and an inventory of the air rifle so destroyed shall be maintained.
   (E)   Authority to promulgate rules. The Department shall have the authority
to promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation of this section and
to prescribe all forms and the information required thereon.
   (F)   Acquisition or possession prohibited by law. Nothing in this section
shall make lawful the acquisition or possession of firearms or firearm
accessories which are otherwise prohibited by law.
   (G)   Penalties. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be
fined no less than $50 or more than $1,000 for such offense. Any person
violating this section more than 1 time shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000.
(Ord. C0-06-45, passed 12-19-2006)
DRUG-RELATED OFFENSES
§ 130.90 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   Sale or delivery. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep for
safe, offer for sale, sell, deliver, furnish, or transfer, or to possess with
intent to deliver, furnish or transfer, drug paraphernalia as defined in
Section 2(d) of the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act (720 ILCS 600/2
(d)), including, but not limited to, glass tubing designed and/or utilized for
the ingestion of crack or cocaine. A violation of this division (A) by any
person 18 years of age or over in delivering drug paraphernalia to a person
under 18 years of age is subject to enhanced penalties as set forth in division
(G).
   (B)   Nuisance. Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any
item of drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or
delivered for any commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance
and is subject to the abatement procedures in §
92.22 of this code. Any costs relating to abatement of a public nuisance shall
constitute a lien against the property where the nuisance exists pursuant to §
92.23.
   (C)   License revocation. The violation, or the causing or permitting of a
violation of this section, by a holder of a business or liquor license issued
by the village, and in the course of the licensee's business, shall be grounds
for the revocation of such license.
   (D)   Seizure and forfeiture. All drug paraphernalia, as defined in Section
2(d) of the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act (720 ILCS 600/2(d)),
including but not limited to glass tubing utilized for the ingestion of cocaine
or crack cocaine, is subject to forfeiture and may be seized by any peace
officer. The seizure and forfeiture shall be made in accordance with
Departmental procedures.
   (E)   Possession. It is unlawful for any person to possess an item of drug
paraphernalia as defined in Section 2(d) of the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia
Control Act (720 ILCS 600/2(d)), including, but not limited to, glass tubing
designed and/or utilized for the ingestion of crack or cocaine, with the intent
to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis or a
controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a
controlled substance for that use. Among the factors that may be considered in
determining intent under this division are the proximity of the cannabis or
controlled substance to drug paraphernalia and the presence of cannabis or a
controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia.
   (F)   Exemptions. The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to items
exempted by Section 4 of the Illinois Drug Paraphernalia Control Act (720 ILCS
600/4) or items sold or possessed pursuant to the requirements of and
compliance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS
130/1 et seq.) or the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.).
   (G)   Penalties. In addition to any penalties set forth above, violations of
division (A) are punishable by a fine of no less than $150 and no more than
$1,000. A violation of division (A) by any person 18 years of age or over in
delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age is punishable
by a fine of no less than $250 and no more than $1,000. Violations of division
(E) are punishable by a fine of no less than $50 and no more than $1,000.
(Ord. C0-07-12, passed 4-3-2007; Am. Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 130.91 SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUGS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
      DELIVER or DELIVERY. The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
      A PRODUCT CONTAINING A SYNTHETIC ALTERNATIVE DRUG. Any product containing
a synthetic cannabinoid, stimulant or psychedelic/hallucinogen, as those terms
are defined herein.
      SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID. Any laboratory-created compound that functions
similar to  the active ingredient in marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC),
including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material,
compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including isomers,
esters, ethers, salts, and salts of isomers) containing a cannabinoid receptor
agonist, such as:
         JWH-007 (1-penty1-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
         JWH-015 ((2-Methyl-l-propyl-1H-indo1-3-y1)-1 -naphthalenylmethanone)
         JWH-018 (1-penty1-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
         JWH-019 (1-hexy1-3-(naphthalen-l-oyl)indole)
         JWH-073 (naphthalen-l-y1-(1 -butylindol-3-yl)methanone)
         JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-l-y1-(l-pentylindo1-3-yl)methanone)
         JWH-09B (4-methoxynaphthalen-l-y1-(1-penty 1-2-methylindo1-3-yl)
methanone)
         JWH-l22 (1-Penty1-3-(4-methyl-l-naphthoyl)indole)
         JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-l-y1-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone
         JWH-200 (1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethypindo1-3-y1)-naphthalen-l-ylmethanone)
         JWH-203 (2-(2-chloropheny1)-1-(1-pentylindol-3-y)thanone
         JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-l-y1-( I-pentylindo1-3-yl)methanone
         JWH-250 (1-penty1-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetypindole)
         JWH-251 (1-penty1-3-(2-methylphenylacetypindole)
         JWH-398 (1-penty1-3-(4-chloro-l-naphthoypindole)
         HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethy1-3-(2-methyloctan-2-
y1)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-l-ol)
          HU-211 ((6aS, l0aS)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)6,6-dimethy1-3-(2-methyloctan-2-
y1)- 6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-l-ol)
         HU-308 ([(1R,2R)5R)-242,6-dimethoxy-4-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)pheny1]-7,7-
dimethyl-4-bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3-enyl] methanol)
         HU-33l ((3-hydroxy-2[(1R,6R)030methyl-6-(1-methylethenyl)-2-
cyclohexen-1- y1]-5-pentyl-2,5-cyclohexadiene-1,4-dione)
         CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]-5-
(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol)
         CP 47,497 (2-[(1 R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-
2yl)phenol) and its homologues
         WIN 55,212-2((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl)
pyrrolo [1,2,3-de)-1,4- benzoxazin-6-yl]-1- nepthalenylmethanone)
         RC5-4((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3-yl)methanone)
         RCS-8(1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-IH-indol-3-y1)-2-(2-
methoxyphenypethanone)
      SYNTHETIC STIMULANT.
         (a)   Any compound that mimics the effects of any federally controlled
Schedule I substance such as cathinone, methcathinone, MDMA and MDEA,
including, but not limited to, any quantity of a natural or synthetic material,
compound, mixture, preparation, substance and their analog (including salts,
isomers, and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a stimulant
effect on the central nervous system, such as;
         3- Fluoromethcathinone
         4- Fluoromethcathinone (other name: flephedrone)
         3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone (other name: methylone, MDMC)
         3,4-Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (other name; MDPV)
         4-Methylmethcathinon (other names: mephedrone, 4-MMC)
         4-Methoxymethcathinone (other names: methedrone, bk-PMMA, PMMC)
         4-Ethylmethcathinone (other name: 4-EMC)
         Ethcathinone
         Beta-keto-N-methylbenzodioxyolylpropylamine (other names: butylone,
bk-MBDB)
         Napthylpyrovalerone (other names: naphyrone, NRG-1)
         N,N-dimethylcathinone (other name: metamfepramone)
         Alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: alpha-PPP)
         4-methoxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MOPPP)
         3,4-methylenedioxy-alpha-pyrrolidinopropiophenone (other name: MDPPP)
         Alpha-pyrrolidinovalerophenone (other name: aipha-PVP)
         6,7-kihydro-5H-indeno(5,6-d)-1,3-dioxa 1-6-amine) (other name: MDAI)
         (b)   Any compound that is structurally derived from 2-amino-1 -
phenyl-l-propanone by modification or substitution in any of the following
ways:
            1.   In the phenyl ring to any extent with alkyl, alkoxy,
alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents, whether or not further
substituted in the phenyl ring by one or more other univalent substituents;
            2.   At the 3-position with an alkyl substituent;
            3.   At the nitrogen atom with alkyl, dialkyl, benzyl, or
methoxybenzyl groups; or
            4.   By inclusion of the nitrogen atom in a cyclic structure.
      SYNTHETIC PSYCHEDELIC/ HALLUCINOGEN. Any compound that mimics the effects
of any federally controlled Schedule I substance, including but not limited to,
any quantity of a natural or synthetic material, compound, mixture,
preparation, substance and their analog (including salts, isomers, esters,
ethers and salts of isomers) containing substances which have a psychedelic/
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system and/or brain, such as:
         2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-ethy1phenyl)ethanamine (2C-E);
         2-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-D);
         2-(4-Chloro-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-C);
         2-(4-iodo-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-I);
         2-(4-(Ethylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-2);
         2-(4-(lsopropylthio)-2,5-dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-T-4);
         2-(2,5-Dimethoxyphenyl)ethanamine (2C-H);
         2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-nitro-phenyl)ethanamine (2C-N);
         2-(2,5-Dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylphenyl)ethanamine (2C-P).
      (B)   Products. The following products have been determined to contain
synthetic cannabinoid, synthetic stimulus or synthetic psychedelic/
hallucinogen:
POW                         Wicked X               XTREME Spice
Spice Gold                  K2 Summit              Stinger
Swagger Grace               Love Strawberry        Pulse
Spice Gold                  Shanti Spice Blueberry Mystery
Pulse                       Aztec Midnight Wind    Bad 2 the Bone
Black Mamba                 Tezcatlipoca           Dragon Spice
Naughty Nights              Sativah                Samurai Spirit
K2 Watermelon               Mid-Atlantic Exemplar  Buzz
Black Mamba                 (K2 Summit)            Midnight Chill
Green Monkey Chronic Salvia Aztec Gold             K Royal
Voodoo Remix                K2 Summit              Spicylicious
G Greenies Caramel Crunch   Ultra Cloud 10         Shanti Spice
Black Diamond               Colorado Chronic       K3 Grape
Blueberry Hayze             K3 Kryptonite          K3 Strawberry
Eruption Spice              Funky Monkey XXXX      K3 Blueberry
Love Strawberry             K2 Blue                Earthquake
Voodoo Child                K2 Blonde              Ocean Blue
Mid-Atlantic Exemplar       K2 Pink                G Four
K2 Summit                   K2 Citron K2           Wood Stock
Magic Dragon Platinum       Mellon K2              K3 Legal
Fire Bird Ultimate          Pineapple              Who Dat
Strength Cinnamon           K2 Standard            Dark Night II
Nitro                       K2 Summit              Spike 99 Ultra
Black Magic Salvia          Si. S Werve            2010
Black Mamba                 Chronic Spice          Zombie World
K2 Strawberry               K3 Mango               SYN Swagg
K2 Blueberry                K3 Original            SYN Smooth
SYN Spearmint               Magic Spice            SYN Incense Smooth
 
SYN Spearmint#2            Voodoo Magic         SYN Incense Spearmint
SYN Chill                  Texas Gold           SYN Incense LemonLime
SYN Suave                  Demon                Super Summit
Heavenscent Suave          K3                   D-Rail
SYN Vanilla                K2 Pink Panties      K2 Peach
SYN Vanilla #2             Heaven Improved      Funky Monkey
SYN Lemon Lime             K3Sun                K2 Summit Coffee Work
SYN Lemon Lime #2          K3 Dusk              K3 Legal - Original (Black)
New K3 Improved            K3 Original Improved K3 Legal - Sun (Black)
C4 Herbal Incense          K2 Summit            K3 Legal - Sea (silver)
New Improved K3 Cosmic     New K3 Heaven        K3 Legal - Earth (silver)
New Improved K3 Dynamite   New K3 Earth         K2 Cloud 9
New Improved K3 Kryptonite New K3 Sea Improved  Greenies Strawberry
Utopia                     New-Kron Bomb        K2 Blonde
Utopia-Blue Berry          Cherry Bomb          K2 Standard
Euphoria                   Rebel Spice          K2 Citron
Who Dat Herbal Incense     Mega Bomb            K2 (unknown variety)
Love Potion 69             Mr. Smiley’s       K2 Summit Space
Legal Eagle                Summer Skyy          K2 Blue
K2 Standard                Moe Joe Fire         K2 Pink
Super Kush                 Fully Loaded         K2 Latte
Bayou Blaster              Da Block             K2 Mint
Paradise                   Back Draft           K2 Silver
Red Bird                   K1 Orbit             K2 Peach
K1 Gravity                 C3                   Spike Gold
Spike Maxx                 Banana Cream Nuke    Humboldt Gold
Spike Diamond              K4 Silver            K2 Orisha Regular
Spike Silver               K4 Gold              K2 Orisha Max
 
K2 Strawberry                    K3 Heaven Improved K2 Orisha Super
K2 Pineapple Express             K3 Heaven Legal    K2 Amazonian Shelter
K2 Blueberry                     K3 Sun Legal       K2 Solid Sex on the
K2 Pink                          K3 Sun Improved    Midnight Chill
K2 Blonde                        K3 Kryptonite      Unknown cigarette
K2 Summit                        K3 XXX             Freedom
K2 Citron                        K3 Cosmic Blend    K2 Sex
K2 Ultra                         K3 Original        K2 Orisha White Magic
K2 Blue                          C4                 K2 Orisha Black Magic Max
MNGB Tropical Thunder            K1 Gravity         K2 Thai Dream
MNGB Pinata Colada               K1 Orbit           K4 Bubble Bubble
MNGB Almond/Vanilla              K2 Pina Colada     MTN-787
MNGB Peppermint                  K3 Kryptonite      K2 Kryptonite
MNGB Spear Mint                  K3 XXX             Legal Eagle Apple
p.e.p. pourri Twisted Vanilla    K3 Cosmic Blend    Pie K4 Purple Haze
p.e.p. pourri Original Spearmint K3 Original        K4 Summit Remix
p.e.p. pourri Love Strawberry    Rasta Citrus Spice 8-Ball
p.e.p. pourri X Blueberry        Kind Spice         C4
K2 Summit                        Time Warn          K2
Voo Doo Remix (orange)           Rasta Citrus Spice Tribal Warrior
Voo Doo Remix (black package)    Pink Tiger         Soike99
exSES                            Spice Gold         Spice Gold
Yucatan Fire Smoke               Chill Out          Spice Diamond
Skunk                            Smoke              Spice Silver
Sense                            Forest Humus       Genie
EX-SES Platinum Blueberry        Scope Vanilla      Spike 99
EX-SES Platinum Cherry           Scope Wildberry    Jamaican Gold
EX-SES Platinum Strawberry       Chill X            Potpourri
 
EX-SES Platinum Vanilla   Space             Winter Boost
Magic Silver              Silent Black      Citrus
Spice Artie Synergy       Sence             Spice Gold
Spice Diamond             Smoke             Spicey XXX
Spice Gold                Caneff            Spike 99
Spice Tropical Synergy    Spice Gold        Ex-SES Platinum
Spicey Regular XXX        Gold Spirit Spice Magic Gold
Spicey Regular XXX        Yucatan Fire      Bombay Blue
Spicey Ultra Strong XXX   Spice Diamond     Dream
Spicey Ultra Strong XXX   Smoke Plus        Spice Tropical Synergy
Spike 99 Ultra Blueberry  Magic Silver      Diamond Spirit
Spike 99 Ultra Cherry     Mojo              Platinum Strawberry
Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry EX-SES            Spicey Ultra Strong XXX
Spike 99 Ultra Strawberry
 
   (C)   Possession unlawful. No person shall knowingly possess a product
containing a synthetic cannabinoid, a synthetic stimulant or a synthetic
psychedelic/hallucinogen, including but not limited to those products set forth
in division (B).
   (D)   Use unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the
influence of a synthetic cannabinoid, a synthetic stimulant or a synthetic
psychedelic/hallucinogen.
   (E)   Sale or delivery unlawful. No person shall sell, offer for sale or
deliver any product containing a synthetic cannabinoid, a synthetic stimulant
or a synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen including, but not limited to, those
products set forth in division (B).
   (F)   Penalty. In addition to any other penalties provided by law and this
Code, the owner of any store convicted, or whose employee is convicted, of
selling any product containing synthetic cannaboid, synthetic stimulant or
synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen, shall be subject to having his or her
business license revoked for good and sufficient cause as provided in §
110.10 of the Maywood Village Code.
(Ord. CO-2012-13, passed 4-30-2012)
§ 130.92 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS.
   (A)   Definition. For purposes of this section, the term CANNABIS shall
include marijuana, hashish, and other substances which are identified as
including any part of the plant Cannabis Sativa, whether growing or not; the
seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant,
its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other
cannabinol derivatives, including its naturally occurring or synthetically
produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by extraction, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination of extraction
and chemical synthesis. However, this term  shall not include the mature stalks
of such plant; fiber produced from such stalks; oil or cake made from the seeds
of such plant; any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom);
fiber, oil cake; or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of
germination.
   (B)   Possession of cannabis prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person
to knowingly possess cannabis within the limits of the Village in violation of
the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.). This section
shall not be construed as conflicting with or limiting enforcement of the
Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq., as amended from time to
time.
   (C)   Any person who violates this section by possessing not more than 30
grams (30g) of cannabis shall be issued a notice of violation. The notice of
violation shall direct the individual to appear at an administrative hearing
for the village.
   (D)   Persons possessing more than 30 grams (30g) of cannabis and who are
cited for violations of Illinois Cannabis Control Act, 720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.,
will have such citations adjudicated in the Circuit Court of Cook County as
felony offenses.
   (E)   The observations of a village police officer with regard to the sight
or smell of a substance, or the use of a field testing process, such as the
Rapid Modified Duquenois-Levine test, or another established screening test for
the presence of cannabis in a particular substance, shall provide prima facie
evidence that the substance in possession of the individual contains the
presence of cannabis.
   (F)   Any person appearing before the village's administrative hearing and
found to have violated this section of this chapter by possessing not more than
30 grams (30g) of cannabis shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $750
for each violation, and, in the discretion of the hearing officer, may be
referred to a suitable drug education, counseling or rehabilitation program, or
ordered to perform community service.
   (G)   This section shall not be applicable to any individual who legally
possesses any substance containing cannabis, as a medical cannabis cardholder,
cultivator or dispenser, as defined by the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act, 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq. or Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act, 410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
(Ord. CO-2015-26, passed 9-15-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2019-38, passed 12-17-2019)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of §
130.06 is punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 and imprisonment of not
more than 30 days, or both.
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005)
CHAPTER 131: PROSTITUTION AND PROSTITUTION-FREE ZONES
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Loitering to solicit prostitution; directing persons to prostitutes or
houses of ill fame
   
131.03   Notification to news media
   
131.04   Prostitution-free zones
   
131.05   Designation of prostitution-free zones
   
131.06   Civil exclusions
   
131.07   Issuance of exclusion notices
   
131.08   Procedure
   
131.09   Appeals
   
131.10   Variances
 
   
131.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Criminal trespass to real property, see §
130.06 
   Towing of vehicle used in commission of prostitution, see §
99.18
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARREST. To place a person under actual or constructive restraint or to take
a person into custody for the purpose of charging that person with an offense.
   ESSENTIAL NEEDS. Food, physical care, and medical attention.
   PROSTITUTION, SOLICITATION OF A SEXUAL ACT, SOLICITING FOR A PROSTITUTE,
PANDERING, SOLICITING FOR A JUVENILE PROSTITUTE, PANDERING,PATRONIZING A
PROSTITUTE,  and PATRONIZING A JUVENILE PROSTITUTE. These terms shall have the
same meanings given them in the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961, as amended.
   PROSTITUTION-FREE ZONES. As defined in §
131.04.
   PUBLIC PLACE.  Any street, sidewalk, bridge, alley or alleyway, plaza, park,
driveway, parking lot or transportation facility or the doorways and entrance
ways to any building which fronts on any of the aforesaid places, or a motor
vehicle in or on any such place, or any other public way.
   TRAVEL. The movement on foot or within or upon a vehicle within a
prostitution-free zone from one point to another without delay other than to
obey traffic control devices.
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005)
§ 131.02 LOITERING TO SOLICIT PROSTITUTION; DIRECTING PERSONS TO PROSTITUTES OR
HOUSES OF ILL FAME.
   (A)   Loitering to solicit prostitution. It shall be unlawful and a
violation of this section for any person to loiter in or near any street or
public place in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of
inducing, enticing, soliciting, or procuring another to commit an act of
prostitution. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether such purpose is manifested are that the person repeatedly contacts,
stops or attempts to stop pedestrians, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop
motor vehicle operators or passengers by hailing them or gesturing to them.
   (B)   Directing persons to prostitutes or houses of ill fame. It shall be
unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to knowingly direct,
take, transport, or offer to direct, take or transport, any person for immoral
purposes to any other person, or assist any person by any means to seek or to
find any prostitute or other person engaged in immoral practices, or any
brothel, bawdy house, or any other house or place of ill fame.
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005; Am. Ord. C0-09-07, passed 3-3-2009) Penalty,
see §
131.99
§ 131.03 NOTIFICATION TO NEWS MEDIA.
   The Chief of Police shall distribute to all local newspapers, radio and
television stations the names and addresses of persons, other than juveniles,
arrested on charges of solicitation of a sexual act (720 ILCS 5/11-14.1),
patronizing a prostitute (720 ILCS 5/11-18) or patronizing a juvenile
prostitute (720 ILCS 5/11-18.1).
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005)
§ 131.04 PROSTITUTION-FREE ZONES.
   Prostitution-free zones are those areas of the Village as designated by the
Village President and Board of Trustees under this chapter, based on a written
recommendation from the Chief of Police, which are areas where the number of
arrests where there was probable cause to believe a person has committed any of
the offenses enumerated in §
131.06(A) for a 12-month period within the 18 months preceding its designation
is significantly higher than that for other similarly sized geographic areas of
the Village that are not located within a prostitution-free zone or areas where
observations by police officers and Village officials or citizen complaints
lead the Village President and Board of Trustees to conclude that prostitution
or related offenses are taking place in such areas with significant more
frequency than other similarly sized geographic areas of the Village that are
not located within a prostitution-free zone.
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005; Am. Ord. C0-09-07, passed 3-3-2009)
§ 131.05 DESIGNATION OF PROSTITUTION-FREE ZONES.
   (A)   The Village President and Board of Trustees may designate one or more
areas of the Village meeting the criteria of §
131.04 of this Code to be a prostitution-free zone, based on a written
recommendation from the Chief of Police. The Village President and Board of
Trustees shall designate such prostitution-free zone(s) by approving, by a vote
of a majority of its members, a written description of a zone that identifies
the geographic boundaries (using streets and blocks) of said area(s). The
designation shall be valid for a period of 3 years.
   (B)   The Chief of Police of the Village is directed to report to the
Village President and Board of Trustees at least 90 days before the end of the
3-year period as to whether there is a need to re-authorize or re-configure any
prostitution-free zones previously approved. Failure of the Chief of Police to
make this report shall not prohibit the Village President and Board of Trustees
from re-authorizing or re-configuring any prostitution-free zones.
   (C)   Prostitution-free zones as approved by the Village President and Board
of Trustees under this section shall be assigned a number or letter designation
(i.e. Zone A), shall be described in writing by their boundaries, and shall be
set forth on a map available at the Village of Maywood Police Station, 125
South 5th Avenue, and at the Office of the Village Clerk, 40 Madison Street,
that may be handed out to persons subject to exclusion and any other person
upon request, and may be otherwise publicized or made available. Prostitution-
free zones shall include the entire area on and within the listed boundaries.
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005; Am. Ord. C0-09-07, passed 3-3-2009)
§ 131.06 CIVIL EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   A person is subject to exclusion for a period of 90 days from any
public right-of-way and park within the applicable prostitution-free zone
designated by the Public Safety Committee of the Board of Trustees if that
person has been arrested based upon probable cause to believe that the person
has committed any of the following offenses within that prostitution-free zone,
unless the offense was committed entirely within a private residence:
      (1)   Prostitution in violation of Section 11-14 of the Illinois Criminal
Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/11-14).
      (2)   Solicitation of a sexual act in violation of Section 11-14.1 of the
Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/11-14.1).
      (3)   (Reserved).
      (4)   (Reserved).
      (5)   Patronizing a prostitute or patronizing a juvenile prostitute, in
violation of Sections 11-18 or 11-18.1 of the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961
(720 ILCS 5/11-18 or 720 ILCS 5/11-18.1).
      (6)   (Reserved).
      (7)   Loitering to solicit prostitution, in violation of §
131.02 of this chapter.
      (8)   Attempts to commit any of the above offenses.
   (B) A 1-year exclusion from any public right-of-way and park within the
applicable prostitution-free zone shall take effect upon the date that a
finding of guilt or plea of guilty is entered for any of the offenses
enumerated in division (A) of this section if that offense was committed within
that prostitution-free zone. The entry of an order of supervision by a court
upon a finding of guilt or plea of guilty shall have no adverse impact on the
validity of the exclusion.
   (C)   Except as allowed under §
131.10, a person excluded from a prostitution-free zone under authority of this
section may not enter that prostitution-free zone except to:
      (1)   Attend a meeting with an attorney;
      (2)   Attend a scheduled initial interview with a social service
provider;
      (3)   Comply with court-or corrections-ordered obligations;
      (4)   Contact police or other criminal justice personnel at a police or
other criminal justice facility;
      (5)   Attend any administrative or judicial hearing relating to an appeal
of:
         (a)   The person's notice of exclusion; or
         (b)   The denial, revocation, or amendment of the person's variance;
      (6)   Travel through that prostitution-free zone on public
transportation; or
      (7)   Travel through that prostitution-free zone on the Eisenhower
Expressway within its boundaries.
   (D)   While in a prostitution-free zone, a person who is otherwise excluded
may travel only directly to and from the obligations enumerated in division (C)
or for the purposes stated under any variance held by that person pursuant to §
131.10.
   (E)   If an excluded person is in a prostitution-free zone from which that
person is excluded, in violation of the exclusion during the exclusion period,
that person is subject to arrest for criminal trespass under Section 21-3 of
the Illinois Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/21-3) or §
130.06 of the Maywood Village Code.
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005)
§ 131.07 ISSUANCE OF EXCLUSION NOTICES.
   The Chief of Police and/or his designees are the persons in charge of the
public rights-of-way and parks in the prostitution-free zones for purposes of
issuing notices of exclusion in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005)
§ 131.08 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   If a person is arrested based upon probable cause to believe that the
person has committed any of the offenses enumerated in § 131.06(A) within a
prostitution-free zone, the Chief of Police and/or his designees may exclude
that person from that prostitution-free zone for a period of 90 days as set
forth in § 131.06(A). Every person excluded shall be provided a notice of
exclusion and variances substantially similar to Exhibit A attached to
Ordinance No. C0-05-09, a copy of which is on file in the Village Clerk's
office.
   (B)   At the time a person is issued a notice of exclusion from a
prostitution-free zone, the Chief of Police and/or his designees shall issue a
general or any other variances described in § 131.10, following a preliminary
review with the excluded person of the need for such variance(s) pursuant to
the process described in § 131.10.
   (C)   The notice of exclusion shall be in writing and a copy delivered to
the excluded person. The notice of exclusion shall specify the following:
      (1)   The area designated as a prostitution-free zone under this chapter,
along with a written boundary description and map indicating the area from
which that person is excluded; and
      (2)   Information concerning the right to appeal the exclusion to the
Village Manager as provided in § 131.09.
   (D)   A 90-day notice of exclusion shall automatically convert to a 1-year
exclusion upon a finding of guilt or plea of guilty subsequent to arrest for
the applicable offense, as set forth in § 131.06(B).
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005)
§ 131.09 APPEALS.
   A person to whom a notice of exclusion is issued shall have a right to
appeal as follows:
   (A)   Appeals shall be made to the Village Manager. Any hearings regarding
such appeals shall be conducted in accordance with hearing procedures adopted
by the Village Manager.
   (B)   Copies of documents in the Village's control which are intended to be
used at the hearing shall be made available, upon request, to the appellant.
   (C)   An appeal of a 90-day notice of exclusion must be filed, in writing,
with the Village Manager by 5:00 p.m. of the fifth business day following
issuance of the notice of exclusion.
   (D)   An appeal of a 1-year guilt-based exclusion must be filed, in writing,
with the Village Manager by 5:00 p.m. of the fifth business day following the
date of entry of the finding or plea.
   (E)   An appeal of:
      (1)   A denial of a request for a variance subsequent to the initial
notice of exclusion; or
      (2)   A denial of a request for an amendment to a variance; or
      (3)   A revocation of a variance, must be filed, in writing, by 5:00 p.m.
of the fifth business day following the action regarding the variance.
   (F)   A 90-day exclusion shall not take effect during the time that an
appeal of the 90-day exclusion is pending. If no appeal is taken, the initial
90-day exclusion shall take effect at 12:01 a.m. on the eighth calendar day
following the issuance of the notice of exclusion.
   (G)   A 1-year guilt-based exclusion shall take effect at 12:01 a.m. on the
calendar day following the date of the finding or plea and, notwithstanding an
appeal of the exclusion, shall remain in effect unless the Village Manager
issues a contrary decision.
   (H)   At the hearing on an appeal of a 90-day exclusion, the Village shall
have the burden to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the appellant
committed any of the offenses enumerated in § 131.06(A), and that the conduct
supporting the exclusion occurred within a prostitution-free zone.
   (I)   At the hearing on an appeal of a 1-year guilt-based exclusion, the
Village shall have the burden to show by a preponderance of the evidence that
the appellant was found guilty or entered a plea of guilty for any of the
offenses enumerated in § 131.06(A), and that the conduct supporting the finding
or plea occurred within a prostitution-free zone. The entry of an order of
supervision upon a finding of guilt or plea of guilty shall have no adverse
impact on the validity of the exclusion.
   (J)   At the hearing on an appeal of a denial of a request for a variance or
denial of a request for an amendment to a variance as provided in divisions (E)
(1) and (E)(2) of this section, the Village shall have the burden to show by a
preponderance of the evidence that the denial was in accordance with this
section.
   (K)   At the hearing on an appeal of a revocation of a variance as provided
in division (E)(3) of this section, the Village shall have the burden to show
by a preponderance of the evidence that any of the conditions enumerated in §
131.10(B) supporting revocation existed at the time of revocation.
   (L)   At the hearing on an appeal of a 90-day exclusion, the following shall
be prima facie evidence that the exclusion was based on probable cause to
believe that the appellant committed any of the offenses enumerated in § 131.06
(A):
      (1)   A determination by a court having jurisdiction over the offense
that forms the basis for the exclusion, that probable cause existed to arrest
the person to whom the initial 90-day notice of exclusion was issued for
violation of any of the offenses enumerated in § 131.06(A); or
      (2)   An accusatory instrument charging the person to whom a 90-day
notice of exclusion was issued, for violation of any of the offenses enumerated
in § 131.06(A).
   (M)   At the hearing on an appeal of a 1-year guilt-based exclusion, a
judgment indicating a finding of guilt or a plea of guilty for any of the
offenses that formed the basis for the exclusion, as enumerated in § 131.06(A),
shall be conclusive evidence that the described conduct occurred. The entry of
an order of supervision upon a finding of guilt or plea of guilty shall have no
adverse impact on the validity of the exclusion.
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005)
§ 131.10 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Variances shall be granted, denied, amended, or revoked in accordance
with the following provisions:
      (1)   All variances shall be in writing, for a specific period and only
to accommodate a specific purpose, all of which shall be stated on the
variance.
      (2)   The purpose of the variance is to allow only travel to and from
locations within a prostitution-free zone according to the terms of the
variance. The variance must be carried on the person while in a prostitution-
free zone in order to be effective and must be presented to a police officer
upon request.
      (3)   The Police Department shall receive and process requests for
prostitution-free zone variances during regular business hours if they are
otherwise open to the public. This capability will be maintained at the police
station.
      (4)   The Police Department, prior to issuing a variance, may demand
proof in the form of written documentation concerning the need for a variations
in cases where such documentation would be appropriate, including but not
limited to, written proof of residency or employment.
         (a)   General variance. The Chief of Police and/or his designees may,
for any reason, grant an excluded person a variance from an exclusion at any
time during an exclusion period. The Chief of Police and/or designees shall
grant an appropriate variance to an excluded person who presents a plausible
need to engage in any non-criminal activity that is not associated with the
behavior supporting the person's exclusion. A variance granted under this
division (A)(4)(a) allows travel within the prostitution-free zone only in
accordance with the terms specified in the variance.
         (b)   Residential variance. The Chief of Police and/or his designees
shall grant a residential variance to an excluded person. A residential
variance allows travel within the prostitution-free zone directly to or from
the person's residence other than transient occupancy in a hotel or motel in
accordance with the terms of the variance.
         (c)   Essential needs variance. The Chief of Police and/or his
designees shall grant an essential needs variance to an excluded person. An
essential needs variance allows travel within the prostitution-free zone in
accordance with the terms of the variance:
            1.   To access a public or private place within the prostitution-
free zone that provides an essential need; and
            2.   When the essential need sought by the excluded person cannot
be reasonably accessed by the excluded person without entering the
prostitution-free zone.
         (d)   Employment variance. The Chief of Police and/or his designees
shall grant an employment variance to an excluded person. An employment
variance allows an excluded person to travel to, from or for work within the
prostitution-free zone in accordance with the terms of the variance if the
excluded person:
            1.   Is an owner, principal, agent or employee of a place of lawful
employment located in the prostitution-free zone; or
            2.   Is required to perform employment-related services in the
prostitution-free zone.
         (e)   Social services variance. The Chief of Police and/or his
designees shall grant a social services variance to an excluded person. A
social services variance allows travel within the prostitution-free zone in
accordance with the terms of the variance if the excluded person:
            1.   Is in need of social services in the prostitution-free zone;
            2.   The social services are sought for reasons relating to the
health or well-being of the excluded person; and
            3.   The social services agency has written rules and regulations
prohibiting the unlawful use and sale of controlled substances by their
clients.
         (f)   Educational variance. The Chief of Police and/or his designees
shall grant an educational variance to an excluded person. An educational
variance allows travel within the prostitution-free zone in accordance with the
terms of the variance to enroll as a student or attend school at an educational
facility located within the prostitution-free zone.
   (B)   Revocation or amendment of variances. Variances may be revoked or
amended in accordance with the following provisions:
      (1)   A variance may be revoked or amended for the following reasons:
         (a)   The excluded person provided false information in order to
obtain the variance;
         (b)   There is probable cause to believe the person has committed any
of the offenses enumerated in § 131.06(A) in the prostitution-free zone
subsequent to the issuance of the variance;
         (c)   If the circumstances giving rise to the issuance of the variance
no longer support a continuation of the variance or a term thereof; or
         (d)   If the person has new circumstances that would support amending
the variance.
      (2)   Residential variance exception.
         (a)   A residential variance may be revoked only if the applicant
provided false residential information in order to obtain the variance; or
         (b)   If the circumstances giving rise to the issuance of the variance
no longer support a continuation of the variance.
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to violate any term of any variance
issued pursuant to §
131.10. For violations of §
131.10, a court may impose a fine of not less than $1,000 and not more than
$1,500 for each offense, and/or a sentence of imprisonment of not more than 30
days, or both.
   (B)   Any person violating any provisions of the Village Code relating to
prostitution, unless a separate penalty specifically and expressly applies,
shall be fined not less than $1,00 nor more than $1,500 for each offense in
addition to any other penalty authorized in the Code, including but not limited
to the news media notification in §
131.03, as amended.
(Ord. C0-05-09, passed 3-7-2005; Am. Ord. C0-09-07, passed 3-3-2009)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
Chapter
   
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
   
151.   VILLAGE PLANNING
   
152.   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
   
153.   BILLBOARDS
   
154.   ZONING CODE
   
155.   ADJACENT NEIGHBORS LAND ACQUISITION PROGRAM
   
156.   TAX REACTIVATION PROGRAM
   
157.   POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY SITING
   
158.   HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION AND DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS AND
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
   
159.   STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
   
160.   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
   
161.   COVENANT FUND
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Building Code
   
150.001   2018 International Building Code and other adopted codes
   
150.002   Amendments and changes to the 2018 International Building Code
   
150.003   Fire limits; construction within
   
150.004   Building permit fees
   
150.005   Moving buildings
   
150.006   Procedure for violations
   
150.007   Stoppage of work; cancellation of permit
   
150.008   Conflicts between provisions
   
150.009   Decisions of Building Director final
   
150.010   Enforcement
   
150.011   Permits
   
150.012   Plans
   
150.013   Temporary permits
   
150.014   Water and street regulations
   
150.015   Demolition of structures
   
150.016   Revocation of permits; reissuance
   
150.017   Buildings contrary to plans
   
150.018   Compliance with zoning regulations
   
150.019   Street occupancy
   
150.020   Barricades or fences for excavations
   
150.021   Materials placement
   
150.022   Restoration of streets and sidewalks
   
150.023   Dwelling unit separations
   
150.024   Barbed/razor wire fences
   
150.025   Fences
   
150.026   Air conditioning
   
150.027   Boarding windows and doors
   
150.028   Street dumpsters
   
150.029   Unsafe structures
   
150.030   Reserved
   
150.031   Registration of foreclosing mortgaged property and vacant property
   
150.032   Minimum requirements for vacant buildings
   
150.033   Mortgagee to inspect real estate
   
150.034   Improperly maintained buildings subject to nuisance abatement
proceedings
   
150.035   Termination
Nuisances
   
150.036   Chronic public nuisances
   
150.037   Crime-free housing
Residential Code
   
150.039   Amendments and changes to the 2018 International Residential Code
Electrical Code
   
150.040   National Electrical Code
   
150.041   Registration of electrical contractors
   
150.042   Electrical Inspection Division
   
150.043   Turning on current
   
150.044   Defects in apparatus
   
150.045   Permit for erection of poles and underground wiring
   
150.046   Notice to inspect work before covering
   
150.047   Dead wires
   
150.048   Defective wires
   
150.049   Electric signs
   
150.050   Modifications of National Electric Code
Plumbing Code
   
150.065   Illinois Plumbing Code adopted
   
150.066   Building Director’s duties
   
150.067   Entry for inspection
   
150.068   Permits
Energy Conservation Code
   
150.080   Adoption of Energy Conservation Code
   
150.081   Reserved
International Property Maintenance Code
   
150.095   Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code
   
150.096   Terms of International Property Maintenance Code defined
   
150.097   Amendments to International Property Maintenance Code
   
150.098   Certificate of compliance
   
150.099   Notice of intent to rent or sell
   
150.100   Registration and licensing of landlords
   
150.101   Posting of information relating to residential rental property
   
150.102   Authority of Village Manager to issue rules and regulations
   
150.103   Occupancy affidavit and zoning district acknowledgment
   
150.104   Certificate of occupancy
Elevation Inspection Program and Standards
   
150.120   Elevation inspection program and standards
   
150.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Village policies, see
Ch. 38
BUILDING CODE
§ 150.001 2018 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AND OTHER ADOPTED CODES.
   (A)   The 2018 International Building Code Series, as published by the
International Code Council, shall be and is adopted by reference as the
Building Code of the Village and, except as modified in this chapter, each and
all of the regulations, provisions and conditions and terms of the 2018
International Building Code Series are referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof by reference as if fully set forth in this Code.
   (B)   The suite of 2018 International Code Council (“ICC”) codes and related
codes adopted by the Village governing buildings and property within the
Village include the following:
      (1)   International Building Code.
      (2)   International Residential Code.
      (3)   International Fire Code.
      (4)   National Fire Protection Agency National Electrical Code 2017
Edition (NEC 2017).
      (5)   International Property Maintenance Code.
      (6)   International Fuel Gas Code.
      (7)   International Mechanical Code.
      (8)   International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
      (9)   International Existing Building Code.
      (10)   Most recent state adopted energy code.
      (11)   Most recent state adopted plumbing code.
   (C)   Not less than 1 copy of the International Building Code Series, 2018
Edition, shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Director and the
Village Clerk’s office for public inspection.
(1997 Code, § 23.01) (Ord. C0-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. C0-03-28,
passed 12-29- 2003; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 150.002 AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE.
   The 2018 International Building Code adopted by reference pursuant to §
150.001 is amended as it applies within the Village as follows:
   (A)   To the extent that there is any conflict between the 2018
International Building Code and the provisions of Chapter 150 of the Maywood
Village Code, the more restrictive provision shall govern and control;
   (B)   In § 101.1, insert “Village of Maywood”;
   (C)   In § 101.2, “International Residential Code” as adopted shall include
“the locally published detached garage specifications as published by the
Village of Maywood, as amended from time to time”;
   (D)   “All references herein to the electrical code shall mean the 2017
National Electrical Code (“2017 NEC”), as amended”;
   (E)   In § 101.4.4, delete “International Plumbing Code” and replace with
“Illinois Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended under Chapter 150 of the
Maywood Village Code.” At the end of the section, add “All references to the
Plumbing Code herein shall mean the Illinois Plumbing Code, as amended”;
   (F)   Section 101.4.6. is amended to read as follows:
      “The provisions of the 2018 International Fire Code as published by the
International Code Council, and the NFPA 101, Life Safety Code, 2017 edition,
as published by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted and
amended under Chapter 91 of the Maywood Village Code, shall apply to matters
affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of
fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling, or use of structures,
materials or devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property or public
welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction,
extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems
or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy of
operation. All references to the Fire Code shall mean the 2018 International
Fire Code, as amended”;
   (G)   In § 103, change the title to “Section 103 - Building and Code
Enforcement Department”;
   (H)   In § 103.1, delete current language and replace with: “The Building
and Code Enforcement Department shall be charged with the responsibility of
enforcement of these provisions and the official in charge thereof shall be
known as the building official”;
   (I)   § 103.2 shall be entirely deleted;
   (J)   § 103.3 shall be entirely deleted;
   (K)   In § 105.2, the following shall be deleted from the list of “work
exempt from permit” under the heading of “Building” - Exemption numbers 1, 2,
3, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 13;
   (L)   Section 105.5 is amended to read as follows:
   “Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the
site authorized by such permit is commenced within 90 days after its issuance,
or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned
for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The building
official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time,
for periods not more than 180 days each.”
   (M)   Section 113 shall substitute the following:
   “General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or
determinations made by the building official relative to the application and
interpretation of this Code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of
Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the Village Manager, who shall
render judgment based upon presentations from both the Building Official and
the Developer. The decision of the Village Manager shall constitute a final
decision and any appeal of this decision shall be to the Circuit Court of Cook
County and pursuant to the Illinois Administrative Review Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101
et seq.).”
   (N)   Section 113.3 shall be deleted.
   (O)   Section 202 shall be amended to add the following to BUILDING OFFICIAL
(definition):
   “The Building Director assigned to the Building and Code Enforcement shall
be considered the Building Official as defined in this paragraph.”
(1997 Code, § 23.02) (C0-08-95, passed 10-12- 1995; Am. Ord. C0-03-28, passed
12-29-2003; Am. Ord. C0-05-13, passed 4-18-2005; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-
6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45, passed 11-
7-2023)
§ 150.003 FIRE LIMITS; CONSTRUCTION WITHIN.
   (A)   The fire limits of the Village are established as, and shall conform
to, the locations and boundaries of the Village, and all areas covered by the
Maywood Fire Department.
   (B)   No combustible building or structure shall be erected within the fire
limits, excepting as follows:
      (1)   Existing structures building previously that are not changing use
group and consist of a level 1 or level 2 alteration as defined by the 2018
IEBC.
      (2)   Temporary structures not more than 1 story in height, for use only
in connection with a duly authorized building operation and located on the same
lot with such building operation, on a lot immediately adjoining, or as allowed
within a temporary use permit and constructed to meet the IBC, and IFC.
      (3)   New buildings and structures built under the adopted Village codes
and provided with fully compliant NFPA 13 and NFPA 72 life safety systems as
referenced in the IFC.
      (4)   New buildings and structures less than 2,000 square feet in size
and in conformance with the 2018 IBC and IFC when protected throughout with a
NFPA 72 fire protection system.
      (5)   IRC governed residential buildings and their associated accessory
structures when separated throughout the building as required by the IBC, IRC,
and local dwelling unit separation requirements.
      (6)   IBC governed accessory structures in conformance with the IBC
without fire protection systems under 2,000 square feet in size, and approved
by the Code Official and Fire Chief or their designee.
(1997 Code, § 23.03) (Ord. C0-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45,
passed 11-7-2023)
§ 150.004 BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   The fees to be charged for building permits may include the term “cost
of construction.” This value shall be determined by the current edition of
RSMeans, with the Code Official having final authority on cost. The schedule of
fees shall be as follows:
      (1)   For private garages and accessory buildings the fee shall be based
upon square footage in accordance with the following schedule or 2% of the cost
of construction, whichever is greater:
         (a)   0-200 square feet:       $100;
         (b)   201 square feet and over:    $200;
      (2)   For parking pads and patios:    $100 or 2% of the cost of
construction, whichever is greater;
      (3)   For all buildings and other structures, except private garages and
accessory buildings, the fee for the permit shall be 2% of the cost of
construction, or the following minimum fees, whichever is greater, as follows:
         (a)   Public buildings: A minimum fee of $500;
         (b)   Institutional buildings: A minimum fee of $500;
         (c)   Residential buildings: A minimum fee of $500;
         (d)   Commercial buildings: A minimum fee of $500;
         (e)   Storage buildings: A minimum fee of $500;
         (f)   Churches: A minimum fee of $500;
         (g)   Schools: A minimum fee of $500.
      (4)   Before any building permit shall be issued for the erection of a
residential building, or alteration exceeding 50% of the value and requiring a
certificate of occupancy, the owner or contractor shall first file with the
Village Clerk a bond in favor of the Village in the sum of$10,000 with sureties
acceptable to the Village to guarantee to the Village that such residence will
not be occupied until it has been fully completed in accordance with the plans
and specifications and an official certificate of final inspection and
occupancy shall have been issued by the Village.
   (B)   The fee to be charged for permits for alterations and repairs in or to
any building or other structure shall be based on the cost of such alterations
and repairs and shall be paid at the rate of 2% of the cost of construction
with a minimum of $50, provided that in accordance with §
150.016(C), no permit fee shall be required for ordinary repairs which are
incidental to the upkeep of the building and do not require a permit. A 50%
reduction in permit fees charged under this division shall be given to permit
applicants who are 65 years of age or older and who are able to provide proof
that they are both an owner or co-owner and an occupant of the property where
the work is to be performed and the property has no more than 4 residential
units. Mixed use properties, properties with both residential and commercial
use, are not eligible for this reduction. Two items for proof of residency
shall be required, one of which must be a current State of Illinois issued
drivers license or identification card and the other being reasonable
documentation establishing residency as determined by the corporate
authorities.
   (C)   The fee to be charged for permits to move, raise, lower, underpin, or
wreck a building or structure, respectively, shall be as follows:
      (1)   For moving over, upon or in any public highway buildings or
structures, one and one-half stories or less in height, $500 or 2% of the
associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (2)   For moving over, upon or in any public highway buildings or
structures of more than one and one-half stories but less than two and one-half
stories in height,$750 or 2% of the associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (3)   For moving buildings or structures within the limits of any 1 block
when the same does not pass over, upon or in any public highway,$500 or 2% of
the associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (4)   For moving buildings or structures within the limit of any lot
where the same does not pass over, upon or in any public highway,$155 or 2% of
the associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (5)   For raising, lowering or underpinning any building,$50 or 2% of the
associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (6)   The fee to be charged for permits to wreck a building or structure
shall be $250 or 2% of the associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (7)   The fee to be charged for permits to wreck a garage, accessory
building or structure shall be $100 or 2% of the associated cost, whichever is
greater.
   (D)   Additional permit and inspectional fees are as follows:
      (1)   For installation or repair of elevator or other conveyances, $250
or 2% of the associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (2)   For bi-annual inspection of elevator or other conveyances, $150
unit/year;
      (3)   (a)   For installation of an automatic sprinkler system, $175
minimum for first 15 sprinklers, plus 2% of the associated cost;
         (b)   For the conduct by the Village of hydrant flow tests, the fee
shall be $200 per test;
         (c)   For the conduct by the Village of underground sprinkler piping
flush tests, the fee shall be $200 per test:
      (4)   For erection of nonilluminated signs,$50 plus $0.25 per square foot
of area;
      (5)   For erection of illuminated and/or roof signs,$10 plus $0.25 per
square foot of sign area;
      (6)   For annual inspection of building required to be inspected, $75;
      (7)   For permit for tank or tower on roof in excess of 400 gallon
capacity, minimum $10 or 2% of the associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (8)   Reserved;
      (9)   For certificate of final occupancy, $75;
      (10)   For extension of a building permit 20% of original cost of permit;
      (11)   For permit for any street occupancy or obstruction, except street
dumpsters as provided by § 150.028,$100 per month for each 25 feet or
fractional part thereof. In addition, a street or parkway opening charge of
$350 per opening shall be required by the contractor to cover restoration of
the street;
      (12)   For permit to use parkways and alleys for limited periods, a fee
of $50 per day;
      (13)   For permit for canopy or fixed awning,$50 or 2% of the associated
cost; nonilluminated and $100 or 2% of the associated cost, whichever is
greater, for illuminated awnings;
      (14)   (a)   For a permit to install an underground tank the fee shall be
charged in accordance with the following minimum fee schedule based on the size
of the tank and 2% of the associated cost:
            1.   0-1,000 gallons      $225;
            2.   1,001-2,500 gallons      $275;
            3.   2,501-5000 gallons      $350;
            4.   5,001 gallons and over      $450;
         (b)   For a permit to remove an underground tank the fee charged shall
be in accordance with the following schedule based on the size of the tank plus
2% of the associated cost:
            1.   1-1,000 gallons   $175;
            2.   1,001-2,500 gallons   $200;
            3.   2,501-5,000 gallons   $250;
            4.   5,001 gallons and over   $325;
      (15)   For utility permits and right-of-way permits, 2% of the
construction cost;
      (16)   Reserved;
      (17)   The following fees shall be charged for the installation of
plumbing, provided the minimum fee shall be$50, plus, for items (a) through
(f), the rates in the following schedule or 2% of the associated cost,
whichever is greater:
         (a)   For each fixture installed   $20;
         (b)   For miscellaneous piping supply and waste   $45;
         (c)   For water connection:
            1.   For a 3/4 inch pipe connection    $100;
            2.   For a 1 inch pipe connection    $150;
            3.   Above 1 inch pipe connection       $120;
         (d)   For sewer connection inspection   $100;
            In addition, a sewer impact fee of $500/inch diameter of pipe is
imposed.
         (e)   For water pipe and sewer line per linear foot   $0.25;
         (f)   For installation of hot water heater   $50;
         (g)   New water service connection tap fee:   $1,000/inch diameter of
pipe size;
         (h)   New water meter and fitting   Cost plus 15%;
      (18)   For inspection of sewer or water connection,$100;
      (19)   The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of a
permanent swimming pool shall be$50 minimum or 2% of the associated cost,
whichever is greater;
      (20)   (a)   For erecting a fence on residential use property,$50 or 2%
of the associated cost, whichever is greater;
         (b)   For erecting a fence on other than residential property, $100 or
2% of the associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (21)   For permits for the construction of residential, paved, concrete
or blacktop driveways,$50 or 2% of the associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (22)   For permits for the construction of commercial driveways,$100 or
2% of the associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (23)   Fees for electrical installations shall be a minimum of $50 plus
additional charges in accordance with the following schedule, or 2% of the
associated cost, whichever is greater.
         (a)   New service:
            100 amps service    $50
            200 amps service    $75
            400 amps service    $100
            600 amps service    $200
            800 amps service    $300
            1,000 amps service   $350
         (b)   Circuits new and/or additional 15-20 amps shall comply to new
service:
            0-50 circuits      $5 each
            51 or more circuits    $3.50 each
         (c)   Solar panels, $75/panel plus $15 miscellaneous charge per piece
of equipment installed;
      (24)   For each air conditioner, $75 or 2% of the associated cost of
construction, whichever is greater;
      (25)   For permit for maintenance or use of a street dumpster,$20 plus
$10 for each renewal;
      (26)   For each new furnace or boiler installation,$75 or 2% of the
associated cost, whichever is greater;
      (27)   For permit to install an automatic fire alarm system, minimum $200
or 2% of the associated cost, whichever is greater.
   (E)   Plan review fees. All permits requiring review are charged a minimum
of $50, or the contracted price of review, plus 15%.
      (1)   Additional plan reviews are charged at a rate of 50% of the first
review.
      (2)   Trade specific reviews are billable based on prevailing wage rates
for the specific trade being reviewed.
(1997 Code, § 23.04) (Ord. C0-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. C0-00-23,
passed 12-4- 2000; Am. Ord. C0-00-39, passed 12-4-2000; Am. Ord. C0-04-36,
passed 11-15-2004; Am. Ord. C0-05-13, passed 4-18-2005; Am. Ord. C0- 07-42,
passed 10-16-2007; Am. Ord. C0-08-11, passed 2-19-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45,
passed 11-7-2023)
§ 150.005 MOVING BUILDINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Buildings or structures moved in the Village upon, along or
across any street or alley that are worth more than one-third, but less than
three- fourths of the cost of duplicating such buildings or structures in their
proposed new location with new construction and materials shall comply
throughout with this chapter and the zoning regulations of the Village, both as
to construction and use in the new location. The acceptance of a permit for
moving of such building or structure shall impose the obligation to cause same
to be made to comply with this chapter. Failure to cause same to be made to
comply with this chapter shall constitute a violation of this Code.
      (2)   No building or structure worth less than one-third of the cost of
duplicating same in its proposed new location with new construction and
materials shall be moved from its present to another location.
      (3)   The costs and values referred to and made necessary to be
determined in applying this section shall be furnished by the owner and shall
be verified and approved by the Building Director, before a permit to move the
building or structure involved shall be issued or will be recognized as valid.
   (B)   No person shall move any building which has been damaged to an extent
greater than one-third of its value by fire, decay or otherwise, such value to
be determined as prescribed in this section. No person shall move any building
to a location at which the uses for which such building is designed are
prohibited by the provisions of this Code or by other ordinances of the city,
nor shall any person be permitted to move any building to a location which will
cause the destruction of or injury to any trees on public property in any
residential section of the Village.
(1997 Code, § 23.05) (Ord. C0-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.006 PROCEDURE FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The procedure in all cases of unauthorized deviations from, or
violations of, the provisions of this chapter found on inspections required by
the preceding section shall be as follows: a verbal notice shall be immediately
served by the inspector at the site, and on the persons doing or in charge of
the work being done, or responsible for or capable of correcting, or of causing
to be corrected the deviation observed. Such verbal notice shall be followed by
a written notice on forms prepared for the purpose and designating the
deviation observed. Should the work or condition continue, notwithstanding such
verbal and written notice, then a copy of such notice shall be posted at the
site in as safe and conspicuous a place as practicable, and where, if
unmolested, the same must certainly come to the notice of any persons either
employed on the work, or frequenting or occupying the building, structure or
premises, and a duplicate of such written notice shall be mailed to the last
known address of the owner, agent or person in control of the building or
structure involved.
   (B)   If the verbal or written or posted notice or any of them are respected
and steps are promptly taken to correct the deviation observed, and if such
deviation is promptly corrected, on notice, to the satisfaction of the
inspector in charge and consistent with the requirements of this chapter, the
deviation observed shall not be deemed a willful violation of this chapter, nor
be subject to any penalty therein provided.
   (C)   In the event a written notice of a deviation from the provisions of
this chapter so observed has been posted and mailed, as aforesaid, and the work
or condition continues in defiance thereof, or if the deviation is not promptly
corrected in a manner consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the
urgency of the case, then the deviation shall be considered a willful
violation, and the inspector shall promptly stop the work, and if need be shall
close the building or structure to the public. The facts pertaining to the case
and the steps so far taken therein shall next and forthwith be reported in
writing on forms prepared for the purpose to the Building Director, who shall
forthwith proceed to enforce the provisions and penalties provided.
   (D)   The Building Director and other officers of the Village who may assist
them in case of flagrant or defiant violations of this chapter are authorized
to use the police power of the Village in such manner and to such extent as the
character of the violation and the urgency, hazards, rights and interests of
public health and safety may justify and demand for the case involved.
(1997 Code, § 23.06) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.007 STOPPAGE OF WORK; CANCELLATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Building Director is directed to stop work on any building,
structure or portion thereof that is being done in a reckless, unsafe or
insanitary manner, or with the use of defective or improper materials, and on
any building, structure or portion thereof proposed for unlawful purposes as
regards location, intended use or occupancy, and any work that in any other
respect is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or to the
requirements of any other ordinances of the Village.
   (B)   This right and duty shall exist and be performed irrespective of any
permit that may or may not have been either required or issued for the work
involved.
   (C)   The suspension of work shall be for such time as may be necessary to
secure a correction of the particular violations and features complained of or
until a satisfactory agreement and arrangement, approved of by the Building
Director, is reached that such correction will be made, and if a court trial is
had, then the work shall be suspended and held in abeyance until the court
renders its decision.
   (D)   Any person having charge of, directing, or in any way engaged in work
that violates this chapter, who shall refuse or fail to promptly desist from
such work on written notice from the Building Director, or who having desisted
on either verbal or written or posted notice shall resume the work before the
violation which occasioned the order is corrected or agreed to be corrected
satisfactorily to the Building Director and consistent with the purposes of
this chapter, or who before having been authorized by the Building Director,
resumes work stopped by the Building Director, shall be deemed guilty of
violating this chapter and permits for work being done in violation of this
chapter may be canceled or revoked on order of the Building Director.
(1997 Code, § 23.07) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.008 CONFLICTS BETWEEN PROVISIONS.
   When a general provision or requirement of this chapter or the zoning
regulations of the Village conflicts with a specific provision thereof relating
to the construction, equipment, maintenance, use or location of any building,
structure, or any portion thereof in this chapter or the zoning regulations,
the specific provision or requirement shall govern.
(1997 Code, § 23.08) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 150.009 DECISIONS OF BUILDING DIRECTOR FINAL.
   Whenever the decision of the Building Director upon the safety of any
building or any part thereof is made in a case which is so urgent that failure
properly to carry out their orders to demolish or strengthen such building or
part thereof may in their judgment endanger life and limb, the decision and
order of the Building Director shall be absolute and final.
(1997 Code, § 23.09) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.010 ENFORCEMENT.
   The duty of enforcing this chapter shall primarily devolve upon the Building
Director and their assistants. The Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire
Department, the Corporation Counsel and the Health Commissioner are authorized
and directed to aid in enforcing this chapter. The Chief of Police and the
Corporation Counsel, insofar as may be necessary and practicable, shall each
act in conjunction with and through the Building Director and their assistants.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as disqualifying or exempting any
other department head or officer of the Village from the duty of aiding in the
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter.
(1997 Code, § 23.10) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.011 PERMITS.
   (A)   Required. Before proceeding with the erection, enlargement,
alteration, repair or removal of any building or structured in the Village, a
permit for such erection, enlargement, alteration, repair or removal shall
first be obtained by the owner or their agent from the Building Director, and
it shall be unlawful to proceed with the erection, enlargement, alteration,
repair or removal of any building or of any structural part thereof within the
Village unless such permit shall first have been obtained from the Building
Director.
   (B)   Time limit extension fee. If after a permit has been granted, the
operations called for by the permit shall not be begun within 90 days after the
date thereof, or if such operations are not completed within 1 year from the
date thereof, such permit shall be void, and no operations thereunder shall be
begun or completed until an extended permit shall be taken out by the owner or
their agent. A fee of 20% of the original cost of permit shall be charged for
such extended permit.
   (C)   Ordinary repairs.
      (1)   A permit is not required for the exempted items listed under §
150.002(K).
      (2)   Before such repairs shall be made notification thereof by the
contractor shall be filed with the Building Director if the cost of such work
exceeds $1,000.
   (D)   Application; issuance of permit. Applications for a building permit
shall be made by the owner or their agent to the Building Director. When such
application is made, plans in conformity with the provisions of this chapter,
the Village’s Fire Prevention Code and all other applicable provisions of this
Code or any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the Village shall be filed
with the Building Director. Where the permit seeks to erect, enlarge, alter,
repair, or remove any building or structure in the Village that has been found
to be abandoned for 90 days or more, or is proposed to be improved, upgraded,
demolished, or rehabbed at a value of 50% or more of the building’s assessed
value, or where the habitable space is being increased (additional bedrooms,
sleeping rooms, or bathrooms), and/or changes interior water or sewer supply
lines (except those in the course of ordinary repairs), or where plumbing is
being substantially upgraded, the applicant shall be required to ensure all
water service piping, which includes all piping from the water meter location
to the terminating fixture, shall be piped from the street main to the water
distribution system for the building, the plans must include improvements or
upgrades to any sewer and/or water connections and piping systems to ensure
compliance with the land and water pollution requirements of the Illinois
Environmental Property Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control and the
Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, other applicable state, federal,
county or other laws or regulatory requirements relating to sewer and/or water
lines and service, and any other applicable ordinance set forth in this Code.
Unless the application pertains to a building used exclusively for residential
purposes which contains not more than 2 dwelling units, the Building Director
shall refer the plans for review to the Bureau of Fire Prevention. The Bureau
of Fire Prevention shall review the plans for the purpose of determining
whether the plans are in conformity with the Village’s Fire Prevention Code.
The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall thereafter notify the Building Director
whether the plans are or are not in conformity with the Village’s Fire
Prevention Code. If the plans are determined to be in conformity with the
Village’s Fire Prevention Code, or if review of the plans by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention is not required under the provisions of this section, the Building
and Code Enforcement Department shall review the plans to determine whether
they are in conformity with all other applicable codes, ordinances, rules and
regulations. If the plans are in conformity with the Village’s Building Code,
Fire Prevention Code, if applicable, and all other applicable codes,
ordinances, rules and regulations, then the Building Director shall issue a
building permit and shall apply to such plans a final official stamp, stating
that the drawings to which the stamp has been applied comply with the terms of
this chapter, the Village’s Fire Prevention Code, if applicable, and to all
other applicable codes, ordinances, rules and regulations. The plans so stamped
shall then be returned to the applicant, along with a copy of the building
permit. True copies of so much of the plans as may be required in the opinion
of the Building Director and the Village’s Fire Prevention Officer to
illustrate the features of construction and equipment of the building referred
to shall be filed with the Building Director and shall remain on file in their
office for a period of 6 months after the occupation of the building or
structure for which the permit was issued. After the 6 month period expires,
the drawings shall be returned to the person who provided the drawings to the
Building Director upon request. It shall not be obligatory upon the Building
Director to retain such drawings in their custody for more than 6 months after
the occupation of the building or structure for which the permit was issued.
(1997 Code, § 23.11) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. C0-00-23,
passed 12-4- 2000; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45, passed 11-7-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2023-54,
passed 12-5-2023)
§ 150.012 PLANS.
   (A)   Required. The Building Director shall not issue any building permit
unless the plans submitted for their approval clearly show that such building
or structure with all its appurtenances, foundations and attachments can be
erected entirely within the limits of the lot or tract of land upon which it is
proposed to erect such building or structure except as provided by this chapter
or other ordinances of the Village, and no permit shall authorize the use of
any part of any public highway or other public ground for the construction or
maintenance of such building or structure except as provided by this chapter or
other ordinances of the Village.
   (B)   Plans on job site. In all cases, the approved plan, together with
building permits, must be kept on the job while the work is in progress.
   (C)   Contents. All such plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not
less than one-eighth of an inch to the foot, on paper or cloth, in ink, or by
some process that will not fade or obliterate, to be accompanied by electronic
document of the same in PDF or other approved file type. A Plat of Survey is
required showing all distances and dimensions accurately figured, and drawings
made explicitly and complete, showing the lot lines and the location of the
exterior lines of the building in relation thereto, and the entire ventilating,
sewerage and drain pipes and the location of all plumbing fixtures within such
building. Each set of plans presented shall be approved by the Code Official or
designee before a permit will be granted. No permit shall be granted or plans
approved unless such plans are made and signed by such persons as are permitted
under the laws of the state to make plans for buildings, as provided in 225
ILCS 305/1 et seq.
   (D)   Driveways.
      (1)   No building permit shall be granted for a single-family residence
or a two-family residence unless the plans submitted clearly show that a strip
of land not less than 10 feet in width has been provided for driveway purposes
on the lot on which such building is to be constructed. Said 10 feet may
include that portion of the lot designated as a “sideyard” under the terms of
the zoning ordinance. Any deviation in construction from the plans submitted
for such building which results in the reduction in size of such strip shall be
unlawful and shall operate to annul the permit which has been issued for such
work.
      (2)   The foregoing driveway requirement shall not apply to a lot having
an alley to the rear thereof, to a corner lot, or to any lot lying between 2
lots on which buildings have been constructed if such lot is exempt from the
minimum area requirements of the zoning ordinance by reason of being of record
at the time of the passage of the zoning ordinance.
   (E)   Architect or engineer to certify plans. It shall be unlawful for any
architect or structural engineer or other person permitted under the laws of
the state to make drawings and plans, to prepare or submit to the Building
Director for their approval, any final drawings or plans for any building or
structure which does not comply with the requirements contained in this
chapter. It shall be the duty of the Building Director to require that all
drawings and plans submitted to them for approval for any building or structure
be accompanied by a certificate of such architect or structural engineer
preparing such drawings and plans, and that such drawings and plans must have
the architect’s or structural engineer’s licensed seal stamped on drawings
submitted as provided by 225 ILCS 305/1 et seq.
   (F)   Alterations and deviations from plans. It shall be unlawful to erase,
alter or modify any lines, figures or coloring contained upon such drawings so
stamped by the Building Director or filed with them for reference. If during
the progress of the execution of such work it is desired to deviate in any
manner affecting the construction or other essentials of the building from the
terms of the application or drawing, notice of such intention to alter or
deviate shall be given to the Building Director, and their written assent shall
first be obtained before such alteration or deviation may be made. Alterations
in buildings which do not require a permit and that are not in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, or the requirements of the zoning ordinance,
may be made without the permission of the Building Director.
(1997 Code, § 23.12) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45,
passed 11-7-2023)
§ 150.013 TEMPORARY PERMITS.
   For the purpose of facilitating the commencement of lawful building
operations, the Building Director may authorize such operations to commence and
proceed for such limited time, not exceeding 20 days as the Building Director
may deem sufficient to allow the owner, their architect or agent to complete
the filing of detailed plans and other data required for the issuance of the
final permit. Temporary permits will be revocable at the will of the Building
Director. In case new buildings or structures are to be erected, the work shall
not be carried above the level of the grade line, nor above the level of the
first tier of girders, beams, floor joists or first floor proper. The applicant
for a temporary permit shall furnish the Building Director to determine that
the work to be commenced and proposed subsequently to be done is of a lawful
nature and shall file with the Building Director the frontage consents required
by this chapter or other laws of the Village for the proposed work or purpose.
(1997 Code, § 23.13) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.014 WATER AND STREET REGULATIONS.
   Before the Building Director issues a permit, they shall require evidence
from the applicant that payment has been made to the Water Department of the
Village for the water to be used or for a water meter for measuring all the
water to be used in the construction of such building under the provisions of
this Code relative to water regulations. Such applicant shall produce evidence
that they have complied with all the requirements of this Code and of the
Village ordinance as to use of the streets and alleys of the Village by reason
of any proposed obstruction or occupation thereof in and about such building
operations.
(1997 Code, § 23.14) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.015 DEMOLITION OF STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Before proceeding with the wrecking or tearing down of any building or
other structure, a permit for such wrecking or tearing down shall first be
obtained by the owner or their agent from the Building Director, and it shall
be unlawful to proceed with the wrecking or tearing down of any such building
or structure or any structural part of such building or structure unless each
permit shall first have been obtained. Application for such permit shall be
made by such owner or their agent to the Building Director, who shall issue
such permit upon such application and the payment of the fees provided for in §
150.004. Upon the issuance of such permit, such building may be wrecked or torn
down, provided that all the work done thereunder shall be subject to the
supervision of the Building Director and to such reasonable restrictions as
they may impose in regard to elements of safety and health, and provided
further that the work shall be kept sprinkled and sufficient scaffolding be
provided to ensure safety to human life.
   (B)   Before any permit is issued granting authority to wreck or demolish a
building or structure for which such permit is required, the person engaged in
the work of wrecking or demolishing same shall file with the Director of
Finance a bond which has a principal amount of not less than $50,000 with
sureties to be approved by the Village Manager to indemnify, keep and save
harmless the Village against any loss, cost, damage, expense, judgment or
liability of any kind which the Village may incur, or which may accrue against,
be charged to or be recovered from the Village, or any of its officials, from
or by reason or on account of injuries or damage to persons or property during
any such wrecking or demolition operations from or by reason or on account of
failure to comply with divisions (C) or (D) hereof, or by reason or on account
of anything done under or by virtue of any permit granted for any such wrecking
or demolition operations. Such bond in each case shall extend over the period
of and cover all such wrecking or demolition operations.
   (C)   Any deposit of mud on any street, sidewalk or alley as a result of
wrecking or demolition operations shall be completely removed on the day that
the mud is deposited. The obligations of this division (C) rest jointly and
separately on any owner performing wrecking or demolition operations or on
whose behalf wrecking or demolition operations are performed, and upon any
contractor performing wrecking or demolition operations.
   (D)   Within 30 days following completion of the wrecking or demolition of
any building or structure:
      (1)   All debris from the demolished structure or building must be
removed from the parcel of land on which the building or structure was located
and the parcel must be seeded or sodded; and
      (2)   Existing pavements and surfaces within the public right-of-way
which were damaged or otherwise disturbed as a result of wrecking or demolition
operations shall be restored to their original condition. The obligations of
this division (D) rest jointly and separately upon any owner performing
wrecking or demolition operations or on whose behalf wrecking or demolition
operations are performed and upon any contractor performing wrecking or
demolition operations.
   (E)   Any person violating the terms and conditions of this section shall be
subject to a penalty of not to exceed $500, with each and every day that the
violation is allowed to remain in effect being deemed a complete and separate
offense. In addition, the appropriate authorities of the Village may take such
other action as they deem proper to enforce the terms and conditions of this
section, including, without limitation, an action in equity to compel
compliance with its terms. Any person violating the terms of this section shall
be subject, in addition to the foregoing penalties, to the payment of court
costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees.
(1997 Code, § 23.15) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45,
passed 11-7-2023)
§ 150.016 REVOCATION OF PERMITS; REISSUANCE.
   If the work in, upon or about any building or structure shall be conducted
in violation of any of the provisions of this Code, it shall be the duty of the
Building Director to revoke the permit for the building or wrecking operations
in connection with which such violation shall have taken place. It shall be
unlawful, after the revocation of such permit, to proceed with such building or
wrecking operations unless such permit shall first have been reinstated or
reissued by the Building Director. Before a permit so revoked may be lawfully
reissued, the entire building and building site shall first be put into
condition corresponding with the requirements of this chapter and other
ordinances of the Village, and any work or material applied to the same in
violation of this chapter and other ordinances of the Village shall be first
removed from such building and for such permit as reissued the fee required for
a new permit shall be paid.
(1997 Code, § 23.16) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.017 BUILDINGS CONTRARY TO PLANS.
   (A)   Permit voided. It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or architect
or for any contractor or builder engaged in erecting, altering or repairing any
building to make any departure from the plans as approved by the Building
Director of such nature that such departure involves any violation of the
requirements of this chapter as to buildings of the class in which such
building is, or to make any changes in plans or construction affecting means of
egress, ventilation, natural lighting or sanitary conditions without first
obtaining the written consent of the Building Director to such changes. Any
such departure or any such change without the consent of the Building Director
being obtained, as required herein, shall operate to annul the permit which has
been issued.
   (B)   Stop work orders. In case any work is done under a permit authorizing
the erection, alteration or repair of a building or structure, which work is
contrary to the approved plans, the Building Director and their assistants
shall have power to at once stop such work and to order all persons engaged
therein to stop and desist therefrom. Such work shall not be resumed until
satisfactory assurance has been given the Building Director that it will be
done according to the approved plans or until the Building Director has
consented, in writing, to the changes made in such approved plans, in either of
which cases a new permit must be issued before the work proceeds, for which
permit the usual fee shall be paid by the contractor doing such work.
   (C)   Lack of permit. No contractor or builder shall begin any work on any
building or structure for which a permit is required until such permit shall
have been secured. In case any work is begun on the erection, alteration,
repair or removal of any building or structure without a permit, the Building
Director and their assistants shall have power to at once stop such work and to
order any and all persons engaged therein to stop and desist therefrom until
the proper permit is secured.
   (D)   Penalty fee for work without permit. Any contractor or builder
beginning any work on any building or structure for which a permit is required
without first obtaining a permit for such work shall be subject to a penalty
fee of 2 times the amount of the permit for such work as set forth in §
150.004.
(1997 Code, § 23.17) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.018 COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS.
   Application for a building permit shall be accompanied by application for
certificates of occupancy and compliance and by plans as required by the zoning
regulations. Compliance with the zoning regulations shall be deemed a
prerequisite for a building permit.
(1997 Code, § 23.18) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45,
passed 11-7-2023)
§ 150.019 STREET OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or store on the
roadway, parkway or sidewalk space of any street or in alleys building
materials or any fuels or other supplies for any building or structure in
course of erection, repair or alteration, unless a street occupancy permit from
the Building Director is obtained prior to the act.
   (B)   Application and issuance of permit. An application for a street
occupancy permit shall be made to the Building Director and shall describe the
location to be occupied, the use to be made and the length of time of such
intended occupation. Should the Building Director approve of such application,
they shall issue a street occupancy permit to the applicant, provided the
applicant has complied with all the provisions of this chapter as to bonds,
fees and all other prerequisites in connection with such permit.
   (C)   Bond. Before the Building Director shall issue a street occupancy
permit, the applicant for such permit shall file with the Director of Finance
on a form to be furnished by the Village a bond in the penal sum of $15,000,
with surety to be approved by the Village Manager and conditioned to indemnify,
save and keep harmless the Village from any and all loss, costs, expense or
liability which the Village may suffer or be put to, or, which may be recovered
from it by reason of the issuance of such permit, or by reason of any act or
thing done, or neglected to be done under or by virtue of the authority given
in such permit. An annual bond may be given to cover street occupancy permits.
   (D)   Permit fee and deposit. The fee and deposit for a street occupancy
permit shall be as set forth in §
150.004. Upon the removal of such obstruction, so much of the deposit as shall
be necessary to so restore the street shall be retained by the Village and the
remainder shall be returned to the depositor. The Village may maintain an
action against the person to recover the damage done to any street or sidewalk.
   (E)   Limitations on occupancy of streets. The permission to occupy space of
any street or in alleys for the purposes of building is intended only for
imperative use in connection with the actual erection, repair, alteration,
wrecking or removal of buildings and shall terminate with the completion of
such operation. It shall also be unlawful to occupy any such named space under
authority of the street occupancy permit for the storage of articles not
intended for immediate use in connection with the operation for which such
permit has been issued. Failure to immediately remove building or other
material from such occupied space on notice so to do from the Building Director
or Chief of Police shall subject the owner or contractor so notified to the
penalty provided for violation of this chapter.
   (F)   Space limitations.
      (1)   The occupation of a street or alley for the storage of building
material including temporary sidewalks shall not extend out beyond the curb
line more than one-third of the way across the street pavement.
      (2)   It shall not be lawful to occupy with building material any space
of any street or alleys other than immediately in front of the lot or land upon
which the building is being erected; provided, that if the written consent of
the owners, tenants or occupants of properties adjoining the site of any
proposed building is first obtained and filed with the Building Director, the
occupation of the roadway and sidewalk may be extended in front of the property
so consenting, upon the same terms and conditions as those herein fixed for the
occupation of the streets in front of the building site.
      (3)   During the progress of building operations, a sidewalk not less
than 4 feet in width, or an equal width of a clean, hard, paved roadway,
available and made safe for footway, shall at all times be kept open, clean and
unobstructed for the purpose and use of a passageway in front of such lot of
lots.
      (4)   It is not intended to prohibit the maintenance of a driveway for
the delivery of material across such sidewalk from the curb line to the
building site, but such driveway shall be under the supervision of the Building
Director.
   (G)   Lights on excavations and obstructions.
      (1)   Sufficient lighting shall be displayed and maintained during the
whole of every night at each excavation, pile of material, fence or any other
obstruction on any public highway to so cast their rays that each excavation,
pile of material, fence or other obstruction shall be in full view of the
public.
      (2)   No person shall without cause remove, extinguish or disturb a light
so placed.
(1997 Code, § 23.19) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
Penalty, see § 150.999
§ 150.020 BARRICADES OR FENCES FOR EXCAVATIONS.
   (A)   Any site excavations greater than 2 feet in depth for structures to be
built shall at all times be guarded by a substantial railing or barricade not
less than 4 feet high at lot line.
   (B)   All unattended street excavations and openings greater than 2 feet in
depth shall be provided with metal plates or barricades with approved signage
to mark the presence of the excavation.
(1997 Code, § 23.20) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 150.021 MATERIALS PLACEMENT.
   Materials, fences or sheds shall not be placed within 6 feet of the rail of
any railway, render inaccessible any valve, chamber, manhole, or catch basin.
All gutters shall be kept free and clear at all times.
(1997 Code, § 23.21) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 150.022 RESTORATION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   Whenever any street, alley or sidewalk is damaged by the erection or
alteration of any building abutting thereon by reason of the construction
thereof, the same shall be restored by, or at the expense of, the owner of the
building involved or their contractor to a condition as good and serviceable as
prior to the beginning of the work.
(1997 Code, § 23.22) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 150.023 DWELLING UNIT SEPARATIONS.
   Except in residential buildings protected throughout by an automatic
supervised sprinkler system designed in accordance with NFPA 13, where 3 or
more dwelling units are located in a building, each dwelling unit shall be
separated from adjacent dwelling units and other occupancies by masonry or
concrete fire separation assemblies constructed in accordance with Section 708
of the 2018 International Building Code as published by the International Code
Council and Section R-317 of the 2018 International Residential Code as
published by the International Code Council. The fire separation assemblies
shall develop a minimum 2-hour fire resistance rating. Where the fire
separation assemblies are offset, the portion of the structure supporting the
fire separation assembly shall also be required to develop a 2- hour fire
resistance rating.
(1997 Code, § 23.23) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. C0-05-13,
passed 4-18-2005; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 150.024 BARBED/RAZOR WIRE FENCES.
   (A)   General. No owner, lessee or agent of any real estate in the Village
shall erect, maintain or permit to be erected or maintained on or about the
exterior building line of such real estate or upon any portion of the sidewalk
adjacent to such real estate any railing, fence, guard or protection of any
kind ofbarbed and razor wire or spiked or nail or other dangerous instrument
unless granted a permit to do so in accordance with divisions (B) through (E)
of this section. The Code Official may immediately remove or cause to be
removed at the owner’s expense any wire, barbs, razors, or sharp object which
is not permitted under this section.
   (B)   Authority. The owner of any property desiring to erect or maintain a
fence upon such property which would otherwise be prohibited by division (A) of
this section shall file an application for authority to do so with the Building
Director, which application shall be accompanied by an accurate plat or sketch
of the premises and a list of the names and addresses of the persons owning or
occupying the properties adjacent and contiguous to or across from the subject
property. The plat or sketch must indicate the details and location of the
proposed fence construction. In their discretion, the Building Director may
require the applicant to submit a recent date survey of the property prepared
by an Illinois registered land surveyor. A notice of the application shall be
sent by U.S. mail to persons occupying or owning properties adjoining,
contiguous to or across from subject property advising them that they have 7
days within which to file written objections to the approval of the requested
permit. Such notice shall also be hand delivered to residences in the immediate
area.
   (C)   Standards. In the case of properties located in zoning use districts
“B-1,” “B-2,” “B-3,” “B-4,” “M-1" and “M-2,” the Building Director is
authorized to issue or deny the requested permit upon their determination that
the fence if erected will comply with the following standards:
      (1)   A particular hardship will result to the owner as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience if the barbed wire fence is not permitted;
      (2)   The fence will not be detrimental or injurious to other properties
or improvements in the neighborhood or to the use and enjoyment thereof;
      (3)   The proposed fence will not diminish or impair property values;
      (4)   The fence will be well constructed so as not to be subject to early
deterioration;
      (5)   The fence will not constitute a nuisance.
   (D)   Hearing. In the case of properties located in zoning use districts “R-
1" through and including “R-6,” the Building Director is authorized to issue or
deny the requested permit upon their determination that the fence if erected
will comply with the above standards, but only after holding a hearing on the
issue. Ten days notice of said hearing shall be sent by the applicant at the
applicant’s expense by U.S. mail to persons owning or occupying properties
adjoining, contiguous to, or across from subject property advising them of the
application and of their right to testify at said hearing. Such notice shall
also be hand delivered by the applicant to residences in the immediate area.
   (E)   Review by Board. Upon issuance or denial of such permit, the Building
Director shall file a report of their determination with the Board of Trustees.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Building Director shall have the
right to appear before the Board of Trustees within 30 days after said decision
to seek review, reversal, or amendment of the Building Director’s decision.
   (F)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to fences erected between any
land or premises and the right-of-way of any railway company in the Village.
   (G)   Construction supports. Every fence shall be so constructed that its
supporting posts or structure is located on the interior side thereof.
   (H)   Permit. Before any fence is erected a permit therefore shall be first
obtained from the Building Director. The permit fee shall be as set forth in §
150.004.
(1997 Code, § 23.24) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45,
passed 11-7-2023)
§ 150.025 FENCES.
   Fence requirements are governed by the Village’s Zoning Code. Before any
fence is erected a permit therefor shall be first obtained from the Building
Director. The permit fee shall be as set forth in §
150.004.
(1997 Code, § 23.25) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15- 2010; Am. Ord. CO-2021-
21, passed 8-17-2021)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 150.026 AIR CONDITIONING.
   (A)   Permits. No person shall install any air conditioning system within
the Village without having procured a permit therefor from the Building
Director. This provision shall not apply to window type or individual apartment
type air conditioning units. AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEM is defined as any system
using refrigeration to maintain air temperature of 60 degrees Fahrenheit or
over in an air conditioned space. The permit fee shall be as set forth in §
150.004.
   (B)   Residential Districts.
      (1)   In residential districts, the applicant shall be required to
furnish plans and specifications indicating the location of any air
conditioning system or unit.
      (2)   Air conditioning units shall be permitted only in rear yards, but
not closer to the lot lines than the side yard regulation permitted in the
zoned district, except that if a rear yard abuts a public alley, a unit may be
installed within the 10 feet of the rear lot line provided that the exhaust
faces in the direction of the main building. It is further provided that such
units shall be installed at ground level, except that they may be permitted in
the basement of the structure or at floor level.
      (3)   All exhaust from electrically operated units must face toward the
rear lot line. Gas operated units must be exhausted upwards and away from
buildings.
      (4)   All units shall be maintained in proper functional order and shall
be set on rubber shock mounts. Air conditioning units may be installed in an
attached or detached garage upon the conditions set forth in this section.
   (C)   Operation. All air conditioning installations shall be operated in
accordance with the laws of the state and this Code.
(1997 Code, § 23.26) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.027 BOARDING WINDOWS AND DOORS.
   (A)   No person or entity, owning, renting or in possession of or control of
any building in the Village shall permit the windows or doors in the building
to be covered with boards, planks of wood, wire mesh or commercial-quality, 14-
gauge, rust-proof steel security panels and doors (e.g., VPS Security Closures)
(hereinafter “steel security panels”), except as hereinafter specifically
provided. The use of plywood is prohibited, except as allowed in §
150.032(D)(2) below.
   (B)   No person or entity owning, renting or in possession of or control of
any building in the Village shall be permitted to cover exterior windows or
doors with iron grates or bars, except as hereinafter specifically provided.
   (C)   Use of boards, planks of wood, wire mesh or steel security panels to
cover broken windows and unsecured doors is required and shall be permitted in
occupied buildings when such windows and doors have been broken or damaged but
such boarding up is only permitted for a reasonable time not to exceed a period
of 60 days to allow for repairs. In vacant buildings, use of boards, planks of
wood, wire mesh or steel security panels to cover broken windows and unsecured
doors is required and shall be permitted for a period not to exceed 6 months to
allow for repair, remodeling or new occupancy, unless an extension of time is
granted, for good cause shown, by the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation. Boards, planks of wood, wire mesh or steel security panels covering
windows and unsecured doors, whether used on occupied or vacant buildings,
shall be the same as or a similar color to the exterior wall of the building
they are attached to, shall have an exterior finish that allows for easy
graffiti removal and shall be secured from the interior of the building to
prevent unauthorized removal, as approved by the Code Enforcement Officer. In
occupied or vacant buildings, wire mesh is the preferred option for use on
broken or damaged windows and doors where window and door frames are already in
place. The time periods listed above in this section shall commence on the date
listed in a Village-issued notice of repair or citation that has been sent via
certified mail, messenger delivery service or personally delivered to the
property owner or property manager.
   (D)   Iron gratings and bars shall be permitted in the rear portion of
commercial buildings on the exterior of recessed front doors and on the
interior of commercial buildings, provided such iron gratings over doors and
windows are designed to be opened by quick release mechanisms and in no way
constitute a hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of
Maywood. Existing metal grates on the extensor of doors or windows shall be
removed.
   (E)   Violations of this section are declared to be a public nuisance and
may be abated or enjoined by action of the Village.
   (F)   If, after 10 days subsequent to the giving of the notice as provided
in §
150.029 the owner or owners fail to enclose the unsafe or uncompleted building,
the Village may board up such building at the owner’s expense.
(1997 Code, § 23.28) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-18,
passed 3-17- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2012-08,
passed 2-21-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 150.028 STREET DUMPSTERS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall maintain or use a street dumpster within the
Village without having procured a permit therefor from the Building Director.
      (2)   STREET DUMPSTER is hereby defined as any garbage or other waste
receptacle for temporary use on the street or public way in conjunction with
building renovation or building clean-up.
      (3)   The permit fee shall be as set forth in §
150.004.
   (B)   Prohibition. All street dumpsters are prohibited on recognized state,
county and local main thoroughfares. Local main thoroughfares shall include the
following:
      (1)   Washington;
      (2)   Chicago Avenue;
      (3)   5th Avenue;
      (4)   9th Avenue;
      (5)   17th Avenue south of Madison Street; and
      (6)   19th Avenue north of Madison Street.
   (C)   Application for permits. Applications for permits for street dumpsters
shall be made to the Building Director and shall contain the name, address and
telephone number of the applicant, the name, address and telephone number of
the licensed waste hauler, and the location of the premises where the street
dumpster is or is to be located.
   (D)   Requirements. No final permit shall be issued for the maintenance or
use of a street dumpster unless:
      (1)   The Building Director is satisfied that the street dumpster has
sufficient reflective taping and barricades (in front and rear) to warn
residents of the street obstruction;
      (2)   The street dumpster must clearly display the name, address and
telephone number of the owner; and
      (3)   The waste hauler must be licensed by the Village in accordance with
Chapter 110 of the Village Code.
   (E)   Issuance of final permit. The Building Director shall cause an
inspection to be made and if the maintenance of the street dumpster complies
with the requirements of division (D) of this section, the Building Director
shall issue a final permit for the maintenance and use of the street dumpster.
However, before any permit shall be issued for the maintenance or use of a
street dumpster, the applicant or street dumpster owner shall first file with
the Village Clerk a bond in favor of the Village in the sum of $2,000 with
sureties to be approved by the Board of Trustees.
   (F)   Revocation of permits. Any permit issued under this section may be
revoked summarily upon conviction for violation of the provisions of this
section or upon failure of the holder of such permit to discontinue maintaining
or using the street dumpster upon orders of the Building Director to do so.
   (G)   Time limitation. No person or entity shall maintain a street dumpster
within the Village beyond 7 days without first procuring a renewed permit from
the Building Director.
   (H)   Operation. All street dumpsters shall be maintained and used in
accordance with the laws of the state and this Code.
   (I)   Servicing dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be serviced before the dumpster
overflows. The waste hauler shall remove all debris and refuse from around the
street dumpster upon removal of the dumpster from the street.
(1997 Code, § 23.50) (Ord. CO-08-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.029 UNSAFE STRUCTURES.
   Dangerous and unsafe buildings or uncompleted and abandoned buildings within
the Village are declared a public nuisance. The corporate authorities of the
Village may demolish, repair, or enclose or cause the demolition, repair, or
enclosure of dangerous and unsafe buildings or uncompleted and abandoned
buildings within the Village and may remove or cause the removal of garbage,
debris, and other hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or materials from
those buildings, in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 11,
Division 31 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-31 et seq.), as
amended. If the nuisance is of such an emergency nature or threat to the
welfare, safety and comfort of the community that it must be abated
immediately, the Village Manager is hereby authorized, in conformance with §
92.22(D), to take whatever steps are necessary to effect the abatement of same
regardless of the requirements herein.
(Ord. CO-02-2, passed 1-22-2002; Ord. C0-04- 05, passed 3-1-2004; Am. Ord. CO-
2016-15, passed 7-26-2016)
§ 150.030 RESERVED.
§ 150.031 REGISTRATION OF FORECLOSING MORTGAGED PROPERTY AND VACANT PROPERTY.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of the Board of
Trustees to establish a process to address the deterioration, crime, and
decline in value of Village neighborhoods caused by property with foreclosing
or foreclosed mortgages located within the Village, and to identify, regulate,
limit and reduce the number of these properties located within the Village. It
has been determined that owner-occupied structures are generally better
maintained when compared to vacant structures, even with a diligent off-site
property owner. Vacant structures or structures owned by individuals who are
economically strained and unable to meet their mortgage obligations are often
not properly or diligently maintained, which contributes to blight, declined
property values, and have a negative impact on social perception of the
residential areas where they are located. It is the Board of Trustees' further
intent to establish a registration program as a mechanism to help protect
neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance
of properties that are in foreclosure or foreclosed, and to provide a mechanism
to avert foreclosure actions through timely intervention, education or
counseling of property owners.
   (B)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
      DEFAULT. Shall mean that the mortgagor has not complied with the terms of
the mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of the
debt, referred to in the mortgage.
      ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any Law Enforcement Officer, Building Director or
other Building Official, Zoning Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire
Inspector, Building Inspector, or other person authorized by the Village to
enforce the applicable code(s).
      EVIDENCE OF VACANCY. Any condition that, on its own, or combined with
other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the
property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due utility notices and/or disconnected
utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris; abandoned vehicles, auto
parts and/or materials; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items
consistent with habitation or occupancy; the presence of an unsanitary,
stagnant swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers, circulars, fivers and/
or mail; statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government
agents; and/or the presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings in
violation of applicable code.
      FORECLOSURE or FORECLOSURE ACTION. The legal process by which a
mortgagee, or other lien holder, terminates or attempts to terminate a property
owner's equitable right of redemption to obtain legal and equitable title to
the real property pledged as security for a debt or the real property subject
to the lien. The legal process is not concluded until the property obtained by
the mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by certificate of title, or any
other means, is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length
transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
      MORTGAGEE. The creditor, including but not limited to: trustees; mortgage
servicing companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement: any agent, servant or
employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any assignee of the
creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement; or
any other person or entity with the legal right to foreclose on the real
property, excluding governmental entities as the assignee or owner.
      OWNER. Every person, entity or mortgagee, who, alone or severally with
others, has legal or equitable title to any real property as defined by this
chapter; has legal care, charge or control of any such property: is in
possession or control of any such property; and/or is vested with possession or
control of any such property. The property manager shall not be considered the
owner.
      PROPERTY MANAGER. Any party designated by the owner as responsible for
inspecting, maintaining and securing the property as required in this chapter.
      REAL PROPERTY. Any residential or commercial land and/or buildings,
leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or portion thereof
identified by a property parcel identification number, located in the Village
limits.
      REGISTRABLE PROPERTY. Shall mean:
         (a)   Any real property located in the Village, whether vacant or
occupied, that is encumbered by a mortgage subject to an ongoing foreclosure
action by the mortgagee or trustee, has been the subject of a foreclosure
action by a mortgagee or trustee and a judgment has been entered, or has been
the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the
beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. The designation of a
"foreclosure" property as "registrable" shall remain in place until such time
as the property is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an arm's length
transaction or the foreclosure action has been dismissed; or
         (b)   Any property that is vacant for more than 30 days or any
cancellation of utility or service, whichever occurs first.
      REGISTRY. A web-based electronic database of searchable real property
records, used by the Village to allow mortgagees and owners the opportunity to
register properties and pay applicable fees as required in this chapter.
      SEMI-ANNUAL REGISTRATION. Six months from the date of the first action
that requires registration, as determined by the Village, or its designee, and
every subsequent 6 months. The date of the initial registration may be
different than the date of the first action that required registration.
      UTILITIES AND SERVICES. Any utility and/or service that is essential for
a building to be habitable and/or perform a service necessary to comply with
all Village codes. This includes, but is not limited to, electrical, gas,
water, sewer, lawn maintenance, pool maintenance and snow removal.
      VACANT. Any parcel of land in the Village that contains any building or
structure that is not lawfully occupied.
   (C)   Applicability and jurisdiction. This chapter applies to foreclosing,
foreclosed and vacant property within the Village.
   (D)   Establishment of a registry. Pursuant to the provisions of this
section, the Village, or its designee, shall establish a registry cataloging
each registrable property within the Village, containing the information
required by this section.
   (E)   Inspection and registration of real property under foreclosure.
      (1)   Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within
the Village shall perform an inspection of the property upon default by the
mortgagor as evidenced by the filing of a foreclosure action.
      (2)   Property inspected pursuant to division (E)(1) above that remains
in foreclosure shall be inspected every 30 days by the mortgagee or mortgagee's
designee. If an inspection shows a change in the property's occupancy status,
the mortgagee shall, within 10 days of that inspection, update the occupancy
status of the property registration.
      (3)   Within 10 days of the date any mortgagee files a foreclosure
action, the mortgagee shall register the real property with the Village
registry, and, at the time of registration, indicate whether the property is
vacant, and if so shall designate in writing a property manager to inspect,
maintain and secure the real property subject to the mortgage under a
foreclosure action when legally possible. A separate registration is required
for each property under a foreclosure action, regardless of whether it is
occupied or vacant.
      (4)   Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a
minimum the name of the mortgagee, the mailing address of the mortgagee, email
address, telephone number and name of the property manager, and said person's
address, email address and telephone number.
      (5)   At the time of initial registration, each registrant shall pay a
non-refundable semi-annual registration fee of $325 for each property.
Subsequent non-refundable semi-annual renewal registrations of properties and
fees in the amount of $325 are due within 10 days of the expiration of the
previous registration. Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: (1)
registration and registration enforcement; (2) code enforcement and mitigation
related to defaulted properties; (3) post-closing counseling and foreclosure
intervention limited to owner-occupied persons in default, which may not
include cash and mortgage modification assistance; and (4) for any related
purposes as may be adopted in the policy set forth in this section. Said fees
shall be deposited to a special account in the Village's Finance Department
dedicated to the cost of implementation and enforcement of this section, and
fulfilling the purpose and intent of this section. None of the funds provided
for in this section shall be utilized for the legal defense of foreclosure
actions.
      (6)   Each individual property on the registry that has been registered
for 6 months or more prior to the effective date shall have 30 days to renew
the registration and pay the non-refundable $325 semi-annual registration fee.
Properties registered less than 6 months prior to the effective date shall
renew the registration every 6 months from the expiration of the original
registration renewal date and shall pay the non-refundable $325 semi-annual
registration fee.
      (7)   If the mortgage and/or servicing on a registrable property is sold
or transferred, the new mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this section.
Within 10 days of the transfer, the new mortgagee shall register the property
or update the existing registration. The previous mortgagee(s) will not be
released from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines and
penalties accrued during that mortgagee's involvement with the registrable
property.
      (8)   If the mortgagee sells or transfers the registrable property in a
non-arm's length transaction to a related entity or person, the transferee is
subject to all the terms of this section. Within 10 days of the transfer, the
transferee shall register the property or update the existing registration. Any
and all previous unpaid fees, fines and penalties, regardless of who the
mortgagee was at the time registration was required, including, but not limited
to, unregistered periods during the foreclosure process, are the responsibility
of the transferee and are due and payable with the updated registration. The
previous mortgagee will not be released from the responsibility of paying all
previous unpaid fees, fines and penalties accrued during that mortgagee's
involvement with the foreclosed property.
      (9)   If the foreclosing or foreclosed property is not registered, or the
registration fee is not paid within 30 days of when the registration or renewal
is required pursuant to this section, a late fee equivalent to 10% of the semi-
annual registration fee shall be charged for every 30-day period, or portion
thereof, the property is not registered and shall be due and payable with the
registration.
      (10)   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the
subject of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as
well as any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of
foreclosure or by any other legal means.
      (11)   Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the
semi-annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security and
maintenance standards of this section, as long as the property remains
registrable property.
      (12)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to
properly register or to modify the registration to reflect a change of
circumstances as required by this section is a violation of this section and
shall be subject to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to
the Village.
      (13)   If any property is in violation of this section, the Village may
take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and/or place a lien on the
property for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any additional cost
incurred to the property into compliance.
      (14)   Registration of foreclosure property does not alleviate the
mortgagee and/or owner from obtaining all required licenses, permits and
inspections required by applicable code or state statutes. Acquisition of
required licenses, permits and inspections or registration of rental property
does not alleviate the requirement for the property to be registered under this
section. Mortgagee and/or owner is expected to update the status of the
property in the event of a mortgagee managed rental.
   (F)   Inspection and registration of real property that is not subject to
mortgage in foreclosure.
      (1)   Any owner of vacant property located within the Village shall,
within 10 days after the property becomes vacant, register the real property
with the Village registry.
      (2)   Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a
minimum the name of the owner, the mailing address of the owner, email address
and telephone number of the owner, and, if applicable, the name and telephone
number of the property manager and said person's address, email address and
telephone number.
      (3)   At the time of initial registration, each registrant shall pay a
non-refundable semi-annual registration fee of $325 for each vacant property.
Subsequent non-refundable semi-annual renewal registrations of vacant
properties and fees in the amount of $325 are due within 10 days of the
expiration of the previous registration. Said fees shall be used to offset the
costs of: (1) registration and registration enforcement; (2) code enforcement
and mitigation related to vacant properties; and (3) for any related purposes
as may be adopted in the policy set forth in this section. Said fees shall be
deposited to a special account in the Village's Department dedicated to the
cost of implementation and enforcement of this section, and fulfilling the
purpose and intent of this section.
      (4)   Each individual property on the registry that has been registered
for 6 months or more prior to the effective date shall have 30 days to renew
the registration and pay the non-refundable $325 semi-annual registration fee.
Properties registered less than 6 months prior to the effective date shall
renew the registration every 6 months from the expiration of the original
registration renewal date and shall pay the $32.
      (5)   If the property is sold or transferred, the new owner is subject to
all the terms of this section. Within 10 days of the transfer, the new owner
shall register the vacant property. The previous owner(s) will not be released
from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines and penalties
accrued during that owner's involvement with the vacant property.
      (6)   If the vacant property is not registered, or either the
registration fee or the semi-annual registration fee is not paid within 30 days
of when the registration or semi-annual registration is required pursuant to
this section, a late fee, equivalent to 10% of the semi-annual registration
fee, shall be charged for every 30 day period, or portion thereof, the property
is not registered and shall be due and payable with the registration. This
section shall apply to the initial registration and registrations required by
subsequent owners of the vacant property.
      (7)   Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the
semi-annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security and
maintenance standards of this section as long as the property is vacant.
      (8)   Failure of the owner to properly register or to modify the
registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this section
is a violation of this section and shall be subject to enforcement by any of
the enforcement means available to the Village.
      (9)   If any property is in violation of this section, the Village may
take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any additional cost
incurred to the property to bring it into compliance.
      (10)   Properties registered as a result of this section are not required
to be registered again pursuant to the foreclosure mortgage property section.
   (G)   Maintenance requirements.
      (1)   Properties subject to this section shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by
federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material,
or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned.
      (2)   Registrable property shall be maintained free of graffiti or
similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that
matches the color of the exterior structure.
      (3)   Front, side and rear yards, including landscaping, of registrable
property shall be maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the
time registration is required.
      (4)   Registrable yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative
rock or bark or artificial turf/sod. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or
landscape shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar
material.
      (5)   Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering,
irrigation, cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape, and
removal of all trimmings.
      (6)   Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and
clear of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth
in the applicable code(s).
      (7)   Failure of the mortgagee, owner and transferees to properly
maintain the property as required by this section may result in a violation of
the applicable code(s) and issuance of a citation or notice of violation in
accordance with the applicable code of the Village. Pursuant to a finding and
determination by the Village's administrative hearing officer or a court of
competent jurisdiction, the Village may take the necessary action to ensure
compliance with this section.
      (8)   In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained
in accordance with the applicable code(s) of the Village.
   (H)   Security requirements.
      (1)   Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a
secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
      (2)   A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure
and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure. Broken
windows, doors, gates, and other openings of such size that may allow a child
to access the interior of the property or structure must be repaired. Broken
windows shall be secured by re-glazing of the window.
      (3)   If a property is registrable, and the property has become vacant or
blighted, a property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee and/or owner
to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with the
applicable code(s), and the property manager must perform regular inspections
to verify compliance with the requirements of this section, and any other
applicable laws.
      (4)   In addition to the above, the property is required to be secured in
accordance with the applicable code(s) of the Village.
      (5)   When a property subject to this section becomes vacant, it shall be
posted with the name and 24 hour contact telephone number of the property
manager. The property manager shall be available to be contacted by the Village
Monday through Friday between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., legal holidays excepted.
The sign shall be placed in a window facing the street and shall be visible
from the street. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches and
shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of 45 feet. The posting
shall contain the following language with supporting information:
THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY                  
AND IS INSPECTED ON A REGULAR BASIS. THE PROPERTY MANAGER CAN BE CONTACTED
BY TELEPHONE AT                                   
OR BY EMAIL AT                                   .
      (6)   The posting required in division (H)(5) above shall be placed on
the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so that
it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/
structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible
from the street or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to
support the posting in a location that is at all times visible from the street
to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior
posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials.
      (7)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to
properly inspect and secure a property subject to this section, and post and
maintain the signage noted in this section, is a violation and shall be subject
to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the Village. The
Village may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section,
and recover costs and expenses in support thereof.
   (I)   Provisions supplemental. The provisions of this section are cumulative
with and in addition to other available remedies. Nothing contained in this
section shall prohibit the Village from collecting on fees, fines and penalties
in any lawful manner; or enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but
not limited to, injunction, abatement, or as otherwise provided by law or
ordinance.
   (J)   Public nuisance. All registrable property is at risk of being a public
nuisance and if vacant or blighted can constitute a public nuisance, the
abatement of which, pursuant to the police power, is hereby declared to be
necessary for the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Village.
   (K)   Additional authority.
      (1)   If the Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a property
subject to the provisions of this section is posing a serious threat to the
public health, safety and welfare, the Code Enforcement Officer may temporarily
secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee or owner, and may bring the
violations before the Village's administrative hearing officer or a court of
competent jurisdiction as soon as possible to address the conditions of the
property. Nothing herein shall limit the Village from abating any nuisance or
unsafe condition by any other legal means available to it.
      (2)   The Village's administrative hearing officer or a court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the authority to require the mortgagee or
owner affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/or
security measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors,
windows or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard or other
measures as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the
property.
      (3)   If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing
a serious threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then the Village's
administrative hearing officer or a court of competent jurisdiction may direct
the Village to abate the violations and charge the mortgagee or owner with the
cost of the abatement.
      (4)   If the mortgagee or owner does not reimburse the Village for the
cost of temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement directed by the
Village's administrative hearing officer or a court of competent jurisdiction,
within 30 days of the Village sending the mortgagee or owner the invoice, then
the Village may lien the property with such cost, along with an administrative
fee as determined in the Village's fee ordinance, to recover the administrative
personnel services. In addition to filing a lien, the Village may pursue
financial penalties against the mortgagee or owner.
      (5)   The Village may contract with an entity to implement this section,
and, if so, any reference to the Enforcement Officer herein shall include the
entity the Village contracts with for that purpose.
   (L)   Opposing, obstructing Enforcement Officer; penalty. Whoever opposes,
obstructs or resists any Enforcement Officer or any person authorized by the
enforcement office in the discharge of duties as provided in this section shall
be punishable as provided in the applicable code(s) or a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (M)   Immunity of Enforcement Officer. Any Enforcement Officer or any person
authorized by the Village to enforce the sections herein shall be immune from
prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith entry upon real
property while in the discharge of duties imposed by this section.
   (N)   Penalties. Unless otherwise provided for in this section, a violation
of this section is declared unlawful, and the violator shall be fined no less
than $100 and no more than $750 for each offense. Each act of violation and
each day upon which a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. CO-09-18, passed 3-17-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2012-08, passed, 2-21-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2012-30, passed 8-21-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-41, passed 11-5-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2021-33, passed 12-14-2021)
§ 150.032 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR VACANT BUILDINGS.
   For purposes of this section, the terms VACANT and OWNER shall be defined as
provided in §
150.031(E). In addition to any other applicable code requirements, each vacant
building must be kept in compliance with the following requirements as for as
long as the building remains vacant.
   (A)   Lot maintenance standards. The lot the building stands on, and the
surrounding public way, shall be maintained as follows:
      (1)   All grass and weeds on the premises, including abutting sidewalks,
gutters and alleys, shall be kept below 6 inches in height, and all dead or
broken trees, tree limbs or shrubbery shall be cut and removed from the
premises;
      (2)   The interior walkway leading to the main entry door, and any public
sidewalk adjoining the lot, shall be shoveled clear of snow;
      (3)   Junk, rubbish, waste and any material that creates a health, safety
or fire hazard, including but not limited to, any mail or flyers that have been
delivered to the building, shall not be permitted to accumulate on any portion
of the exterior lot of the building;
      (4)   No portion of the lot, nor any structure, vehicle, receptacle or
object thereon, shall be maintained or operated in any manner that causes or
produces any health or safety hazard or permits the premises to become a rodent
harborage or is conducive to rodent harborage;
      (5)   The lot shall be maintained so that water does not accumulate or
stand on the ground; and
      (6)   All fences and gates shall be maintained in sound condition and in
good repair.
      (7)   The owner shall not permit unauthorized persons and/or their
vehicles to park on the lot. Persons who authorized to park, and vehicles that
are authorized to be parked by such persons, are limited to those persons and
vehicles on the list submitted by the owner to the Village pursuant to §
150.031(A)(4).
   (B)   Exterior maintenance standards. The exterior of the building shall be
enclosed, secured and maintained as follows:
      (1)   Foundations, basements, cellars and crawlspaces shall be maintained
in sound and watertight condition, adequate to support the building, and
protected against the entry of rodents or other animals;
      (2)   Exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting
boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness
to the interior portions of the walls or the interior spaces and shall be
protected against the entry of rodents or other animals;
      (3)   Exterior windows, doors and openings shall be equipped with
hardware for locking and the locking mechanism shall be maintained in properly
functioning condition. Any window or opening which is broken, cracked or
missing glass or glazing shall be replaced and maintained in good repair or the
building opening shall otherwise be adequately secured pursuant to §
150.027;
      (4)   The roof shall be adequately supported, and shall be maintained in
weather tight condition; the gutters, downspouts, scuppers and appropriate
flashing shall be in good repair and adequate to remove the water from the
building or structure;
      (5)   Chimneys and flues shall be kept in sound, functional, weather
tight condition and in good repair;
      (6)   Every outside stair or step shall be maintained in sound condition
and in good repair; every porch, stoop, deck, veranda, balcony and walk shall
be maintained in sound condition for its purpose; and
      (7)   All exit areas shall have continuous exterior lighting from dusk to
dawn; normal intensity of lighting shall be not less than 5 foot-candles per
square foot on the floor surfaces, within an 8-foot radius around the exit.
This requirement may be met by the use of battery-powered or solar-powered
lighting if such lighting meets the performance standards set by this division.
   (C)   Interior maintenance standards. The interior of any building shall be
maintained as follows:
      (1)   It is prohibited to accumulate or permit the accumulation of junk,
trash and debris, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, junk vehicles or any other
materials in such a manner that may produce any health, fire or safety hazard,
or provide harborage for rodents or other animals on the premises; materials
stored by the owner or permitted to be stored by the owner shall be stacked
safely, and away from stairs or hallways, and any other places of ingress and
egress;
      (2)   Every foundation, roof, floor, wall, stair, ceiling and any other
structural support shall be safe and capable of supporting the loads that
normal use may cause to be placed thereon, and shall be kept in sound condition
and in good repair; floors and stairs shall be free of holes, grooves and
cracks that could be potentially hazardous;
      (3)   Any plumbing fixtures shall be maintained with no leaking pipes;
and all pipes for water shall be either completely drained or heated to resist
being frozen;
      (4)   Every exit door shall be secured with an internal deadbolt lock, or
with a locking mechanism deemed equivalent or better by the Building and Code
Enforcement Department, and every exit door shall be capable of being opened
from the inside easily and without the use of a key or special knowledge;
      (5)   Interior stairs shall have treads and risers that have uniform
dimensions, are sound, securely fastened and have no rotting, loose or
deteriorating supports;
      (6)   Every owner shall be responsible for the extermination of insects,
rodents and other vermin in or about the premises; and
      (7)   Every owner shall maintain in good repair all asbestos-containing
materials on the premises; all asbestos-containing materials shall remain free
from defects such as holes, cracks, tears and/or looseness that may allow the
release of asbestos fibers into the air.
   (D)   Building security standards. The following standards apply to the
securing of vacant buildings:
      (1)   All building openings shall be closed and secured, using secure
doors, glazed windows or boards, planks of wood, wire mesh, or steel security
panels, as provided for in §
150.027(C) or filled with like-kind material as the surrounding wall, as
applicable, to prevent entry by unauthorized persons. The use of boards or
planks of wood shall be installed in a weathertight manner and finished with
varnish, or paint of a similar color as the exterior wall, and cut to the
inside dimension of the exterior of the opening, and otherwise secured in the
manner prescribed by rules and regulations issued by the Building and Code
Enforcement Department;
      (2)   Openings less than 1 square foot in area may be boarded with
plywood, provided that the boarding is made weather tight and finished with
varnish, or paint of a similar color as the exterior wall, and cut to the
inside dimension of the exterior of the opening, and otherwise secured in the
manner prescribed by rules and regulations issued by the Building and Code
Enforcement Department;
      (3)   At least 1 building entrance shall be accessible from the exterior
and secured with a door that is locked to allow access only to authorized
persons; a minimum of 2 exit doors shall be available to exit from the interior
of the building, with at least 1 exit door available per 150 linear feet of
horizontal travel at ground-floor level;
      (4)   If a building has been vacant for 6 months or longer, or upon any
renewal of the registration statement required in §
150.031, the property owner must implement and provide proof satisfactory to
the Building and Code Enforcement Department that the building, in addition to
complying with the security standards set forth elsewhere in this section (D),
contains all of the security features set forth in either division (D)(4)(a) or
(b) below:
         (a)   Provided all access points to the building are secured and
closed, maintain a working burglar alarm system and have an active account with
a third party burglar alarm company; the burglar alarm system shall connect to
all areas of the building subject to unauthorized human entry, including, but
not limited to, all exterior doors, windows or other readily accessible
openings. The burglar alarm system shall, upon detecting unauthorized entry,
send an automatic signal to a burglar alarm company that has 24 hour live
operators who will monitor the system and telephone the property owner or
designated agent of the unauthorized entry, and who will also telephone the
Police Department to inform it of the unauthorized entry, if there is no
adequate response from the property owner or designated agent; or
         (b)   Seal off every opening larger than 1 square foot in area that is
located on the exterior face of the building with boards, planks of wood, wire
mesh or steel security panels and doors that are the same or a similar color to
the exterior walls:
            1.   Boards, planks of wood, wire mesh or security panels and doors
shall have an exterior finish that allows for easy graffiti removal; and
            2.   Security panels and doors shall be secured from the interior
of the building to prevent unauthorized removal.
   (E)   Rules and regulations. The Building and Code Enforcement Department
may issue rules and regulations for the administration of this section.
   (F)   Fines and penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
section or of the rules and regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not
less than $500 and not more than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines
assessed under this chapter shall be recoverable from the owner and shall be a
lien on the property. Any building in which violations under this chapter
remain uncorrected for a period of over 10 days may be declared a public
nuisance and shall be subject to abatement proceedings pursuant to §
92.22 and to liens in the amount of any abatement pursuant to §
92.23.
   (G)   Duty of owner where vacant building becomes violated, after the owner
has provided proof that such building is secure. It shall be a violation of
this section for a vacant building to become violated (“violated” means
security devices and measures have been breached, damaged or removed in a
manner that allows for unauthorized entry into the building or exposure of the
interior of a building to the elements), after the owner has provided proof to
the Building and Code Enforcement Department that such building has been
secured in accordance with the regulations of this section. With respect to a
vacant building represented by the owner as secure, if the Building and Code
Enforcement Department determines, based on an inspection report prepared by
the Building and Code Enforcement Department that such building is violated,
the Building and Code Enforcement Department shall send by certified mail a
written notice of violation to the person responsible for day-to-day
supervision and management of the building or to the authorized agent for
service of process as identified on the sign required by §
150.031(B), or if there is no such sign, then sent by certified mail to the
owner of record. The fine for violation of this division shall be not less than
$500 and not more than $1,000.
(Ord. CO-09-18, passed 3-17-2009; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2012-08, passed 2-21-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-41, passed 11-5-2012; Am. Ord.
CO- 2016-15, passed 7-26-2016; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021) Penalty,
see §
150.999
§ 150.033 MORTGAGEE TO INSPECT REAL ESTATE.
   (A)   For purposes of this section the terms DEFAULT, MORTGAGE, MORTGAGEE,
MORTGAGOR and VACANT shall be defined as provided in §
150.031(E).
   (B)   Beginning 45 days after a default, a mortgagee shall determine, on a
monthly basis, if the building on the real estate subject to its mortgage is
vacant. Such determination may be made by communication with the mortgagor, a
visual inspection of the real estate, or other means reasonably calculated to
determine if the building is vacant.
   (C)   This section shall not require a mortgagee to perform any action which
it is barred from doing by an automatic stay pursuant to a bankruptcy
proceeding.
   (D)   To the extent permitted by law, a mortgagee’s acts or omissions
required by this section shall not subject the mortgagee to civil or criminal
liability unless the act or omission constitutes gross negligence or willful,
wanton, or intentional misconduct.
   (E)   Any person who violates any provision of this section or of the rules
and regulations issued hereunder shall be fined not less than $500 and not more
than $1,000 for each offense. Every day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense. The affirmative defenses provided
in §§
150.031 and
150.032 shall also apply to this section.
(Ord. CO-2012-08, passed 2-21-2012)
§ 150.034 IMPROPERLY MAINTAINED BUILDINGS SUBJECT TO NUISANCE ABATEMENT
PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Nuisances declared. In addition to nuisances set forth elsewhere in
the Village Code, the following buildings and structures are hereby declared to
be public nuisances subject to abatement proceedings under this section:
      (1)   A building or structure found to be vacant and open after the
effective date of an order to secure and enclose issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction or the Department of Administrative Hearings within the previous
12 months, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction;
      (2)   A building or structure that contains any violation of a health,
fire, electrical, plumbing, building or zoning provision of this Code which is
dangerous and hazardous;
      (3)   A building or structure for which the costs of the repairs
necessary to bring the building or structure into compliance with applicable
laws would exceed the market value of the building or structure after the
repairs would have been made, or when the owner cannot show that it has readily
available and sufficient assets to make such repairs or where such repairs
otherwise are economically infeasible;
      (4)   A building or structure where a defendant has failed to comply with
any order issued by a court of competent jurisdiction or a hearing officer of
the Department of Administrative hearings, including, but not limited to,
compliance with any requirement in §
150.031, by the end of the 60-day period following the date the order was
issued or by such later date that is specified in the order, unless the order
has been stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction; or
   (B)   Abatement procedure.
      (1)   Whenever an inspection by the Community Development Department
reveals that a building or structure is a public nuisance as described in this
section, the Director of Sustainability and Innovation, with the concurrence of
the corporation counsel, may initiate an administrative adjudication abatement
proceeding in accordance with
Chapter 39 of the Village Code by serving a notice of violation or notice of
hearing on all owners of record, beneficial owners of any Illinois land trust
having title to the property, and all lien holders of record in the property,
in person or, if the entity being served is a corporation, partnership, limited
liability company or Illinois land trust, either in person or by certified
mail, return receipt requested as set forth in § 39.07. As used in this
section, LIEN HOLDERS OF RECORD includes persons owning certificates of
purchase under the Property Tax Code (35 ILCS 200/1-1 et seq.). The notice
shall:
         (a)   Be in writing;
         (b)   Include a description of the building or structure sufficient
for identification;
         (c)   State that the building or structure has been declared a public
nuisance and that an abatement proceeding has been initiated pursuant to this
section;
         (d)   State that a hearing will be held before the administrative
adjudication hearings officer of the village (Village Hearing Officer) and
further setting forth the date, time and location of the hearing; and
         (e)   State that all owners of record, beneficial owners of any
Illinois land trust having title to the property, and all lien holders of
record in the property shall be given the opportunity to appear and present
evidence at the hearing to contest the determination that the building or
structure is a public nuisance.
      (2)   If, after notice and hearing provided in this section, a Village
Hearing Officer finds that the Village has established by a preponderance of
the evidence that the building or structure identified in the notice is a
public nuisance as described in this section, the Hearing Officer shall enter
an order of abatement which requires the owner or owners of record, including
beneficial owners of any Illinois land trust, within the time frame specified
in the order, to take all reasonable measures necessary to abate the public
nuisance. The Hearing Officer’s order of abatement may include, but is not
limited to, correcting all code violations, altering, repairing or improving
the building or structure; rendering the building or structure fit for human
use or habitation; vacating or enclosing the building or structure; removing or
demolishing the building or structure; hiring a property manager or hiring a
receiver appointed by the Hearing Officer with powers specified in the order of
abatement; compliance with the requirements of §§
150.031 and
150.032; or, if requested by the Village Attorney and reasonable in light of
the magnitude of the harm caused or which can reasonably be expected to be
caused by the nuisance, the market value of the property in its current
condition and the extent to which the defendant has failed to take effective
measures to abate the nuisance, the assignment to the Village or a third party
designated by the Village or forfeiture to the Village of all of the
defendant’s rights, title and interest in the real estate.
      (3)   Any person who fails to comply with a Hearing Officer’s abatement
order issued under this section shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
§
39.99. In addition, upon the failure to comply with the Hearing Officer’s
order, unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, the Community
Development Department, with the concurrence of the Village Attorney, may seek
an order from a Hearing Officer authorizing the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation to repair, alter, improve, vacate, close, remove or demolish, the
building or structure as specified in the Hearing Officer’s order.
   (C)   Abatement action in court. The Village Attorney is authorized to bring
an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate a public nuisance
described in this section. If the court finds that the Village has established
by a preponderance of the evidence that the building or structure identified in
the notice is a public nuisance as described in this section, the court shall
enter an order of abatement which requires the owner or owners of record,
including beneficial owners of any Illinois land trust, within the time frame
specified in the order, to take all reasonable measures necessary to abate the
public nuisance. The court’s order of abatement may include, but is not limited
to: correcting all code violations; altering, repairing or improving the
building or structure, rendering the building or structure fit for human use or
habitation; vacating or enclosing the building or structure; removing or
demolishing the building or structure; the appointment of a receiver;
compliance with the requirements of §§
150.031 and
150.032; or, if requested by the Village Attorney and reasonable in light of
the magnitude of the harm caused or which can reasonably be expected to be
caused by the nuisance, the market value of the property in its current
condition, and the extent to which the defendant has failed to take effective
measures to abate the nuisance, the assignment to the Village or to a third
party designated by the Village or forfeiture to the Village of all of the
defendant’s rights, title and interest in the real estate.
   (D)   In lieu of the foregoing procedure, the Village may instead proceed to
abate any public nuisance existing at a property and to subsequently lien the
property pursuant to the procedures set forth in §§
92.22 and
92.23 of this Code, where applicable, or to pursue any other abatement
procedure or remedy set forth in this Code or available under Illinois law.
(Ord. CO-09-18, passed 3-17-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2012-08, passed 2-21-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2016-15, passed 7-26-2016; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 150.035 TERMINATION.
   (A)   For purposes of this section the terms MORTGAGE, MORTGAGEE, and VACANT
shall be defined as provided in §
150.031(E).
   (B)   Upon the occurrence of any of the following, the requirements of §§
150.031 and
150.033 shall terminate with respect to a mortgagee: the filing with the
Recorder of Deeds Office of a satisfaction or release of the mortgagee’s
mortgage.
   (C)   Upon the occurrence of any of the following, the requirements of §§
150.031 and
150.033 shall terminate with respect to a building:
      (1)   The filing with the Recorder of Deeds Office of a conveyance of
title to the underlying real estate, pursuant to foreclosure proceedings or
otherwise;
      (2)   The building ceases to be vacant; or
      (3)   The building is demolished with all permits required by the Village
of Maywood and all required permits required by Cook County.
   (D)   Within 10 days of termination pursuant to this section, a mortgagee
shall notify the Building and Code Enforcement Department on a form provided by
the Building and Code Enforcement Department for such purpose.
(Ord. CO-2012-08, passed 2-21-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
NUISANCES
§ 150.036 CHRONIC PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   Declaration of purpose.  It is the purpose of this section to
encourage property owners and persons in charge of real property to eliminate
illicit activities from their premises and to provide an effective method of
abating the nuisance created by illicit activities if the person maintaining
the nuisance fails in their responsibility to abate said nuisance.
   (B)   Chronic public nuisance.  Any real property located within the
Village, together with any buildings, structures, fixtures or improvements
thereon, used or permitted to be used for 2 or more of the following offenses
within a 12 month period is hereby declared to be a chronic public nuisance:
      (1)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 9 (Homicide) of the
Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/9-1, et seq.
      (2)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 10 (Kidnaping and
related offenses) of the Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/10-1, et seq.
      (3)   Any offenses defined and prohibited by Section 11-14
(Prostitution), Section 11-14.3 (Promoting Prostitution), Section 11-15
(Soliciting for a Prostitute), Section 11-16 (Pandering), Section 11-17
(Keeping a Place of Prostitution), Section 11-20 (Obscenity), Section 11-20.1
(Child Pornography), Section 11-20.1 B (Aggravated Child Pornography), or
Section 11-21 (Harmful Material to Minors) of the Criminal Code of 1961, 720
ILCS 5/11-14, 5/11-15, 5/11-16, 5/11-17, 5/11-20, 5/11-20.1, 5/11-20.1B, and 5/
11-21.
      (4)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 12 (Bodily Harm) of
the Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/12-0.1, et seq.
      (5)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 16 (Theft) of the
Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/16-1, et seq.
      (6)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 20-2 (Possession of
Explosives or Incendiary Devices) of the Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/20-
2, et seq.
      (7)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 24 (Deadly Weapons)
of the Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/24-1, et seq.
      (8)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 25 (Mob Action) of
the Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/25-1, et seq.
      (9)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 26 (Disorderly
Conduct) of the Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/26-1, et seq.
      (10)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 28 (Gambling) of the
Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/28-1, et seq.
      (11)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Article 31 (Interference
with Public Officers) of the Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/31-1, et seq.
      (12)   Any offense defined and prohibited by Section 6-16 (Prohibited
Sales and Possession) or Section 6-20 (Transfer, possession, and consumption of
alcoholic liquor) of the Liquor Control Act of 1934, 235 ILCS 5/6-16 and 5/6-
20.
      (13)   Any offense defined and prohibited by the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act, 720 ILCS 570/100, et seq.
      (14)   Any offense defined and prohibited by the Cannabis Control Act,
720 ILCS 550/1, et seq.
      (15)   Any offense defined and prohibited by the Methamphetamine Control
and Community Protection Act, 720 ILCS 646/1, et seq.
      (16)   Any inchoate offense defined and prohibited by Article 8 (Inchoate
Offenses) of the Criminal Code of 1961, 720 ILCS 5/8-1, et seq., which is
relative to the commission of any of the aforesaid principal offenses.
      (17)   Any violation of the Village noise ordinances, including §
92.30 (Noise) and/or §
130.21 (Noise).
      (18)   Any violation of the Village ordinances regarding leasing and
renting properties within the Village, including §
150.100 (Registration and Licensing of Landlords), §
150.101 (Posting of Information Relating to Residential Rental Property), §
150.102 (Authority of Village Manager to Issue Rules and Regulations), §
150.103 (Occupancy Affidavit and Zoning District Acknowledgment) and/or §
150.104 (Certificate of Occupancy).
      (19)   Any violation of Title XI (Business Regulations),
Chapter 117 (Alcoholic Beverages), §
117.47 (Sales to and by Persons Under Age 21, Drunkards, Spendthrifts) and §
117.48 (Purchase or Acceptance of Gift of Liquor by Person of Nonage) of the
Maywood Village Code.
      (20)   Any violation of Title XI (Business Regulations),
Chapter 100 (Business Licenses),
Chapter 111 (General Business Licenses) or
Chapter 112 (Rooming Houses) of the Maywood Village Code, including any uses or
activities that are not permitted under the Business Regulations.
      (21) Any violation of or offense defined and prohibited by Title XII
(General Offenses),
Chapter 130 (General Offenses) and/or
Chapter 131 (Prostitution and Prostitution-Free Zones) of the Maywood Village
Code.
      (22)   Any violation of the Village Zoning Code (
Chapter 154) involving uses or activities that are not permitted under the
applicable Zoning District regulations or that are not authorized by a Village-
issued zoning permit (i.e., a Village issued special use permit).
      (23)   Any violation of §
72.22 (Parking on Public Parkway), §
72.25 (Parking Prohibited), §
72.28 (Parking on Private Property) and/or §
72.29 (Parking in Alleys) of the Village Code.
      (24)   Any violation of §
72.07 (Property Owner Parking Responsibility).
   (C)   Other definitions.
      (1)   CHIEF OF POLICE.  The Chief of Police of the Village of Maywood or
his or her designee.
      (2)   OWNER. Any person having any legal or equitable interest whatsoever
in any real property within the corporate limits of the Village of Maywood,
together with the buildings, structures and improvements located thereon.
      (3)   PERMIT.  To suffer, allow, approve, consent to, acquiesce in or
agree to the doing of an act, including the failure to prevent through
inaction.
      (4)   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, limited
liability company, unincorporated association or any other group, enterprise or
entity capable of owning, using, controlling or occupying property.
      (5)   PERSON IN CHARGE. Any person in actual or constructive possession
of any real property within the Village or any of the buildings, structures and
improvements located thereon, including, but not limited to, a property manager
or owner-occupant of property under his or her domain, ownership or control, or
who, by any means whatsoever, has the ability, authority or right to regulate,
restrain, control, direct or affect the conduct of persons present on any such
property.
      (6)   PROPERTY.  Any real property, including property which is affixed,
incidental or pertinent to the land, including but not limited to any premises,
room, house, building, or structure or any separate part or portion thereof,
whether permitted or not.
   (D)   AUTHORITY TO ABATE. Any chronic public nuisance found to exist within
the Village shall be subject to abatement in accordance with the provisions of
this section.
   (E)   Pre-abatement procedure.
      (1)   Upon a determination by the Village that a property is a chronic
public nuisance, the Chief of Police or his/her designee shall notify the
owner, person in charge and occupants of the property that the property has
been determined to be a chronic public nuisance. The notice shall be served by
certified mail, return-receipt requested, or by personal service, and shall
contain the following information:
         (a)   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
         (b)   A statement that the Chief of Police has determined the property
to be a chronic public nuisance with a concise description of the public
nuisance activities leading to his/her findings.
         (c)   Demand that the owner and person in charge respond within 10
days of the date of the notice to the Chief of Police and propose a course of
action that the Chief of Police agrees will abate the public nuisance
activities giving rise to the Chronic Public Nuisance.
      (2)   A copy of the notice shall be posted at the property after 10 days
has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the owner and person
in charge of the property, if said persons have not contacted the Chief of
Police.
      (3)   The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may
be a chronic public nuisance shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the
proceedings under this section.
      (4)   If, after notification in accordance with division (E)(1) above,
but prior to commencement of legal proceedings by the Village pursuant to this
section, the owner and/or person in charge of the property stipulate with the
Chief of Police that the owner will pursue a course of action that the parties
agree will abate the public nuisance activities giving rise to the chronic
public nuisance of the property, the Chief of Police may agree to postpone
legal proceedings for a period of not less than 10 nor more than 40 days. If
the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of the public
nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within the
agreed time, the Chief of Police shall request authorization for the Village
Attorney to commence a legal proceeding to abate the chronic public nuisance.
      (5)   Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth herein, the
Chief of Police shall send copies of the notice, as well as any other
documentation which supports legal proceedings, to the Village Attorney.
      (6)   When an owner or person in charge makes a response to the Chief of
Police as required above, any conduct or statements made in connection with the
furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any public
nuisance activities have or are occurring. This section does not require the
exclusion of any evidence which is otherwise admissible or offered for any
other purpose.
   (F)   Judicial abatement procedure. Following notice, the Village Attorney
may initiate legal proceedings, either in the circuit court or through the
Village’s administrative adjudication program, to abate the chronic public
nuisance, and to seek the penalties and remedies provided in this section.
COURT, as used in this section, shall refer to either a circuit court judge or
administrative hearing officer, as applicable.
   (G)   Commencement of action, burden of proof.
      (1)   In an action seeking abatement of a chronic public nuisance
property, the Village shall have the initial burden of showing by a
preponderance of the evidence that the property constitutes a chronic public
nuisance.
      (2)   It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of a chronic
public nuisance property that the owner or person in charge of the property, at
the time in question, could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or
diligence, determine that the property had become a chronic public nuisance
property, or could not, in spite of the exercise of reasonable care and
diligence, control the conduct leading to the findings that the property is a
chronic public nuisance property.
   (H)   Abatement remedy; penalty.
      (1)   Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an
alleged chronic public nuisance exists, the Court may without notice or bond
enter a temporary restraining order or preliminary injunction to enjoin any
defendant from maintaining such nuisance or otherwise restraining any defendant
in his or her use of the property.
      (2)   In the event the Court determines a property to be a chronic public
nuisance property, the Court may, in addition to any other remedies provided by
this Section, enter an order requiring the taking of measures designed to
eliminate the chronic public nuisance, including but not limited to making
improvements to the property and installing security lighting, hiring licensed
and insured security personnel, the appointment of a receiver, the initiation
and execution of eviction proceedings against tenants engaged in illicit
activities or restraining the owner, person in charge of the property and/or
occupants from using the property for any purpose for a period of up to one
year. The order may further provide that the owner, person in charge of the
property and/or occupants shall have the right to use the property during a
period of time specified in the order if the owner, person in charge of the
property and/or occupants post a bond or other security payable to the Village
and approved by the Court in an amount between $1,000 and $50,000, which bond
or security shall be forfeited and paid over to the Village in the event that
any offense set forth in division (B) of this section is committed upon the
property within the period of time set forth in the Court order.
      (3)   In addition to any other remedy provided in this section, the Court
may impose upon the owner of the property, who (a) intentionally, knowingly,
recklessly, or negligently encouraged or permitted an illegal activity,
described in division (B) of this section, to occur or continue on the
property, or who (b) failed to implement the reasonable and warranted abatement
measures agreed upon, as provided in division (E)(4) of this section, a civil
penalty in the amount of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 per day for
each day on which the property constituted a chronic public nuisance, said
penalty to be payable to the Village of Maywood. In establishing the amount of
any civil penalty requested, the Court may consider any of the following
factors it finds appropriate and shall cite those found applicable:
         (a)   The actions or lack of action taken by the owner to mitigate or
correct the chronic public nuisance at the property.
         (b)   Whether the public nuisance activity at the property was
repeated or continuous.
         (c)   The magnitude or gravity of the public nuisance activities.
         (d)   The cooperation or lack thereof of the owner and/or person in
charge of the property with the Village.
         (e)   The costs of the Village in investigating and correcting or
attempting to correct the public nuisances.
      (4)   The Court may authorize the Village to physically secure the
property against use or occupancy in the event the owner fails to do so within
the time specified by the Court.
      (5)   All costs incurred by the Village in investigating and correcting
or attempting to correct public nuisances hereunder, including reasonable
attorneys’ fees and costs in bringing any enforcement action hereunder, shall
be assessed as a lien against the property, as may all costs reasonably
incurred by the Village to affect the closure of a property where ordered, and
any tenant relocation costs. Prior to placing said lien, the Village shall
submit a statement of such costs to the Court for its review. If no objection
to the statement is made within the period described by the Court, a lien in
said amount may be recorded against said property.
      (6)   Any person who is assessed the cost of closure and/or civil penalty
by the Court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the Village.
      (7)   A tenant is entitled to reasonable relocation costs payable by the
owner, as determined by the Court if, without actual notice, the tenant moved
into the property, after either:
         (a)   The owner or person in charge received notice as described
herein of the Police Chief’s determination as described above; or
         (b)   An unknown owner or other agent received notice of an action
brought pursuant to this section.
   (I)   Emergency closing procedures.
      (1)   In the event that the Chief of Police determines that the property
is an immediate threat to the public safety and welfare, the Village may apply
to the Court for such interim relief as may be determined appropriate by the
Chief of Police. In such an event, the notification provision in division (E)
(1) need not be satisfied; however, the Village shall make a diligent effort to
notify the owner, person in charge of the property and occupants prior to a
court hearing.
      (2)   In the event that the Court finds the property to constitute a
chronic public nuisance property, as defined herein, the Court may order the
remedies set out above. In addition, in the event that it also finds that the
owner had knowledge of activities or conditions of the property constituting or
violating this section and permitted the activities to occur, the Court may
assess a civil fine as provided above.
(Ord. CO-2011-23, passed 12-20-2011; Am. Ord. CO-2021-14, passed 7-13-2021)
Cross-reference:
   For provisions concerning health and sanitation nuisances, see
Ch. 92
Editor’s notes:
   720 ILCS 5/11-15, 11-16, and 11-17 were repealed by P.A. 96-1551, eff. 7-1-
2011
   729 ILCS 5/20.1B was repealed by P.A. 97-995, eff. 1-1-2013
§ 150.037 CRIME-FREE HOUSING.
   (A)   Commencing July 1, 2012, and thereafter, a license to operate as a
landlord within the Village pursuant to §
150.100 of this Code shall not issue to a landlord unless the landlord, or his/
her designated agent, has attended and successfully completed a crime-free
housing education course conducted by the Village of Maywood. The Village’s
crime-free housing education course shall be facilitated by the Police, Fire
and Building and Code Enforcement Departments, and will, among other things,
review the tenant screening process, property maintenance code, inspections
process, vacant property registry and requirements, chronic public nuisance
ordinance, fire safety, any other Village codes or regulations deemed
appropriate, and how to make the rental property environment safe and free of
crime.
   (B)   In the event that a landlord submits registration materials and has
met all other license requirements, but a crime-free housing education course
is not available, a conditional license may be issued, effective for no more
than 3 months from the date of issuance, subject to attendance and successful
completion by the landlord, or his/her designated agent, of the crime-free
housing education course within that time period. Upon completion of the course
within the 3 month period, a license to operate as a landlord in the Village
shall be issued for the balance of the year. In the event the course is not
attended within 3 months, the conditional license shall be void without any
need of further action by the Village.
   (C)   In the event that a designated agent of the landlord attended a crime-
free housing education course conducted by the Village of Maywood to comply
with this section, and that agent is no longer employed by the landlord or
designated by the landlord to be responsible for managing the rental units, the
landlord, or a newly designated agent, shall attend and successfully complete
the course in the Village within 3 months of the termination or change. Failure
to do so shall result in the suspension or revocation of the license to operate
as a landlord in the Village.
   (D)   A landlord or designated agent must attend the Village of Maywood
crime-free housing education course at least every 2 years in order to be
eligible for renewal of a license to operate as a landlord within the Village.
Failure to maintain license eligibility by attending the course again prior to
the 2-year anniversary date of the previous course completion shall result in
the non-renewal, suspension or revocation of the license to operate as a
landlord within the Village. Notice of such nonrenewal, suspension or
revocation shall be delivered or mailed to the landlord, or designated agent,
at the address designated on the most recent registration form/license
application or at any current address provided by the landlord or agent.
   (E)   (1)   At any time prior to the 2-year anniversary date of the previous
Village of Maywood crime-free housing education course completion, a landlord
or designated agent may be required to attend and successfully complete the
crime-free housing education course again, if deemed necessary by the Village
Manager. Such requirement may be imposed based on the recommendation of the
crime-free housing coordinator to the Village Manager, who shall consider the
following in making such determination:
         (a)   Whether the rental units subject to the license is in danger of
becoming or has been designated as a chronic public nuisance as defined in §
150.036 of this Code; or
         (b)   Whether criminal activity is occurring on the rental unit
premises and the landlord has failed to initiate eviction proceedings or take
other appropriate action: or
         (c)   The landlord or designated agent has violated any provision of
this chapter: or
         (d)   Other circumstances that, in the reasonable discretion of the
Village Manager, cumulatively indicate a need for retraining.
      (2)   Failure to attend the Village of Maywood crime-free housing
education course within 3 months of being notified by the Village of Maywood of
a determination of the need for retraining shall result in the non-renewal,
suspension or revocation of the license to operate as a landlord within the
Village. Notice of the non-renewal, suspension or revocation shall be delivered
or mailed to the landlord, or designated agent, at the address designated on
the most recent registration form/license application or at any current address
provided by the landlord or agent.
   (F)   A crime free housing coordinator, to be designated by the Village
Manager, shall maintain a current updated list of landlords and/or designated
agents who have attended the crime-free housing education course, along with
the dates of attendance and verification that the landlord or designated agent
has otherwise complied with this Code to be eligible for issuance or renewal of
a license to operate as a landlord in the Village. The list shall be provided
to the Village Clerk, Finance Director, Village Manager, Building Director, and
Police Chief as it is updated.
   (G)   Commencing July 1, 2012, and thereafter, every lease, including lease
extensions, shall contain a crime-free lease addendum or contain a provision in
the lease substantially similar to a crime-free lease addendum. The purpose of
the crime-free lease addendum or provision is to make criminal activity,
including but not limited to violent or drug-related criminal activity, engaged
in by, facilitated by or permitted by the tenant, member of the household,
guest or other party under the control of the tenant, a lease violation where
the activity takes place within the leased premises or anywhere on the
landlord’s property, including within related parking areas and common areas.
The landlord shall be provided with authority under the addendum or similar
lease provision to initiate eviction proceedings pursuant to state law in the
event of criminal activity in violation of the addendum or lease provision.
Proof of a criminal violation shall be by a preponderance of the evidence.
Samples of crime-free lease addendums shall be available from the Building and
Code Enforcement Department. Failure to include a crime-free lease addendum or
provision in a lease or lease extension subsequent to July 1, 2012 may result
in citations or, in the event of repeated non-compliance, the suspension or
revocation of the license to operate as a landlord in the Village. The crime-
free lease addendum or provision shall be in substantially the following form:
   Crime-Free Housing Lease Addendum or Provision
   Prohibition against criminal activity on premises.
      1.   Neither the tenant, any member of the tenant’s household, tenant’s
guest(s) nor any person under tenant’s control shall engage in or facilitate
quasi-criminal or criminal activity on the leased premises or on the landlord’s
property, which includes the leased premises,
at                                     .
      2.   Neither the tenant, any member of the tenant’s household, tenant’s
guest(s), nor any person under tenant’s control shall permit the leased
premises or landlord’s property to be used for, or to facilitate, quasi-
criminal or criminal activity, regardless of whether the individual engaging in
such activity is a member of the household, or a quest.
      3.   Neither the tenant, any member of the tenant’s household, tenant’s
guest(s), nor any person under tenant’s control shall engage in or facilitate
any breach of the lease agreement that jeopardizes the health, safety, and
welfare of the landlord, his or her agent or any other tenant, or involves
imminent or actual serious property damage.
      4.   The tenant is vicariously liable for the quasi-criminal or criminal
activity on the leased premises or landlord’s property of any member of the
tenant’s household, Tenant’s guest(s), and any person under tenant’s control,
whether or not the tenant had knowledge of the activity or whether or not the
household member or guest was under the Tenant’s control.
      5.   One or more violations of subsections 1, 2 or 3 of this lease
addendum/provision during the term of the lease shall constitute a substantial
violation and a material noncompliance with the lease. Any such violation is
grounds for termination of tenancy and eviction from the leased premises.
Unless otherwise required by law, proof of violation shall not require a
criminal conviction, but shall be by a preponderance of the evidence.
      6.   In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum/
provision and any other provisions of the lease, the provisions of this
addendum/provision shall govern.
      7.   For purposes of this lease addendum/provision, quasi-criminal or
criminal activity shall mean a violation of the Maywood Village Code or other
violation of local, state, or federal law.
(Ord. CO-2012-03, passed 1-17-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
RESIDENTIAL CODE
§ 150.039 AMENDMENTS AND CHANGES TO THE 2018 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE.
   The 2018 International Residential Code adopted by reference pursuant to §
150.001 is amended as it applies within the Village as follows:
   (A)   In Section R305.1, the Ceiling Height Excepts are amended to include
as follows:
   “4)   All Ceiling height minimums are reduced by 2" where the structure is
provided with the following:
      (c)   Smoke detectors with hard wired connectivity and building supplied
power with a battery backup: compliant with R314 (Smoke Alarms).
         b)   Two means of egress complying with Section R311 (Means of Egress)
including no less than one egress pathway leading to an exit door, and one
egressable window opening.”
   (B)   Section R313.1 is amended to include an additional exception, to read
as follows:
      “An exception exists for townhomes consisting of 5 or fewer attached
units intended to be operated as individual R-3 single family homes and where
the following provisions are also adhered to:
      1)   All dwelling units have a minimum of 2 means of egress conforming to
R311.
      2)   The second of which may include a sliding door with a net clear
opening width of not less than 30" wide when opened.
      3)   All stairs and supporting members are made of non-combustible
materials, or where fully encased in a minimum of 5/8" type X drywall.
      4)   All manufactured floor, ceiling, and wall truss assemblies are
protected by a minimum of 1/2" drywall or equivalent.
      5)   All conditioned levels and spaces including un-occupiable basements
and crawl spaces have smoke detectors hard wired connectivity and building
supplies power with a battery backup and compliant with R314.”
(Ord. CO-2023-45, passed 11-7-2023)
ELECTRICAL CODE
§ 150.040 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
   (A)   The National Electrical Code, 2017 Edition, is adopted by reference,
provided that in the event any of the provisions of the National Electrical
Code are in conflict, such other Village ordinance shall prevail.
   (B)   In addition to the copies of the National Electrical Code which have
been on file in the office of the Village Clerk, not less than 1 copy of said
code shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Director and the
Village Clerk.
   (C)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of the National Electrical Code
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500. Each
day any violation of any provision of said code is continued shall constitute a
separate offense.
(1997 Code, § 24.01) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. C0-03-29,
passed 12-29- 2003; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 150.041 REGISTRATION OF ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS.
   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the
business of electrical contractor, without being registered as an electrical
contractor, in the manner hereinafter set forth.
   (B)   Existing contractors. All electrical contractors who have not
registered as an electrical contractor as required by this section prior to
February 11, 1960 must file an application in proper form showing their
qualifications to engage in the business of electrical contractor.
   (C)   Application; issuance of certificate. Any person desiring to engage in
the business of electrical contractor shall apply for registration to the
Village Clerk. Upon the filing of such application in proper form, and the
payment of the registration fee, the Village Clerk shall register the applicant
as an electrical contractor and shall issue to the applicant a certificate of
registration which will authorize the applicant to engage in such business for
the year in which it is issued.
   (D)   Fee; expiration date. The fee for registration as an electrical
contractor shall be as set forth in §
110.13, which sum shall be paid by the applicant to the Village Clerk in
advance upon filing the application. The certificate of registration issued
shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it is issued.
   (E)   Surety bonds. Every person desiring to engage in the business of
making any electrical installation in the Village shall execute and file with
the Building Director a surety bond payable to the Village in the penal sum of
$5,000, conditioned that the applicant shall well and faithfully observe all of
the provisions of this Code relating to electrical installations.
(1997 Code, § 24.02) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.042 ELECTRICAL INSPECTION DIVISION.
   There is established a division within the Building and Code Enforcement
Department which shall be known as the Electrical Inspection Division. Such
Division shall consist of the Building Director and such other employees as may
from time to time be appointed by the President and Board of Trustees. The
Electrical Inspection Division shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the
provisions of this chapter, the rules and regulations thereof and the standards
and specifications for the installation, alteration and use of electrical
equipment.
(1997 Code, § 24.03) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.043 TURNING ON CURRENT.
   Whenever any electrical equipment has been installed or altered, no
electrical current shall be supplied to or used on such equipment previous to
the inspection of such equipment by the Electrical Inspection Division and the
issuance of a certificate of inspection covering such installation or
alteration. The Inspection Division may issue a temporary certificate for the
use of electrical current during the course of construction or alteration of
buildings, which temporary certificate shall expire when the construction or
alteration of such building is complete.
(1997 Code, § 24.04) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 150.044 DEFECTS IN APPARATUS.
   (A)   In case the Electrical Inspector finds a defect in any electrical
apparatus or equipment, subject to inspection in the Village, such inspector
shall report the same in writing to persons for whom the test is being made,
using blanks furnished by the Village for that purpose and giving a description
of the character of the defect. If the defect is of a dangerous character,
necessitating immediate repair, the Electrical Inspector shall forthwith
condemn the apparatus for equipment for further use or until the same is
removed, repaired or renewed.
   (B)   If the defect is of a character such that the apparatus of equipment
may be safely operated for a period of some days pending repairs, the
Electrical Inspector shall so report and name the number of days during which
the same may be operated. A duplicate of all such reports shall be promptly
filed in the office of the Building Director.
(1997 Code, § 24.05) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.045 PERMIT FOR ERECTION OF POLES AND UNDERGROUND WIRING.
   No poles for the carrying of electric or other wires or cable shall be
erected in any street or alley, and no underground wiring shall be installed
without a permit obtained from the Director of Public Works, and all such
permits issued shall provide that the Village may use the poles to be erected
for the purpose of attaching thereto such necessary crossarms, wires or other
electrical appliances as may be deemed necessary by the Village authorities for
fire and police signal service of the Village. Permit fees shall be as set
forth in § 150.004. Nothing broken by accident or storms or for shifting poles
from 1 position to another under orders issued by the Director of Public Works.
(1997 Code, § 24.06) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995)
§ 150.046 NOTICE TO INSPECT WORK BEFORE COVERING.
   Any person installing electric wires or equipment in any building in the
Village which is to be hidden from view shall notify the Building Director, in
writing, of such intended installation, at least 24 hours before the work is to
be covered, and no such work shall be covered until inspection thereof has been
made as herein required. In all cases where such notice has not been given or
such work has been covered without inspection thereof, as herein provided, the
Building Director is authorized to take down or remove such portions of the
building or structure as shall be necessary for the inspection of such electric
wires or equipment, as herein required, and the cost of such taking down and
replacing such work so removed by such official shall be borne by the person
who has failed to give notice of the installation thereof, or by the person who
has covered such work after such notice and before inspection thereof as herein
provided, as the case may be.
(1997 Code, § 24.07) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.047 DEAD WIRES.
   The Building Director shall have the right to cause all dead wires outside
and inside of buildings to be removed at the expense of the owner of such
wires, by giving the owner 10 days written notice so to do, and if the owner
fails or neglects to remove such wires within 10 days after receipt of such
notice, such person shall be subject to the penalty provided for violation of
this Code.
(1997 Code, § 24.08) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.048 DEFECTIVE WIRES.
   The Building Director shall have the right to condemn wires which are
defective and dangerous to life or property and shall notify the owner of such
wires, in writing, to remove or replace the same with new wires.
(1997 Code, § 24.09) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.049 ELECTRIC SIGNS.
   (A)   Definition; permit.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect and maintain over any
sidewalk or street, or place against and running parallel to any building or
structure in the Village, any electric sign without a permit from the Building
Director nor except as prescribed by this chapter. An electric sign is any sign
constructed as follows: signs, all or part of the letters of which are outlined
of incandescent lamps; transparent glass signs illuminated with electric lamps;
signs with flush, painted or raised letters and having a border of incandescent
lamps; signs having vacuum and inert gas tubes.
      (2)   The permit fee shall be as set forth in § 150.004. The fee for a
temporary electric sign, not to exceed 30 days, shall be one-quarter the annual
fee.
   (B)   Area; removal. No such projecting sign shall have an area exceeding 80
square feet unless by special authority of the Board of Trustees. The authority
granted for the erection of any such sign may be revoked at any time by order
of the Board of Trustees upon their finding such action is necessary for public
safety and welfare, and any compensation or permit fees paid to the Village for
such sign shall not be refunded in case of any such revocation. In case it is
necessary to move any sign on account of street widening, such sign shall be
removed upon written notice from the Director or Public Works by and at the
expense of the owner of the sign and if such notice is not complied with, the
sign shall be moved by the Village at the expense of the person to whom such
permit for a sign was granted.
   (C)   Plans. An application for a permit for an electric sign shall be
accompanied with a plan showing the location, size and construction of such
sign. No permit shall be issued for any sign until plan for same shall have
been approved by the Building Director.
   (D)   Location; inspection. The location of any such sign shall first be
approved by the Building Director, and the applicant shall thereupon pay the
required permit fee. The Building Director shall, upon being notified of the
installation of the sign, cause an inspection of same to be made, and if such
sign has been installed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, they
shall then issue a certificate of inspection without cost, for the operation
and maintenance of such sign. No alteration shall be made on any sign operated
or maintained under authority of this chapter unless all the provisions of this
chapter are fully complied with and a permit issued for such alterations.
(1997 Code, § 24.10) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.050 MODIFICATIONS OF NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The following rules and regulations for the installation, alteration, repair
and use of electrical equipment and apparatus in the Village are set forth as
modifications and additions to the provisions of the 2017 National Electrical
Code (NEC) adopted by this chapter and shall apply in lieu of any provisions to
the contrary contained in the 2017 National Electrical Code:
   (A)   Reserved;
   (B)   Circuit breakers: the minimum panel size shall be 20 position and
shall apply to both new construction and upgrades. When dwelling units are put
up for sale or rehabbed, electrical inspection shall be required, and there
shall be replacement of two-prong with three- prong grounded outlets in
accordance with NEC 206.4 (Ground-fault circuit interrupters (GFCI)) shall be
installed where required by the NEC 210.8;
   (C)   Service entrance: 1-1/4 IMC rigid or aluminum conduit is required;
   (D)   Service entrance wire size: #3 is required;
   (E)   In § 210.11, branch circuit requirements shall be amended to include
the following:
      “Major appliances such as refrigerators and microwave ovens shall require
a separate 20 amp branch circuit for each major application or motor.”
   (F)   Raceways: FMC is permitted for concealed remodeling work, EMT, IMCR,
or RMC shall be required in exposed work and new construction;
   (G)   Minimum number of circuits: 8 for single-family residences and other
dwelling units other than apartment buildings with more than 3 units;
   (H)   Reserved;
   (I)   Reserved;
   (J)   Branch circuit conductors supplying kitchen receptacles shall be not
less than No. 12 AWG copper;
   (K)   Electrically operated equipment, such as heating equipment, air
conditioning equipment and room coolers, shall be operated on separate branch
circuits;
   (L)   Reserved;
   (M)   Reserved;
   (N)   Conductors shall not be less than 12 AWG copper in any new
construction work;
   (O)   In revision, new work, or sale or renting of existing units, all
receptacles shall be a ground type installed in accordance with NED 406.4;
   (P)   All clothes closets shall have a mounted ceiling light, using a wall-
mounted switch or motion sensor; all closet ceiling lights currently using a
pull chain shall be replaced with a wall-mounted or motion sensor switch
ceiling light, upon the deterioration or replacement of the existing fixture;
new or replaced closet fixtures shall comply with NEC 410.16;
   (Q)   On commercial and residential electrical services work, the ground
wire shall be connected directly to the metered side of the water meter with a
jumper conductor connected to the street side of the meter, except by special
permission of the Electrical Engineer and the authority having jurisdiction;
   (R)   Garages and other accessory structures: wiring shall be installed
underground in accordance with NEC 300.5 using PVC, IMC, or RMC conduit. All
work shall be inspected before backfilling;
   (S)   No non-metallic cable or aluminum conductors shall be used in the
Village;
   (T)   Work started before permits are pulled shall be stopped and permit
fees shall be doubled as allowed by §§
150.001 et seq. (Emergency work exempted, permit and work order shall be
surrendered within 1 business day);
   (U)   Use of tandem breakers shall be prohibited except in temporary
trailers.
(1997 Code, § 24.11) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. C0-03-29,
passed 12-29- 2003; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45, passed 11-7-2023)
PLUMBING CODE
§ 150.065 ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
   (A)   The Village does adopt as the Plumbing Code of the Village the
language and terms of the Illinois Plumbing Code/2004, 77 Ill. Admin. Code 890,
published by the Illinois Department of Public Health, a copy of which is made
a part hereof by reference.
   (B)   One copy of the Illinois Plumbing Code/2004 shall be kept on file in
the office of the Building Director, the Village Clerk’s office and the Maywood
Public Library.
(1997 Code, § 25.01) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2013-21, passed 4-16-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21,
passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.066 BUILDING DIRECTOR’S DUTIES.
   The Building Director shall have general supervision over plumbing drain
laying and gas fitting and shall enforce the provisions of this Code pertaining
thereto.
(1997 Code, § 25.02) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.067 ENTRY FOR INSPECTION.
   (A)   When the Building Director or any of their authorized representatives
are unable to effect a voluntary entry onto any private property for the
purpose of a building inspection, they shall seek warrant to make such entry.
   (B)   No person shall hinder or obstruct or in any manner interfere with the
Building Director in the performance of their duties.
(1997 Code, § 25.03) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.068 PERMITS.
   (A)   No plumbing or sewer or drainage work except for minor repairs shall
be done without a permit from the Building Director. Where such application
relates to the installation of sewer and/or water lines, the property must be
in full compliance with the land and water pollution requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Water Pollution Control
and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, other applicable state,
federal, county or other law or regulatory requirements relating to sewer and/
or water lines and service, and any other applicable ordinance set forth in
this Code. No permits shall be issued unless a bond shall be on file with the
Village Clerk as required by §
51.69.
   (B)   Permit fees shall be as set forth in §
150.004.
(1997 Code, § 25.04) (Ord. CO-09-95, passed 10-12-1995; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-54,
passed 12-5-2023)
ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
§ 150.080 ADOPTION OF ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE.
   The most recent publication of the Illinois Energy Conservation Code as
published by the International Code Council and amended by the Illinois Capital
Development Board, Inc., is adopted. Two copies of the most recent adopted
Illinois Energy Conservation Code, shall be kept on file in the office of the
Building Director and Village Clerk for use, examination and inspection by the
public.
(1997 Code, § 25A.01) (Ord. CO-83-22, passed 10-13-1983; Am. Ord. CO-09-27,
passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45,
passed 11-7-2023)
§ 150.081 RESERVED.
HOUSING AND EXISTING STRUCTURES CODE
§ 150.095 ADOPTION INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 edition (“Property
Maintenance Code”), as published by the International Code Council, shall be
and hereby is adopted by reference as the Property Maintenance Code of the
Village of Maywood and, except as modified in this chapter, each and all of the
regulations, provisions and conditions and terms of the International Property
Maintenance Code, 2018 edition are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof by reference as if fully set forth in this Code. At least one copy of
the International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 edition shall be kept on file
in the office of the Building Director, the Village Clerk’s office, and the
Maywood Public Library for public inspection.
(1997 Code, § 16.01) (Ord. 85-17, passed 5-23-1985; Am. Ord. C0-05-12, passed
4-18-2005; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-
17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 150.096 TERMS OF INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   Whenever the following words, terms and phrases are used in the Property
Maintenance Code adopted by § 150.095, they have the meaning set forth below:
   CODE OFFICIAL. The Building Director and any inspectors, officers or
employees assigned to the Building and Code Enforcement Department to whom the
authority to enforce the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code has been
delegated.
(1997 Code, § 16.02) (Ord. 85-17, passed 5-23-1984; Am. Ord. C0-05-12, passed
4-18-2005; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-
17-2021)
§ 150.097 AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   The International Property Maintenance Code, adopted by reference pursuant
to §
150.095, is amended as it applies within the Village as follows:
   (A)   Section PM-101.1 is amended to read as follows:
      These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the
Village of Maywood; hereinafter referred to as the “Property Maintenance Code”
or “this Code.”
   (B)   Section PM-103.1 is amended to read as follows:
      The Building and Code Enforcement Department shall be charged with the
administration of this Code and the Building Director shall be known as the
Executive Official or Code Official.
   (C)   Section PM-103.2 is amended to read as follows:
      The Building Director shall be appointed by the Village Manager as
authorized by the Maywood Village Code and Personnel Code therein. The term
“appointing authority” shall mean the Village Manager.
   (D)   Section PM-103.5 is amended to read as follows:
      Fees for all services under this Code shall be as indicated in the
Maywood Village Code.
   (E)   Reserved.
   (F)   Section PM-106.3 is amended by deleting the word “misdemeanor” in the
first sentence, and replacing it with the phrase “local ordinance violation.”
   (G)   Section PM-111.1 is amended to read as follows:
      Any person directly affected by any decision of the Code Official or the
Building and Code Enforcement Department or a notice or order which has been
issued in connection with the enforcement of any provision of this Code, or of
any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Code Appeals Board, specified in PM-
111.2 of this Code, provided that such person shall file, in the office of the
Village Manager, a written petition requesting such hearing and containing a
statement of the reason(s) why the hearing is being requested within 20 days
after the day the decision was served. An application for appeal shall be based
on a claim that the true intent of this Code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this Code do
not fully apply, or the requirements of this Code are adequately satisfied by
other means.
   (H)   Section PM-111.2 is amended to read as follows:
      In order to protect existing structures in the jurisdiction by vigorous
enforcement of the provisions of this Code, there shall be and is hereby
created a Code Appeals Board, hereafter referred to as the “Board,” consisting
of persons who hold the following positions with the Village: the Village
Manager, the Fire Chief, and the Building Director.
   (I)   Section PM-111.2.1 shall be and hereby is deleted in its entirety.
   (J)   Section PM-111.6.1 is amended to read as follows:
      The decision of the Board shall be recorded. A copy of the decision of
the Board shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Code Official, who
shall keep such record showing the basis for each decision made by the Board.
   (K)   Section PM-301.3 is amended by adding the following sentence:
      Unless there is compliance with the requirements of Section 10.3-7.2 of
the Zoning Ordinance of the Village of Maywood, operable and inoperable motor
vehicles may not be parked, stored or otherwise kept and maintained on vacant
land.
   (L)   Section PM-302.1 is amended to read as follows:
      All exterior property areas and premises shall be maintained in a clean,
safe and sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of rubbish, garbage or
litter. The owner of any parcel of property shall be responsible for
maintaining all public sidewalks, walkways and alleys abutting the property, in
a condition which is free and clear of all garbage, litter and rubbish other
than garbage, rubbish and litter placed in the public right-of-way for
collection in compliance with the provisions of this Code.
   (M)   Section PM-302.4 is amended by inserting “six (6) inches” in place of
the parenthetical language in the first sentence of the section.
   (N)   Section PM-302.8 is amended to read as follows:
      Except as provided in other Village regulations and approved by the
Building Director, not more than two currently unregistered and/or uninspected
motor vehicles shall be permitted on that part of the exterior of any property
in a non-residential district which is visible from a public street, sidewalk,
alley or other public right-of-way and any vehicle located on the exterior of
any property which is visible from a public street, sidewalk, alley or other
right-of-way in a non-residential district shall not be in a state of major
disassembly or disrepair, nor shall it be in the process of being stripped or
dismantled. Except as provided in other regulations and approved by the
Building Director, any unregistered or uninspected motor vehicle on the
exterior of any property in a non- residential district which is visible from a
public street, sidewalk, alley or other right-of-way must be operable.
      Storage and/or parking in residential areas of tow trucks or other
vehicles defined to tow other vehicles as defined in the Maywood Zoning Code is
prohibited as all times. At no time may such vehicles be present in a
residential area for other than the sole purpose of servicing a call.
      Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including bodywork, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or
similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes, and provided
that the location where the work is being performed inside a structure or
similarly enclosed area is the legal residence of the vehicle owner.
   (O)   Section PM-304.1 is amended to read as follows:
      The exterior of a structure, including every foundation, exterior wall,
roof and other surfaces, shall be maintained in a workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair, structurally sound, kept in a condition so as to
exclude rats, and shall be otherwise safe and sanitary so as not to pose a
threat to the public health, safety and welfare.
   (P)   Section PM-304.2 is amended to read as follows:
      304.2 Protective treatment of Exterior Surfaces. All exterior surfaces,
including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, overhangs,
cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in
good condition. All painted exterior surfaces shall be maintained free of
flaking, peeling and scaling conditions and the paint film integrity shall at
all times be maintained in a smooth, tight and sound condition. Peeling,
flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All
exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected
from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or
treatment. All siding and masonry joints as well as those between the building
envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained
weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or
corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces
with rust or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust
and corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces.
Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this
requirement.
   (Q)   Section PM-304.4 is amended to read as follows:
      All supporting structural members of all structures shall be kept
structurally sound, free of deterioration, and maintained capable of safely
bearing the dead and live loads imposed upon them. If the owner of any
structure disputes a determination by the Code Official that the supporting
structural member of a structure is not structurally sound, free from
deterioration, or maintained capable of safety bearing the dead and live loads
imposed upon it, then the Code Official shall request that the owner have such
structural member examined by a licensed architect of registered structural
engineer at the owner’s expense and that such licensed architect or structural
engineer prepare a written report describing the condition of the structural
member in question and that a copy of the report be submitted to the Code
Official. In the event that the owner refuses to have a licensed architect or
registered structural engineer examine the structural member at the owner’s
expense, then the Code Official shall retain a licensed architect or registered
structural engineer to examine the structural member in question. The Code
Official shall forward one copy of the report to the owner of the structure.
If, following an inspection of a structural member in question was either not
structurally sound, or not free from deterioration or not maintained capable of
safely bearing the dead and live loads imposed upon it, then the owner shall
pay to the Village of Maywood any and all costs the Village incurred in
retaining the architect or structural engineer, and reviewing the report of the
architect and structural engineer.
   (R)   Section PM-304.3 is amended by adding the following:
      When serviced by an alley or other public access roadway the rear of all
properties and/or accessory structures shall have the recorded house numbers
attached thereto in a size and height as mentioned previously.
   (S)   Section 307.1 is amended to read as follows:
      Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having 3 or more risers
shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every open portion of a
stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking surface that is
more than 30 inches (762 mm) above the floor or grade below shall have guards.
Handrails shall be not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height or more than 42
inches (1067 mm) in height measured vertically above the nosing of the tread or
above the finished floor of the landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall be
not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in height above the floor of the landing,
balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or other walking surface.
   Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopted
building code.
   (T)   Section 307.3.1 is amended to read as follows:
      The owner of every dwelling shall supply an approved leakproof, covered,
outside garbage container.
   (U)   Section 307.3.2 is amended to read as follows:
      All residential buildings with four (4) dwelling units or less shall be
required to participate in the Village’s garbage and waste removal program as
contracted by the Village. The container shall be those provided by the waste
removal subcontractor and when the capacity of the provided container has been
surpassed, additional containers provided by the owner may be utilized, so long
as such containers have a capacity of nor more than 30 gallons and a weight of
no more than 50 pounds.
   (V)   Section 307.4 is added, to read as follows:
      307.4 Location and placement for pick-up. The owner of every dwelling
unit and every establishment producing waste and garbage shall cause the same
to be stored completely within the boundaries of the property in the rear or
side yard.
      All occupants, owners and all other persons in charge of, in possession
of, or in control of a building or structure are prohibited from using the
public right-of-way, including but not limited to pubic sidewalks, streets, and
alleys, as a place for the storage of garbage, rubbish, debris or discarded
items. Garbage, rubbish, debris or discarded items may be placed in a public
alley or right-of-way (behind curb) for pick-up, no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on
the day preceding the scheduled garbage collection provided that the garbage,
rubbish, debris and discarded items are in a container which complies with all
the requirements of this Code and any other applicable law or ordinance. All
such containers must be removed from the public alley no later than the end of
the day on the day the garbage, rubbish, debris or discarded items were picked
up.
   (W)   Section PM-308 is amended to read as follows:
      The owner of every dwelling shall supply an approved leakproof, covered,
outside garbage container.
   (X)   Section 308.3.2 is amended to read as follows:
      All residential buildings with four (4) dwelling units or less shall be
required to participate in the Village’s garbage and waste removal program as
contracted by the Village. The container shall be those provided by the waste
removal subcontractor and when the capacity of the provided container has been
surpassed, additional containers provided by the owner may be utilized, so long
as such containers have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons and a weight of
no more than 50 pounds.
   (Y)   Section 308.4 is added, to read as follows:
      308.4 Location and placement for pick-up. The owner of every dwelling
unit and every establishment producing waste and garbage shall cause the same
to be stored completely within the boundaries of the property in the rear or
side yard.
      All occupants, owners and all other persons in charge of, in possession
of, or in control of a building or structure are prohibited from using the
public right-of-way, including but not limited to public sidewalks, street, and
alleys, as a place for the storage of garbage, rubbish, debris or discarded
items. Garbage, rubbish, debris or discarded items may be placed in a public
alley or right-of-way (behind curb) for pick-up, no earlier than 6:00 p.m. on
the day preceding the scheduled garbage collection provided that the garbage,
rubbish, debris and discarded items are in a container which complies with all
the requirements of this Code and any other applicable law or ordinance. All
such containers must be removed from the public alley no later than the end of
the day on the day the garbage, rubbish, debris or discarded items were picked
up.
   (Z)   Section PM 507.1 is amended by adding the following:
      Roof drainage systems shall be diverted from drain tile onto lawns and
away from building foundations unless a retention system has been engineered
for use by the Village and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District.
   (AA)   Section PM-602.2 is amended to read as follows:
      Every dwelling unit and guest room shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit
at a point three feet above the floor and three feet from an exterior wall in
all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. Gas appliances designed
exclusively for cooking or water heating shall not be considered as heating
facilities within the meaning of this provision. Wood burning stoves shall not
constitute heating facilities but may be used by owners or occupants of
residential structures to provide back-up heating facilities in conjunction
with a central heating plant, provided that the wood burning stove was properly
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications, functions
properly, and is fee of all fire, health and accident hazards. The use of back-
up heating facilities shall not be required of tenants by persons who own,
manage or control residential structures. It shall be the duty of every person
owning or controlling a dwelling unit in which heat is furnished from a heating
plant under the control or supervision of such owner or person to furnish heat
at a minimum temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit between the hours of 7:30
a.m. and 10:30 p.m. and to furnish heat at a minimum temperature of 65 degree
Fahrenheit between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
(1997 Code, § 16.03) (Ord. 85-17, passed 5-23-1985; Am. Ord. 85-28, passed 7-
11-1985; Am. Ord. C0-05-12, passed 4-18-2005; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-
2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45, passed 11-7-
2023)
§ 150.098 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Certificate of compliance required. Except as otherwise provided in
this section, a certificate of compliance shall be required prior to any sale
or rental of any lot, dwelling unit, building, structure, improvement, or part
thereof (hereinafter collectively referred to in this section as “property”).
This certificate of compliance shall be based upon compliance of the property
with the minimum standards for health and safety as prescribed by this chapter
and with all other applicable building, housing, health and zoning ordinances
and regulations of the Village.
   (B)   Application. The certificate of compliance shall be applied for by the
owner, lessor, or authorized agent. The applications shall be made to the
Building Director on such forms as they may prescribe. The application form
shall include a statement that the owner or occupant has a right to withhold
consent to a compliance inspection by the Village and require the Village to
obtain a warrant to conduct the inspection and a statement that the Village
must request and obtain the consent of the occupant of any occupied rental
dwelling prior to conducting any inspection. The application shall include a
space for the owner and/or occupant to indicate that the owner and/or occupant
consents to a compliance inspection, or refuses consent.
   (C)   Contents of certificate. A certificate of compliance shall contain the
following information, so far as it may be available:
      (1)   Street address;
      (2)   Zoning classification and authorized use of the property;
      (3)   Maximum allowed occupancy of any dwelling unit being sold or
rented;
      (4)   Variances, exceptions, special use or conditional use permits and
other pertinent legislative acts of record;
      (5)   Any zoning deconversion orders that have been issued;
      (6)   Parking regulations applicable to the property; and
      (7)   Whether the property is in compliance with all applicable codes of
the Village.
      (8)   Whether the property is in full compliance with the land and water
pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control, and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation
District, other applicable state, federal, county or other laws or regulatory
requirements relating to sewer and/or water lines and service, and any other
applicable ordinances set forth in this Code.
   (D)   Inspections. The Building Director, after an application for a
certificate of compliance has been made for a property to be offered for sale
or rent, shall be responsible for seeing that the required or necessary
inspections and reinspections of the exterior and interior of the property, and
review of pertinent Village records relative to the property, are made by the
appropriate Village personnel for the purpose of issuing a certificate of
compliance. The interior and exterior inspection of the property shall include
a review of the use of the property, whether any additional units and/or uses
exist, the number of persons able to legally reside at the premises pursuant to
the Village’s property maintenance code, whether the property is in conformance
with all Village zoning and code regulations, whether any sewer and/or water
line systems are in compliance with the land and water pollution requirements
of the Illinois Environmental Protection agency, Division of Water Pollution
Control and the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District, other applicable
state, federal, county or other laws or regulatory requirements relating to
sewer and/or water lines and service, and any other applicable ordinance set
forth in this Code, and a determination as to whether the property may have
been illegally converted. For purposes of this section, illegally converted
shall mean that the property was converted to another or additional use beyond
that for which the property was originally permitted and which is in violation
of the Village’s zoning and/or occupancy limitations, as set forth in its fire
and property maintenance codes; and is not a legal nonconforming use under the
zoning regulations of the Village, as amended. Following inspection, the
Building and Code Enforcement Department shall, where violations are found,
furnish a report on the violations to the owner, lessor or other person in
control of the property. In the event the inspection reveals that a property
has been illegally converted, the Building and Code Enforcement Department
shall issue a notice of deconversion, specifying the measures which must be
taken in order to bring the illegally converted property into compliance with
all applicable Village zoning and other codes. All dwelling units, buildings,
structures, and improvements or parts thereof, except property containing less
than 2 dwelling units used solely for residential purposes, must be inspected
by the Fire Prevention Bureau prior to the issuance of a certificate of
compliance.
   (E)   (1)   Inspection fees. An inspection fee in accordance with the
following schedule shall be charged in the case of a sale or lease of property
except the lease of a single apartment in a building used solely for
residential purposes.
         (a)   Vacant lots $25;
         (b)   1-2 dwelling units $90;
         (c)   3-6 dwelling units $150;
         (d)   4-10 dwelling units $210;
         (e)   11-20 dwelling units $250;
         (f)   21-30 dwelling units $360;
         (g)   31-40 dwelling units $450;
         (h)   41-50 dwelling units $540;
         (i)   51-75 dwelling units $690;
         (j)   Over 75 dwelling units $960.
      (2)   Buildings, structures, improvements and parts thereof not used for
residential purposes which contain less than 10,000 square feet: $360, less
than 1,000 square feet: $120;
      (3)   Buildings, structures, improvements and parts thereof not used for
residential purposes which contain more than 10,000 square feet: $900;
      (4)   In case of the lease of a single apartment in a building used
solely for residential purposes, the inspection fee shall be $75.
   (F)   Notice of intent to rent or sell. All owners, agents, brokers or any
other individual or legal entity which has ownership or control over or
represents as a listing or selling agent any residential property located
within the Village shall, before selling the property, and within 5 days after
the first real estate listing agreement is entered into and/or public
notification of such intent to sell or rent is made, whichever shall occur
first, notify the Building and Code Enforcement Department on forms to be
provided by the Village of their intent to rent or sell the property.
   (G)   Requirements for issuance. No certificate of compliance shall be
issued for any property unless each of the following criteria has been met;
      (1)   The Building and Code Enforcement Department has received
notification as required by this section;
      (2)   The property has been inspected for compliance with all applicable
Village building, housing, health and zoning ordinances and regulations and a
report of the inspections and/or a notice of deconversion has been prepared,
which report and/or notice shall be furnished to the owner, lessor or other
person in control of the property which was inspected;
      (3)   A report from the Water Department is received by the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation which states that a final reading as to the
amount due for water services has been made and that there are no unpaid water
bills;
      (4)   The Building and Code Enforcement Department has verified that
there are no other outstanding Village liens or judgments against the property;
      (5)   If property is found not to comply with the health, building,
housing, zoning and other applicable ordinances and regulations of the Village,
or is found to have been illegally converted, then an estimate of the cost of
bringing the property into compliance shall be prepared by a person qualified
to do the work necessary to bring the property into compliance. Where a license
or permit is required or other standard is set by the ordinances of this
Village or by other government regulations, the term”qualified” shall mean a
person so licensed or who otherwise meets the required standards. Such
qualified persons shall make available, upon request, copies of their licenses,
verification of their liability insurance, errors and omissions insurance
policies, and surety bond, if applicable. The estimate shall be in the form of
an offer to perform the necessary work for a specified price and shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Village Engineer; and
      (6)   No certificate of compliance shall be issued unless following the
inspection required under division (G)(2) of this section, the property has
been found to be in compliance with all applicable Village health, building,
housing and fire codes, except that with respect to the sale of property, a
conditional certificate of compliance may be issued pursuant to division (H).
   (H)   Escrow/conditional certificates of compliance. Property may be sold or
rented hereunder by an owner who has not completed required repairs or
deconversion identified through an inspection only pursuant to the following.
      (1)   If a sum of money equal to the estimated cost, as calculated
pursuant to division (G)(5) above, of bringing the property into compliance has
been deposited into an escrow account established with the Village for the
purpose of paying the cost of any repairs and other work which must be
performed in order for the property to be brought into compliance or if a
performance or surety bond issued by a reputable surety company and naming the
Village as obligee in an amount equal to the estimated cost of bringing the
property into compliance is furnished to the Building Director. In cases where
deconversion of an illegally converted property is required in order for a
property to be brought into compliance, the sum of money required to be placed
in escrow with the Village shall be $15,000 or 3 times the amount of the
repairs and other work which must be performed in order for a property to be
brought into compliance, whichever is higher.
      (2)   The buyer, conveyee, transferee, assignee or other successor in
title, ownership or interest (hereinafter “buyer”) has entered into an escrow
agreement with the Village whereby the buyer, in order to close, accepts
responsibility for bringing the property into compliance and agrees to do so
within 90 calendar days after the closing of the transaction (the “closing”). A
buyer who elects to accept the property, subject to the inspection with
existing violations or need to deconvert, and who enters into an escrow
agreement as provided herein, shall acknowledge, as part of any such agreement,
that the buyer is fully aware of the existing violations and/or need to
deconvert, as well as the possibility of violations that may have existed but
were unnoted or undiscovered due to lack of access, and agrees to accept the
requirement and obligation to bring the property into compliance within 90 days
of the closing. The seller is also required to sign the escrow agreement.
      (3)   Where the buyer enters into such an agreement, a conditional
certificate of compliance shall be issued by the Village and shall terminate on
the ninety-first day after closing. The Village shall issue a certificate of
compliance upon completion of the repairs and/or other work necessary to bring
the property into compliance. The buyer shall further agree to submit to the
jurisdiction and venue of the Village administrative adjudication process and
the Circuit Court of Cook County and to waive service of summons subject only
to the notice requirements as required by law in order to enable the Village to
expeditiously obtain an order of compliance with this section, if necessary.
      (4)   In the event the buyer fails to complete the required repairs, and/
or have the repairs verified on reinspection, by the date of termination of the
conditional certificate of compliance, the Building Director is authorized to
pursue enforcement proceedings through the Village administrative adjudication
process, or, at their discretion, through the Circuit Court of Cook County. The
Village is further authorized to pursue any other administrative or judicial
remedy in order to bring the property into compliance with applicable codes and
regulations, including an order allowing the Village as Escrowee to release the
funds to a contractor of its choosing to bring the violations into compliance.
The Village shall be entitled to draw on the escrow or performance bond for the
purpose of paying all costs associated with such enforcement proceedings,
including, but not limited to, consultant fees, engineering fees, attorney fees
and litigation expenses. Any and all costs of enforcement beyond the amount of
the escrow are a debt due and owing the Village and may be recorded as a lien
against the property if the balance beyond the escrow is not repaid to the
Village within 30 days following written demand by the Village.
      (5)   Fine for failure to repair or deconvert. The fine for violations of
this division (H) shall be not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 per day for
each day the violations or illegal conversion remain uncorrected following the
expiration of the 90 day period for correction following closing. The Village
shall be entitled to draw on the escrow or performance bond for the purpose of
paying any judgment amounts for fines under this division (H). Any judgment
amounts beyond the amount of the escrow that remain unpaid following the time
for payment and opportunity for judicial review are a debt due and owing the
Village and may be recorded by the Village as a lien against the property.
   (I)   No warranty or guarantee. Inspections made pursuant to this section
shall reflect the condition of the property only as of the date and time the
inspection was made. In issuing a conditional certificate of compliance or
certificate of compliance, the Village and its agents do not make any warranty
or representation of any kind, nor do they intend to insure or provide any
guarantee as to the condition of the property to either buyer or seller of the
property, or to any of their designees, agents, representatives, heirs or
assigns or any other interested party, including mortgage companies, insurance
companies, banks or any other party which may have any interest relative to the
property, nor does the Village affirm that there are no additional violations
relative to any other provisions of the Village Code, zoning and other
regulations, or relevant statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the
County of Cook, the State of Illinois or the United States.
   (J)   Disclosure to buyers and lessees. Whenever property is inspected
pursuant to this section, the owner, lessor or other person in control of the
property shall furnish all buyers and lessees of the property with a copy of
any inspection reports they have received from the Village. In the case of a
sale, this shall be done prior to closing. In the case of a lease, this shall
be done prior to the start of the term of the lease.
   (K)   Expiration of certificates of compliance and notices of violation and
deconversion. A certificate of compliance shall expire and shall no longer be
valid 90 days after the date it is issued. Certificates shall be renewed 1 time
by the Director ofSustainability and Innovation upon application for renewal
for an additional 90 days. Provided that there has been no change in the
property as described in the certificate of compliance, such renewal shall be
provided at no charge. Certificates of compliance may not be renewed more than
once. A notice of violation or notice of deconversion shall be valid for 1 year
toward the issuance of a certificate but shall become invalid after a
certificate has been issued.
   (L)   Variation appeal procedure. A variation to the terms and conditions of
this section may be granted in those cases where the plight of the owner or
lessor is due to unique circumstances and where the variation, if granted, will
not pose a danger to the health, safety or welfare of the residents of the
Village, including any person who might occupy the property in question. A
variation shall be granted only after a hearing before a board consisting of
the Village Manager and the Building Director. This Board shall within 30 days
after the hearing make a written recommendation to the Village Board which
shall then have final authority to determine whether a variation from the terms
of this section shall be granted.
   (M)   Authority to inspect. 
      (1)   No inspection of any property shall be made for the purpose of
determining compliance with the codes, laws and ordinances of the Village,
including a determination of whether a certificate of compliance shall be
issued, unless either:
         (a)   A person in control of the property voluntarily agrees to permit
the inspection; or
         (b)   An administrative search warrant has been issued by a court
which authorizes the inspection.
      (2)   If a person in control of property which is otherwise sought to be
inspected under this section refuses to permit the inspection, the Building
Director shall apply for the issuance of an administrative search warrant which
will authorize the inspection. Any application for an administrative warrant
shall specify the basis upon which the warrant is being sought and shall
include a statement that the inspection will be limited to a determination of
whether there are violations of the Village’s building, housing, health and
zoning ordinances and regulations, and whether there have been any illegal
conversions. The Court may consider any of the following factors along with
such other matters as it deems pertinent in its decision as to whether a
warrant shall issue:
         (a)   Eyewitness account(s) of violation(s);
         (b)   Citizen complaints;
         (c)   Tenant complaints;
         (d)   Plain view violations;
         (e)   Violations apparent from Village records;
         (f)   Property deterioration;
         (g)   Age of property;
         (h)   Nature of alleged violation;
         (i)   Condition of similar properties in the area;
         (j)   Documented violations on similar properties in the area;
         (k)   Passage of time since last inspection;
         (l)   Previous violations on the property; and
         (m)   Whether the inspection is part of an exterior/interior property
inspection and code enforcement policy and program approved by the Village.
      (3)   If the court refuses to issue a search warrant to allow inspection
of the property, or the Village chooses not to seek an administrative search
warrant, then any other provision of this section notwithstanding, a
certificate of compliance shall not be required prior to any sale or rental of
the premises which occurs within 90 days from:
         (a)   The date the owner denied access for purposes of an inspection,
provided the Village declined to seek a warrant to authorize an inspection; or
         (b)   The date the court refused to issue the search warrant. In such
event, the Village shall advise the seller and, if possible, the buyer of the
property that the property is “uninspected property”.
   (N)   Exempt transactions.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, the terms sale, sell, or sold shall
not include:
         (a)   Transactions which encumber, but do not convey title to real
estate or assign the beneficial interest in a land trust;
         (b)   Transactions in which the deed, without additional
consideration, confirms, corrects, modifies or supplements a deed previously
recorded; and
         (c)   Transactions in which the deed constitutes a release of an
encumbrance.
      (2)   The requirements for an inspection or certificate of compliance do
not apply to such transactions.
   (O)   Zoning and occupancy posters. At the time of obtaining the certificate
of compliance, the property owner shall be given a poster by the Building and
Code Enforcement Department which shall state the zoning classification,
maximum occupancy, and any zoning and parking conditions governing the
property. This poster shall be displayed prominently in a window on the ground
floor facing the street on the property for sale or rent, in such a way that
the poster is visible from the street.
   (P)   Listing and advertising disclosure requirements. Realtors or owners
listing property for rental or sale in the Village are required to accurately
and completely set forth the type of residence (single-family, two-unit, multi-
family and the like), number of bedrooms, number of bathrooms, and square
footage of rooms, maximum occupancy limits of the property based on the
Village’s fire and property maintenance codes, and zoning classification and
zoning and parking conditions in any advertisement, brochure, description or
publication offering the property for sale, including any listing on the
Multiple Listing Service or any similar type of information service or source.
For newspaper advertisements, square footage of rooms, maximum occupancy,
zoning classification and zoning and parking conditions do not have to be
included.
   (Q)   Deconversion amnesty program. The Village Manager, in consultation
with the Building Director, may, in their discretion, from time to time,
declare and publicize a temporary “amnesty period” relative to illegally
converted properties within the Village as part of an overall effort to
eliminate existing illegal conversions. During any period of declared amnesty
for deconversions authorized by the Village, building permit fees may be
reduced or waived pursuant to a set published schedule of fee reductions
available to all property owners who own illegally converted properties and who
are making various modifications for the purpose of deconverting the property.
To participate in the amnesty program, a property owner must register with the
Building and Code Enforcement Department and allow the Department to conduct a
property inspection. Following the inspection, the Building and Code
Enforcement Department shall provide the property owner with a written list of
modifications that need to be made and/or violations that need to be remedied
in order to successfully deconvert and bring the property into compliance with
Village zoning, building and other codes and regulations. During the amnesty
period, and for a period of 3 months afterward, provided work is being done
under a Village-issued permit to deconvert the illegal occupancy, program
participants shall not be cited for code violations related to the existing
illegal conversion. Any amnesty program period shall be publicized by the
Village through newsletters and other appropriate means. Property owners who
take advantage of the reduced fees provided under an amnesty program and are
later found to have caused an illegal conversion to again exist on the property
will be subject to increased penalties under §
150.999.
   (R)   Fine for illegal conversion after issuance of certificate of
compliance. It shall be unlawful to alter, modify, or reconvert a property to
create an illegal conversion as defined in division (D) of this section after a
deconversion has occurred or after receiving a certificate of compliance.
Issuance of a certificate of compliance shall constitute prima facie evidence
of thelawful use of the property as described in the certificate, including
evidence that a deconversion has been completed. Any owner found to have
altered, modified, or reconverted a property to create an illegal conversion
following a deconversion by the owner or a previous owner, shall be subject to
an enhanced fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,500, with each day
such illegal conversion exists constituting a distinct and separate offense.
(1997 Code, § 16.12) (Ord. 81-1, passed 3-12-1981; Am. Ord. 82-22, passed 11-
23-1982; Am. Ord. C0-00-14, passed 11-20-2000; Am. Ord. C0-00-40, passed 12-4-
2000; Am. Ord. C0- 02-9, passed 4-1-2002; Am. Ord. C0-05-12, passed 4-18-2005;
Am. Ord. C0-08-01, passed 1- 15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-26, passed 8-4-2009; Am.
Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2014-04, passed 1-21-2014; Am.
Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2023-45, passed 11-7-2023; Am.
Ord. CO-2023-54, passed 12-5-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 150.099 NOTICE OF INTENT TO RENT OR SELL.
   All owners, agents, brokers or any other individual or legal entity which
has ownership or control over any residential property located within the
Village, before selling the property or renting any dwelling unit located in
the property, must notify theBuilding and Code Enforcement Department of their
intent to rent or sell within 5 days after the first real estate listing
agreement is entered into and/or public notification of such intent to sell or
rent is made, whichever shall occur first. No certificates of compliance shall
be issued for any premises unless the Building and Code Enforcement Department
receives notification as required by this section.
(1997 Code, § 16.13) (Ord. 77-14, passed 10-27-1977; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed
10-6- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.100 REGISTRATION AND LICENSING OF LANDLORDS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
separate meaning.
      LANDLORD. The owner (including the owner of the beneficial interest in a
land trust) of any dwelling unit, building, structure or other property within
the Village which is rented or leased for commercial or residential purposes.
The term LANDLORD, however, shall not include owners of:  (1) hotels and motels
that rent rooms to occupants who typically make use of such facilities for a
period of less than 30 days: or (2) nursing homes, retirement centers and rest
homes, which are subject to licensing and inspection by the state or federal
government.
      RENTAL UNIT. A dwelling unit, building, structure or other property
within the Village which is rented or leased for commercial or residential
purposes.
   (B)   Registration and license required. Every landlord covered by this
section shall be required to register with the Village as provided herein and
to obtain a license from the Village evidencing such registration. Every
landlord covered by this section shall renew said registration and license
annually, not less than 30 days prior to the expiration date of a currently
valid license (December 31 of that year). Any landlord not previously
registered and licensed by the Village shall register within 30 days of the
passage of this section. Licenses evidencing registration shall be issued by
the Building Director to be effective for a period of 1 year or less to expire
on December 31 of that license year unless otherwise invalidated, and are not
transferable from one landlord to another upon change of ownership. Any change
in management or transfer of title resulting in a change of landlord or
management of a property covered by this section shall require a new and
separate registration within 30 days following such change. Commencing on July
1, 2012, and thereafter, prior to receiving a license, all landlords will be
required to submit proof that they, or their designated agent, have, within the
past 2 years, attended a Village of Maywood crime-free housing education course
facilitated by the Police, Fire and Building and Code Enforcement Departments,
in conformance with §
150.037 of this Code. The class will, among other things, review the tenant
screening process, property maintenance code, inspections process, vacant
property registry and requirements, chronic public nuisance ordinance, fire
safety, any other Village codes or regulations deemed appropriate, and how to
make the rental property environment safe and free of crime.
   (C)   Information required.
      (1)   Registration by a landlord shall include the following information
to be provided by the landlord, which information shall be updated by the
landlord whenever any change occurs:
         (a)   The name and address of the landlord;
         (b)   The address of every rental unit owned by the landlord;
         (c)   The number of rental units owned by the landlord;
         (d)   A telephone number at which or through which the landlord can be
contacted at all times; and
         (e)   Where any rental unit is operated, managed, or controlled by a
person or entity other than the landlord, including but not limited to all
rental units owned by a land trust, the name and address of such person or
entity, along with a telephone number at which or through which such person or
entity can be contacted at all times.
         (f)   Proof of attendance and successful completion of a Village of
Maywood crime-free housing education course within the past 2 years.
         (g)   An executed affidavit stating that for all leases commencing
after July 1, 2012, the landlord will utilize a crime-free lease addendum or
have a provision in all leases similar to a crime-free lease addendum, as
further detailed in §
150.037 of this Code.
         (h)   The name and address at which service or notices of violations
related to rental units owned by the landlord may be made. If the landlord is
not a resident of the Village then the landlord shall be required to provide:
            1.   The name, address and 24-hour phone number of an agent within
the Village with authority to accept service or notice of a violation; or
            2.   A statement by the landlord that service by regular mail upon
the landlord at the address of the agent stated in the application will be
considered sufficient service for all purposes.
      (2)   Whenever there is a change in the landlord’s property agent, the
landlord shall, within 15 days of such change, file a written notice with the
Building and Code Enforcement Department indicating such change.
      (3)   Every applicant shall be given a packet of materials containing a
crime-free housing lease addendum; a current crime-free housing course
schedule, and the Village’s crime-free housing contact information.
   (D)   (1)   Fees for registration. The fee for registration and obtaining a
license as a landlord pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:
 
Number of Rental Units in Structure Owned Fee per Structure
by Landlord
Single-family structure                   $25
                                          $25 for first unit and $10 for each
Multi-family structures                   additional unit, excluding owner-
                                          occupied units
 
      (2)   Late registration; failure to register. 
         (a)   The penalty fee for late registration shall be in accordance
with the following schedule:
 
Number of Rental Units in Structure Owned Initial Penalty Fee for First Month
by Landlord
1-6 rental units                          $ 20
7-20 rental units                         $ 35
Over 20 rental units                      $ 50
 
         (b)   After the first month, the fee for late registration shall be
increased monthly thereafter by an additional 20% of the amount listed in the
above schedule, the fee to accrue on the fifteenth day of each subsequent month
the landlord fails to register as required by this section.
   (E)   Unlicensed rental. No rental unit may be rented and no new lease may
be entered into and no lease may be renewed until and unless a valid license to
operate as a landlord in the Village has issued pursuant to this section, or
while a license is suspended or revoked for failure to comply with the
requirements of §
150.037 or for some other reason. A rental inspection upon any new rental or
change of tenant is required pursuant to §
150.098 of this Code.
   (F)   Prosecution of violations. Any violation of this section shall, in the
Village’s discretion, be subject to prosecution either in the Circuit Court of
Cook County or through the Village’s administrative adjudication program.
   (G)   Appeal; reinstatement of license. Any person whose license to operate
as a landlord in the Village has been suspended or revoked shall be entitled to
an appeal hearing before the Village Manager. A request for such appeal shall
be made in writing and shall be filed with the Village Manager within 15 days
following the suspension or revocation of the license by the Village. License
suspensions or revocations may be lifted or rescinded, upon proof of compliance
with all requirements for issuance of a license, including satisfaction of any
outstanding fines or judgment amounts owed the Village for violations of this
chapter.
(1997 Code, § 16.14) (Ord. 88-5, passed 7-28- 1988; Am. Ord. C0-05-12, passed
4-18-2005; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2012-03, passed 1-
17-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.101 POSTING OF INFORMATION RELATING TO RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY.
   The landlord of any building containing 3 or more rental dwelling units and
of any commercial property shall cause the following information to be posted
at all times in a conspicuous place at or near the principal entrance to said
building, unless the building is occupied by said landlord:
   (A)   The name of the landlord of the building along with a telephone number
at which or through which the landlord can be contacted at all times; or
   (B)   Where the building is operated, controlled or managed by a person or
entity other than the landlord, including but not limited to all rental units
owned by a land trust, the name of such person or entity, along with a
telephone number at which or through which said person or entity can be
contacted at all times.
(1997 Code, § 16.15) (Ord. 88-5, passed 7-28-1988)
§ 150.102 AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE MANAGER TO ISSUE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Village Manager may issue reasonable rules and regulations to enforce
the provisions of §§
150.100 and
150.101.
(1997 Code, § 16.16) (Ord. 84-2, passed 1-26-1984)
§ 150.103 OCCUPANCY AFFIDAVIT AND ZONING DISTRICT ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
   (A)   The purchaser (or grantee or assignee) of any residential property in
the Village is required to furnish, to the Department of Community Development,
on a form supplied by the Building and Code Enforcement Department, an
occupancy affidavit acknowledging purchase of a dwelling unit or units,
acknowledging the type of dwelling being purchased (i.e. apartment, single-
family home, two-family residence, or multi-family home with a specified number
of apartments), acknowledging the maximum allowable number of occupants for
each dwelling unit or apartment as determined by the Fire Department or
Building and Code Enforcement Department pursuant to the applicable fire and
property maintenance occupancy codes, as amended, acknowledging that no
additional dwelling units or apartments may be created without the prior
approval of the Village, and acknowledging that failure to abide by the rules
and regulations of the Village could result in fines and/or mandatory
deconversion. No real estate transfer stamps shall be issued by the Village
unless an occupancy affidavit has been completed and received by the Building
and Code Enforcement Department.
   (B)   (1)   The purchaser (or grantee or assignee) of any property in the
Village is required to furnish to the Department of Code Enforcement, on a form
supplied by the Village, a zoning district acknowledgment form confirming:
         (a)   The zoning district designation of the real property being
acquired;
         (b)   That use of the property is limited to only those uses listed as
permitted uses under the applicable zoning district designation in the
Village’s zoning regulations, except:
            1.   Where the property is an existing legal non-conforming use, in
which case the use is subject to the provisions of the Village’s zoning
regulations related to legal non-conforming uses; or
            2.   Where a special use permit has already been granted or is
granted for the property by the Village President and Board of Trustees, in
which case the use is subject to the terms and conditions of the special use
permit ordinance;
         (c)   That failure to abide by the zoning regulations of the Village
could result in fines, mandatory deconversion, or other legal action by the
Village.
      (2)   No real estate transfer stamps shall be issued by the Village
unless a zoning district acknowledgment form has been completed, executed by
the purchaser and filed with the Village’s Building and Code Enforcement
Department.
(Ord. C0-08-01, passed 1-15-2008; Am. Ord. C0-09-01, passed 1-13-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-09- 27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.104 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Applicability. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of
the following:
      (1)   Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected, altered or
enlarged.
      (2)   A change in use of an existing building.
      (3)   Occupancy and use of vacant land.
      (4)   Change in the use of land to a different classification.
   (B)   Authority and execution. The Building Director shall be responsible
for determining compliance with this section and all other applicable
ordinances, prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. If approved, the
certificate of occupancy shall be issued within 10 days after the erection or
alteration or change in use of such building has been completed. A record of
all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file and copies shall be
available on request to any person for a fee specified by the Village.
   (C)   Procedure.
      (1)   Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of
vacant land, or for a change in the use of land or of a building, as herein
provided, shall be made to the Building Director.
      (2)   If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this
section, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued within 10 days after the
application has been filed. Each certificate of occupancy shall state that the
building or proposed use of a building or land complies with all of the
provisions of this section.
      (3)   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Zoning
Administrator for a period of not more than 6 months during the completion of
the construction of the building or of alterations which are required under the
terms of any law or ordinance. Such temporary certificate of occupancy may be
renewed, but shall not be construed in any way to alter the respective rights,
duties or obligations of the owner or of the Village relating to the use or
occupancy of the land or building. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall
not be issued except under such restrictions and provisions as will adequately
insure the safety of occupants.
      (4)   A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for coincidentally with
the application for a zoning permit.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
ELEVATION INSPECTION PROGRAM AND STANDARDS
§ 150.120 ELEVATION INSPECTION PROGRAM AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Village hereby adopts and provides for a program of elevator
inspections (the "Program") to be operated and administered in compliance with
the Elevator Safety and Regulation Act (225 ILCS 312/1 et seq.) (the "Act"), as
amended, and any Administrative Rules adopted thereunder.
   (B)   (1)   The following standards, as published by the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers, American National Standards, and American Society of
Civil Engineers, are hereby adopted by reference as the Elevator Codes of the
Village and, except as modified in this chapter, each and all of the
regulations, provisions and conditions and terms of the below listed standards
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof by reference as if fully
set forth in this Code:
         (a)   American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME):
            1.   Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.1-2005)
A17.1(a)-2005 and A17.1(s)-2005;
            2.   Guide for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators, and Moving
Walks (ASME 17.2-2004);
            3.   Safety Code for Existing Elevators and Escalators (ASME A17.3-
2005);
            4.   Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts
(ASME A18.1-2005); and
            5.   Standard for the Qualification of Elevator Inspectors (ASME
QEI-1-2004);
         (b)   American National Standards:
            1.   Safety Requirements of Personal Hoists and Employee Elevators
(ANSI A10.4-2004);
         (c)   American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE):
            1.   Automated People Mover Standards (ASCE 21-2000).
      (2)   At least 3 copies of each of the referenced Codes shall be kept on
file in the Office of Village Clerk for public inspection. Copies shall also be
made available in the Office of the Building Director and at the Maywood Public
Library for public inspection.
   (C)   Inspection fees under the Program shall be as set forth in §
150.004(D)(2).
(Ord. C0-08-11, passed 2-19-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is provided shall be punished as set forth in §
10.99.
   (B)   Landlord registration and information. Any person violating the terms
and conditions of §§
150.100 through
150.102, including but not limited to engaging in rental activity during
periods where they have no license or their license has been suspended or
revoked, shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $100 and not more than
$1,000, with each and every day that the violation is allowed to remain in
effect being deemed a complete and separate offense. In addition, the
appropriate authorities of the Village may take such other action as they deem
proper to enforce the terms and conditions of §§
150.100 through
150.102, including, without limitation, an action in equity to compel
compliance with its terms. Any person violating the terms of §§
150.100 through
150.102 shall be subject, in addition to the foregoing penalties, to the
payment of court costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees.
   (C)   Deconversion amnesty. Any person or entity found to have accepted
benefits under an amnesty program as detailed in §
150.098(N), and who then illegally reconverts the property to a multi-family
dwelling or otherwise modifies the property in a way not authorized by the
Village Code and regulations adopted thereunder, shall be subject to a penalty
of not less than $250 and not more than $1,500, with each and every day that
the violation is allowed to remain in effect being deemed a complete and
separate offense.
   (D)   Enhanced penalties for misleading or false information. Any person who
has violated any section of this chapter and is found in addition to have
intentionally misled the Village, a buyer or lessee of the property, or the
public by providing misleading or false information shall be subject to a
penalty of not less than $250 and not more than $1,500, with each and every day
that the violation is allowed to remain in effect being deemed a complete and
separate offense.
   (E)   Violation placards. Upon suspension or revocation of a license to
operate as a landlord in the Village, the Village may post a placard on any
portion of such landlord’s property containing a rental unit that provides that
the license to operate as a landlord in the Village has been suspended or
revoked and that no new leases may be entered into and no leases may be renewed
until the proper license is secured. A placard may only be removed by the
Village upon full compliance with this section. Unauthorized removal or
defacement of a placard posted pursuant to this section by other than Village
personnel is a separate violation, and is subject to a fine in an amount not
less than $250 and no more than $1,000 and the award to the Village of its
reasonable attorneys’ fees in enforcing such violation.
(1997 Code, § 16.17) (Ord. 84-2, passed 1-26- 1984; Am. Ord. C0-05-12, passed
4-18-2005; Am. Ord. C0-08-01, passed 1-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2012-03, passed 1-
17-2012)
CHAPTER 151: VILLAGE PLANNING
Section
   
151.01   Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
   
151.02   Official plan
   
151.03   Subdivision plats
 
   
151.99   Fees
Cross-reference:
   Village policies, see
Ch. 38
§ 151.01 PLAN COMMISSION/ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.
   (A)   Membership; terms. A Plan Commission is created and established. The
Plan Commission shall consist of 7 members. The members of the Plan Commission
shall also be members of the Zoning Board of Appeals and shall be appointed to
5 year terms by the Village President with the approval of the Board of
Trustees. Members may be removed by the Village President and Board of Trustees
for cause after written charges have been filed and after a public hearing has
been held if demanded by the member so charged. The Plan Commission shall have
the powers and duties set forth in the Village’s Zoning Ordinance. The members
of the Plan Commission shall, by a majority vote of the members then holding
office, elect 1 of the members to be chairperson of the Plan Commission. The
Chairperson of the Plan Commission shall also be the Chairperson of the Zoning
Board of Appeals. The member elected chairperson shall hold office until such
time as a successor is elected or their membership on the Plan Commission
terminates for any reason. The chairperson, or in their absence, the acting
chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses at
hearing of the Plan Commission.
   (B)   Meetings. All meetings of the Plan Commission shall be held at the
call of the chair or at such other times as the Plan Commission may determine.
The Plan Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and may require
submission of such records and other information necessary to make its
determinations. A copy of said rules of procedure shall be made available in
the Community Development Department.
(1997 Code, § 21.01) (Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 151.02 OFFICIAL PLAN.
   (A)   The Official Plan of the Village is established to consist of the
following:
      (1)   The Official Map of the Village, a copy of which is on file in the
office of the Village Clerk and incorporated herein by reference and made a
part hereof;
      (2)   The Comprehensive Village Plan of the Village, which plan is on
file in the office of the Village Clerk.
   (B)   The Official Plan shall be in full force and effect within the Village
and in unincorporated territory within 1-1/2 miles of the Village, from and
after its passage as provided by law, provided that notice of the adoption of
this Plan shall be recorded with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook County.
(1997 Code, § 21.02) (Ord. 67-23, passed 8-3-1967; Am. Ord. CO-09-21, passed 6-
30- 2009; Am. Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15- 2010; Am. Ord. CO-2020-23, passed
8-18-2020; Am. Ord. CO-2022-07, passed 3-22-2022; Am. Ord. CO-2024-17, passed
4-15-2024)
§ 151.03 SUBDIVISION PLATS.
   (A)   Required. All persons subdividing any piece or parcel of land, block,
lot or sub-lot, or any part thereof, in the Village shall make a map or plat
thereof, and before recording the same with the Recorder of Deeds of Cook
County, as provided by law, shall submit the same, with 3 additional copies
thereof, to the Board of Trustees for their approval or rejection, as the Board
of Trustees may deem proper. If approved, such approval shall be certified
thereon, and signed by the President and attested by the Village Clerk; and no
such map or plat shall be valid or entitled to record until it shall have been
approved as aforesaid.
   (B)   Custody and approval. The duplicate of such map or plat as provided in
this section shall be kept on file by the Village Clerk for the use and benefit
of the Village. No such map or plat shall be approved as aforesaid until it
shall have been properly certified by a surveyor and acknowledged by the owner,
as provided by the laws of the state.
   (C)   Recordation. The person submitting such map or plat as required by
this section thereupon shall immediately deposit with the Village Clerk the
legal fee for recording the same, and the Clerk shall, as soon as possible
thereafter, record it in the Recorder's office of the county. Such person shall
also at the same time deposit with the Clerk a reasonable fee for placing such
map or plat upon the official plat or atlas of the Village.
(1997 Code, § 21.03)
§ 151.99 FEES.
   Application filing fees for zoning related matters shall be as follows.
These are provided for reference only and may not be the most current. Please
check with the Village for official fee information.
APPLICATION                                     ZONING ORDINANCE SECTION FEE
ZONING AMENDMENT
Text amendment                                  Section 4.2              $1,200
Map amendment - to rezone to R-1, R-2 & R-      Section 4.2              $600
3 Districts
Map amendment - to rezone to any other district Section 4.2              $1,200
ZONING VARIANCE
Variance - single-family & two-family           Section 4.3              $600
Variance - all others                           Section 4.3              $600
SPECIAL USE (EXCEPT PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT)   Section 4.4              $600
 
APPLICATION                ZONING ORDINANCE SECTION FEE
                                                    $1,200 + deposit for costs
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT   Section 5                (see Section 3.2.D. of
                                                    Zoning Code)
SITE PLAN REVIEW
Site plan review - single- Section 4.6              $200
family & two-family
Site plan review - all     Section 4.6              $400
others
SIGN REVIEW & PERMIT       Section 4.7              $100
ZONING PERMIT              Section 4.8              $100
ZONING INTERPRETATION      Section 4.9              $50
ZONING APPEAL              Section 4.10             $500
TEMPORARY USE PERMIT       Section 12.6             $100
 
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
CHAPTER 152: SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
 Section
   
152.01   Purpose
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   How to use this chapter
   
152.04   Duties of Enforcement Official
   
152.05   Base flood elevation
   
152.06   Occupation and use of flood fringe areas
   
152.07   Occupation and use of designated floodways
   
152.08   Occupation and use of special flood hazard areas where floodways are
not identified
   
152.09   Permitting requirements applicable to all floodplain areas; protection
of building
   
152.10   Other development requirements
   
152.11   Variances
   
152.12   Disclaimer of liability
   
152.13   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.14   Separability
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this
Village by 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 11-12-12, 11-30-2, 11-30-8, and 11-31-2 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.). The purpose of this chapter
is to maintain the Village’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance
Program; to minimize potential losses due to periodic flooding including loss
of life, loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption fo commerce
and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety and general welfare; and to preserve and
enhance the quality of surface waters, conserve economic and natural values and
provide for the wise utilization of water and related land resources.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted in order to accomplish the following specific
purposes:
      (1)   To meet the requirements of 615 ILCS 5/18g, the Rivers, Lakes and
Streams Act;
      (2)   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or
drainage hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to
erosion;
      (3)   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage;
      (4)   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
      (5)   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations;
      (6)   To make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property
in the Village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program;
      (7)   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended;
      (8)   To protect, conserve, and promote the orderly development of land
and water resources; and
      (9)   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of
watercourses and floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts,
improve water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian
habitat, provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and
enhance community and economic development.
(Ord. C0-08-30, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A non-habitable structure which is on the same parcel
of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   ACT. An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams
of the State of Illinois (615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.).
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm, corporation or governmental agency who executes
the necessary forms to procure official approval of a project or permit to
carry out construction of a project from the Village of Maywood.
   APPROPRIATE USE. Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible
and will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed
are as specified in §
152.07(B)(4).
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the crest of the base flood.
   BASEMENT. That portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by
walls and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a
manufactured  home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also
includes recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than 180 days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway use.
   CHANNEL. Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
   CHANNEL MODIFICATION. Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION includes
damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. CHANNEL MODIFICATION does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. CHANNELIZATION is a severe form
of CHANNEL MODIFICATION involving a significant change in the channel cross-
section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.
straightening).
   COMPENSATORY STORAGE. An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off-site floodwater elevations and flows.
   CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE. Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of a proposed change to the floodway map. This
preconstruction approval, pursuant to this chapter, gives assurances to the
property owner that once an appropriate use is constructed according to
permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed, as previously agreed, upon
review and acceptance of as-built plans.
   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A letter which indicates that
FEMA will revise base flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood
boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective Flood Hazard Boundary Map or
Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as-built plans are submitted and approved.
   CONTROL STRUCTURE. A structure designed to control the rate of flow that
passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water
surface elevation.
   CRITICAL FACILITY. Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare
of the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples
of CRITICAL FACILITIES where flood protection is recommended include: sewage
treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations.
   DAM. All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
   DESIGNATED FLOODWAY. The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that
portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by
IDNR/OWR, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year frequency
flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss
of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a 10% increase in velocities.
      (1)   The floodways are designated for DesPlaines River and Silver Creek
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA on Map Number 17031 C dated
August 19, 2008. When 2 floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more
restrictive floodway limit shall prevail.
      (2)   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Cook County that
are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village that may be annexed
into the Village are designated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by
FEMA on Map Number 17031 C dated August 19, 2008.
      (3)   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the
designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map
and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated
floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any man-made change to real estate, including:
         (a)   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building
or any addition to a building.
         (b)   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than 180 days. If the travel trailer or recreational vehicle is
on site for more than 180 days, it must be fully licensed and ready for highway
use.
         (c)   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, or similar projects.
         (d)   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
         (e)   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
         (f)   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or
culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving,
or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of
materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.
         (g)   Any other activity of man that might change the direction,
height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation
removal.
      (2)   Development does not include routine maintenance of existing
buildings and facilities such as re-roofing or re-surfacing of roads when there
is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural
practices that do not involve filling, grading, or construction of levees.
   ELEVATION CERTIFICATES. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
   EROSION. The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or
wave action.
   EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS. Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per
Illinois Compiled Statutes (ILCS) including state, federal or local units of
government, such as the Metropolitan Water Reclamation District.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction  of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FEMA. Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-
79 revised as of October 21, 2002. This incorporation does not include any
later editions or amendments.
   FLOOD. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation
of normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the
unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
   FLOOD FREQUENCY. A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
   FLOOD FRINGE. That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP. An official map of a community where the
boundaries of the flood having special hazard areas have been designated as
Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM). A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
   FLOODPLAIN. That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground
surface elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached Special Flood Hazard Areas,
ponding areas, and the like. The floodplain is also known as the Special Flood
Hazard Area (SFHA).
      (1)   The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the
Village that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood. The SFHAs of the Village for Des Plaines River and Silver Creek are
generally identified as such on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of Cook County
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on Map Number 17031 C,
dated August 19, 2008.
      (2)   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are
within the 1.5 mile extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village and that may
be annexed into the Village are generally identified as such on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Cook County prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency on Map Number 17031 C, and dated August 19, 2008.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE. A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The elevation of the base flood or 100-
year frequency flood plus 1 foot of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
   FLOODWAY. See DESIGNATED FLOODWAY.
   FREEBOARD. An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminary determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminary determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminary
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the State inventory of historic places by
the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency;
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that
has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS. Engineering analysis which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
   IDNR/OWR. Illinois Department of Natural Resources, Office of Water
Resources.
   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). Official determination by FEMA that a
specific structure is not in a 100-year flood zone; amends the effective Flood
Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) or FIRM.
   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, flood insurance rate zones, flood boundaries
orfloodways as shown on an effective FHBM or FIRM.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a buildings lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in 1 or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOMES also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than 180 consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into 2 or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MITIGATION. Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative
effects which floodplain development activities might have on the public
health, safety and welfare. Examples of MITIGATION include compensatory
storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
MITIGATION may also include those activities taken to reduce a structure’s
susceptibility to flooding.
   NAVD 88 (NATIONAL AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988). NAVD 88 supersedes the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
   NATURAL. When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by
the existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross-section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics overtime as the channel meanders and vegetation is re-
established. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the  effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted
by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April
1, 1990.
   NGVD (NATIONAL GEODETIC VERTICAL DATUM OF 1929). Reference surface set by
the National Geodetic Survey deduced from a continental adjustment of all
existing adjustments in 1929.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM). The point on the bank or shore up to which
the presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
   PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT. A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing
and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public
agencies.
   PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS. All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGIONAL PERMITS. Offered for pre-approved projects which are considered
minor projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR Part 3708 rules for
Northeastern Illinois regulatory floodways. A complete listing of the terms and
conditions for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR
website.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A land surveyor registered in the State of
Illinois, under The Illinois Land Surveyors Act (225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.).
   REGISTERED OR LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. An engineer registered in the
State of Illinois, under The Illinois Professional Engineering Practice Act
(225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.).
   REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE. Development activities which do not
result in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes
to the dimensions of a structure.
   REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on 2
separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the cost of repairs at the
time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the
market value of the structure before the damaged occurred.
   RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY. A retention facility stores stormwater runoff
without a gravity release. A DETENTION FACILITY provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.
   RIVERINE SFHA. Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek,
intermittent stream, ditch, on stream lake system or any other identified
channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes,
ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank
flooding.
   RUNOFF. The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
   SEDIMENTATION. The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). Any base flood area subject to flooding
from a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other identified
channel or ponding and shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance
Rate Map as Zone A, AO, A1 -30, AE, A99, AH, VO, V30, VE, V, M, E, or D.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
   STATEWIDE PERMITS. Statewide permits are offered for pre-approved projects
that are considered minor projects, which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR Part
3700 rules. A complete listing of the statewide permits and permit requirements
can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
   STRUCTURE. See BUILDING.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this chapter
equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred, regardless of the actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. The term includes repetitive
loss buildings. See REPETITIVE LOSS.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a
structure, taking place subsequent to the adoption of this chapter in which the
cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement.
      (2)   For the purposes of this definition SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
      (3)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with
existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure.
   TRANSITION SECTION. Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from
a narrow cross-section to a wide cross-section or vice versa.
   VILLAGE. Village of Maywood, Cook County, Illinois.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.
(Ord. C0-08-33, passed 8-19-2008)
§ 152.03 HOW TO USE THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall be responsible for
fulfilling all of the duties listed in §
152.04. To fulfill those duties, the Sustainability and Innovation Director
first should use the criteria listed in §
152.05, Base Flood Elevations, to determine whether the development site is
located within a floodplain. Once it has been determined that a site is located
within a floodplain, the Sustainability and Innovation Director must determine
whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a designated floodway,
or within a SFHA or floodplain for which no floodway has been identified. If
the site is within a flood fringe, the Sustainability and Innovation Director
shall require that the minimum requirements of §
152.06 be met. If the site is within a floodway, the Sustainability and
Innovation Director shall require that the minimum requirements of §
152.07 be met. If the site is located within a SFHA or floodplain for which no
detailed study has been completed and approved, the Sustainability and
Innovation Director shall require that the minimum requirements of §
152.08 be met.
   (B)   ln addition, the general requirements of §
152.09 shall be met for all developments meeting the requirements of §§
152.06,
152.07, or
152.08. The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall assure that all
subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of §
152.10.
   (C)   If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Code Enforcement
Director shall review the requirements of §
152.11 to make sure they are met. In addition, the Sustainability and
Innovation Director shall complete all notification requirements.
   (D)   ln order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in
this chapter, the Sustainability and Innovation Director may take any and all
actions as outlined in §
152.13.
(Ord. C0-08-33, passed 8-19-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 152.04 DUTIES OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall be responsible for the
general administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the
following:
   (A)   Determining the floodplain designation. Check all new development
sites to determine whether they are in a Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA). If
they are in a SFHA, determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or
in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted and which
drains more than 1 square mile. Check whether the development is potentially
within an extended SFHA (with a drainage area less than 1 square mile),
indicating that the development would have adverse impacts regarding storage,
conveyance, or inundation which would be the basis for the applicant being
required to delineate the floodplain and floodway and be subject to the
remaining sections of this chapter.
   (B)   Professional engineer review. If the development site is within a
floodway or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted
and which drains more than 1 square mile, the permit shall be referred to a
registered professional engineer under the employ or contract of the Village
for review to ensure that the development meets §
152.07 or
152.08. In the case of an appropriate use, the P.E. shall state in writing that
the development meets the requirements of §
152.07.
   (C)   Dam safety requirements. Dams are classified as to their size and
their hazard/damage potential in the event of failure. The construction or
major modification of all Class I (high hazard) and Class II (moderate hazard)
dams require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit. Some Class III (low hazard) dams
require an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit, depending on the drainage area to the
dam, the height of the dam and the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most
off-channel detention basins that have an embankment are non-jurisdictional
Class III dam. It is not required that IDNR/OWR “sign off” on all non-
jurisdictional Class III dams. A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge
can estimate a hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety
permit is required. A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for
the construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams. Regulated dams
may include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures.
   (D)   Other permit requirements. Ensure that any and all required federal,
state and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
   (E)   Plan review and permit issuance. Ensure that all development
activities within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the Village meet the
requirements of this chapter and issue a floodplain development permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this
community when the development meets the conditions of this chapter.
   (F)   Inspection review. Inspect all development projects before, during and
after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and schedule on an annual basis
an inspection of the floodplain and document the results of the inspection.
   (G)   Damage determinations. Make damage determinations of all damaged
buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged
structures which must comply with §
152.09(C)(3).
   (H)   Elevation and floodproofing certificates. Maintain in the permit files
an elevation certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) of a residential or non-residential building subject to §
152.09, and/or the elevation to which a non-residential building has been
floodproofed, using a floodproofing certificate, for all buildings subject to §
152.09.
   (I)   Records for public inspection. Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base flood data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies
of federal or state permit documents, variance documentation, Conditional
Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Amendment and
“as-built” elevation and floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
   (J)   State permits. Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to §§
152.07 and
152.08, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the Village.
However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the Village and
shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
      (1)   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes;
      (2)   IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures as defined in §
152.02 and all other state, federal or local unit of government projects,
including projects of the Village and County, except for those projects meeting
the requirements of §
152.07(B)(10);
      (3)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per §
152.07(B)(6)(e);
      (4)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to §
152.07(B)(6)(d);
      (5)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in §
152.07(B)(6)(a), (b) and (h);
      (6)   Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
      (7)   Any changes in the base flood elevation or floodway locations; and
      (8)   Base flood elevation determinations where none now exist.
   (K)   Cooperation with other agencies. Cooperate with state and federal
floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency
flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this chapter.
Submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map
within 6 months whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the base
flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map. Submit reports as
required for the National Flood Insurance Program, and notify FEMA of any
proposed amendments to this chapter.
   (L)   Promulgate regulations. Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to
the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any changes to this chapter.
(Ord. C0-08-33, passed 8-19-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 152.05 BASE FLOOD ELEVATION.
   (A)   This chapter’s protection standard is based on the Flood Insurance
Study for the Village. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood
elevation is not available for a particular site, then the protection standard
shall be according to the best existing data available in the Illinois State
Water Survey’s Floodplain Information Repository that has been approved by
IDNR/OWR and FEMA. When a party disagrees with the best available data, they
shall submit a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with
better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration
prior to any development of the site.
   (B)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
DesPlaines River and Silver Creek shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood
profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of the Village prepared by FEMA and dated
August 19, 2008, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be prepared
from time to time.
   (C)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of
those parts of unincorporated Cook County that are within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed into the Village shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of Cook
County prepared by FEMA and dated August 19,2008, and such amendments or
revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   (D)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each SFHA
delineated as an “AH Zone” or “AO Zone” shall be that elevation (or depth)
delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the Village.
   (E)   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the
remaining SFHAs delineated as an “A Zone” on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of
the Village shall be according to the best existing data available from
federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an engineering
study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood elevations.
When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation exists, the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine SFHA shall be determined
from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, WSP-2, or a dynamic model such as HIP.
The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from a
hydrologic model, such as HEC-I, TR-20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in
various publications prepared by the United States Geological Survey for
estimating peak flood discharges. Along any watercourses draining more than 1
square mile, the above analyses shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval.
Once approved it must be submitted to the Illinois State Water Survey
Floodplain Information Repository for filing. For a non-riverine SFHA, the base
flood elevation shall be the historic flood of record plus 3 feet, unless
calculated by a detailed engineering study and approved by IDNR/OWR for
drainage areas greater than 1 square mile. For an unmapped extended SFHA (with
a drainage area less than 1 square mile) which has been identified by
theSustainability and Innovation Director pursuant to §
152.04(A), the base flood elevation shall be determined by the applicant
utilizing a method as approved in above, with concurrence of the Sustainability
and Innovation Director.
(Ord. C0-08-33, passed 8-19-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 152.06 OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS.
   (A)   Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation, and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of
this chapter. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems.
   (B)   Developments located within the flood fringe shall meet the
requirements of this section, along with the requirements of §
152.09.
      (1)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body not exempted by
law shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the Sustainability and Innovation Director.
      (2)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Sustainability and Innovation Director. The application shall
be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line
dimensions and legal description for the property and sealed by a licensed
engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations in M.S.L., NAVD
88 and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location
and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed
buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest
adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will
be subject to the requirements of §
152.09.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the
Sustainability and Innovation Director shall compare the elevation of the site
to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development
located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation of
the current Flood Insurance Rate Map and which has not been filled after the
date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map without a permit as required
by this chapter is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter. Conversely, any development located on land shown
to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but shown on
the current Flood Insurance Rate Map is subject to the provisions of this
chapter. The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall maintain
documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site and
certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
      (4)   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas shall
be submitted. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
      (5)   The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local
permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this
type of activity. The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall not issue a
permit unless all other federal, state, and local permits have been obtained.
      (6)   Preventing increased damages. No development in the flood fringe
shall create a threat to public health and safety.
      (7)   Preventing increased damages. If fill is being used to elevate the
site above the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant
shall submit sufficient data and obtain a letter of map revision (LOMR) from
FEMA for the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
      (8)   Compensatory storage. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is
authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by theauthorized
fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of
excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and
watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas
so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
      (9)   Compensatory storage; construction of the lowest floor below the
base flood elevation (BFE). A person who has obtained a Letter of Map Revision
based on fill that removes a site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due
to the use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit
from the Village to construct the lowest floor of a residential building below
the BFE in the flood fringe. The Director of Sustainability and Innovation
shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant has complied with all the
criteria set forth in the following:
         (a)   Compensatory storage shall be provided per §
152.06(B)(8).
         (b)   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e.,
window wells, access ways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation
(FPE).
         (c)   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above
the FPE, for a minimum distance of 10 feet beyond the outside face of the
structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
met, the Sustainability and Innovation Director may waive the 10-foot minimum
setback if an Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer certifies that an
alternative method to protect the building from damage due to hydrostatic
pressures has been met. The certifications shall be in the form of a detailed
soils and structural design analysis, which shall be submitted to the
Sustainability and Innovation Director for review. The Sustainability and
Innovation Director may require such additional documentation as necessary to
prove that the proposed shorter setback distance will keep the structure
reasonably safe. In no case shall the setback distance be less than 4 feet.
         (d)   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of 20 feet from the structure, shall be above the BFE. However, if
site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained, the
Sustainability and Innovation Director may waive the 20-foot minimum setback
distance if an Illinois Registered Professional Engineer certifies that an
alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic
pressures have been met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design
proving that a shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe
from flooding, shall be submitted to the Village for review. In no case shall
the setback distance be less than 4 feet.
         (e)   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that
meets all requirements of this division (B)(9) and is at least 5 feet thick
under the basement floor slab. Nothing in this division (B)(9) shall be
interpreted to require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as
part of a LOMR-F, if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar
classification and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC
or ML according to ASTM standard D-2487, Classification of Soils for
Engineering Purposes.
         (f)   The fill material must be homogeneous (i.e., all of one
material) and isotropic (i.e., having the same engineering properties) and the
engineering priorities must be in the same direction.
         (g)   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified
and inspected by an Illinois Licensed Professional Engineer, as warranted by
the site conditions.
         (h)   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than
5 feet below the BFE.
         (i)   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab,
and minimum of 3 horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply shall be
provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at 4 times the
estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away from the
building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the floor
under the effect of the seepage pressure.
         (j)   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
         (k)   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand
hydrostatic pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
         (l)   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set
forth above in this division (B)(9), the Sustainability and Innovation Director
may allow the construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant
demonstrates that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and
requirements set forth in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe
from flooding. In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is
reasonably safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed
engineering analysis of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered
basement study shall be completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA
Technical Bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of the fill being prepared by an
Illinois Registered Professional Engineer.
         (m)   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site,
in no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed 18 inches, as measured from the previously existing natural grade. The
rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation, if
necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and openly
to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to drain
the compensatory storage area will not be permitted.
(Ord. C0-08-33, passed 8-19-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.07 OCCUPATION AND USE OF DESIGNATED FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site
modification or building modification within a designated floodway. The
designated floodways for the DesPlaines River and Silver Creek shall be as
delineated on the designated floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR according to
and referenced in §
152.02. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which meet the
criteria in this section.
   (B)   All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to
accomplish the purpose of the project. The development shall also meet the
requirements of §
152.09.
      (1)   No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by
state law shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining
a development permit from the Sustainability and Innovation Director and IDNR/
OWR.
      (2)   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Code Enforcement Director. The application shall include the
following information:
         (a)   Name and address of applicant;
         (b)   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         (c)   Name of stream or body of water affected;
         (d)   Description of proposed activity;
         (e)   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
         (f)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
         (g)   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
         (h)   Signature of the applicant or the applicant’s agent;
         (i)   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
         (j)   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form; and
         (k)   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign
the name of the trustee by them as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall
be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by
name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
         (l)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include
as a minimum:
            1.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
            2.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level NAVD88, adjacent property lines
and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, location of any channels
and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and
navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially
navigable body of water), designated floodway limit, floodplain limit,
specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location
and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical
scale;
            3.    Cross-section views of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal
water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
            4.   A soil erosion and sediment control plan for disturbed areas.
This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
            5.   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the designated floodway location.
         (m)   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development.
         (n)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of §
152.07(B)(4).
         (o)   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a Letter of Map Revision has been approved by FEMA.
         (p)   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings
of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing
ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed
excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of §
152.09.
         (q)   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
            1.   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
            2.   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations
or methods (see division (B)(6)(i)1. of this section) to accomplish the purpose
of the proposed work;
            3.   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in division (B)(6)(i)1. of this section would
have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected;
and
            4.   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project,
considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the
body of water affected.
      (3)   The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local
permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity. The
Sustainability and Innovation Director shall not issue the development permit
unless all required federal and state permits have been obtained. A Registered
Professional Engineer, under the employ or contract of the Village shall review
and approve applications reviewed under this section.
      (4)   Preventing increased damages. The only development in a floodway
which will be allowed are appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the
base flood elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health
and safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions
of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or
aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate
mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses
listed in 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 will be allowed. The approved appropriate
uses are as follows:
         (a)   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife.
         (b)   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring
access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities,
and facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses.
         (c)   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls.
         (d)   Underground and overhead utilities.
         (e)   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail
systems, including any related fencing (at least 50% open when viewed from any
1 direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open
air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block flood
flows nor reduce floodway storage.
         (f)   Detached garages, storage sheds, or other non-habitable
accessory structures that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway
storage.
         (g)   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto.
         (h)   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
            1.   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event
will not exceed 1.0 foot; or
            2.   The applicant of a short-term recreational use facility
parking lot, formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events
and accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all
overbank flooding events.
         (i)   Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a
positive non-erosive slope toward a watercourse.
         (j)   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures, or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than 10 feet away from the exterior wall of the existing structure,
and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the structure.
         (k)   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged
building, provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the
building was damaged to 50% or more of the market value before the damage
occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection
elevation.
         (l)   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase
the enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows including but not limited to,
fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story additions. If the
building is improved to 50% or more of the market value before the modification
occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will be protected from
flooding to the flood protection elevation.
      (5)   Engineering and mitigation criteria. Appropriate uses do not
include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building
additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to
accommodate otherwise non-appropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including
landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials
except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use. Within the
designated floodway as identified on the floodway maps designated by IDNR/OWR,
the construction of an appropriate use, will be considered permissible provided
that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation
criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and
data by a registered professional engineer and provided that any structure
meets the protection requirements of §
152.09.
         (a)   Preservation of flood conveyance, so as not to increase flood
stages upstream. For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on-stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
            1.   Designated floodway conveyance, “K” = (1.486/n)(AR2/3) where
“n” is Manning’s roughness factor, “A” is the effective flow area of the cross-
section, and “R” is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Open
Channel Hydraulics, Ven Te Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.)
            2.   The same Manning’s “n” value shall be used for both existing
and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a federal,
state, or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a non-vegetative
land cover.
            3.   Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations
of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to
IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
               A.    When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of 1
foot horizontal for every 4 feet of the flooded stream’s length.
               B.    When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the watershould be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of 1
foot horizontal for every 1 foot of the flooded stream’s length.
               C.    When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical
direction, a minimum of 1 foot vertical transition for every 10 feet of stream
length shall be used.
               D.    Transition sections shall be provided between cross-
sections with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated
floodway delineation on adjacent properties.
               E.   All cross-sections used in the calculations shall be
located perpendicular to flood flows.
         (b)   Preservation of floodway storage so as not to increase
downstream flooding. Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated
floodway storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or
structures placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least 1.5
times the volume of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created storage lost
due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to be
replaced. The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed between
the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation.
All designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All designated
floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse. If the
compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed
construction, the applicant’s engineer shall demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through a
determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the
compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.There shall be no reduction in
floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification, unless such
modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.
         (c)   Preservation of floodway velocities so as not to increase stream
erosion or flood heights. For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts
or on stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in
the average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. In the case of bridges
or culverts or on stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water
in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be increased at the
structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be avoided by the use
of rip-rap or other design measures.
         (d)   Construction of new bridges or culvert crossings and roadway
approaches. The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for
all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event; or the
upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or
within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the
design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded
flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood
stages greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a
permit for a dam or waiver.
            1.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in §
152.05. Culverts must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT, FHWA Hydraulic Chart for
the Selection of Highway Culverts. Bridges must be analyzed using the U.S. DOT/
Federal Highway Administration Hydraulics of Bridge Waterways calculation
procedures.
            2.   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per §
152.07(B)(6)(b).
            3.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per §
152.07(B)(6)(c).
            4.   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used
for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
            5.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge
showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by §
152.07(B)(4).
            6.   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed per §
152.07(B)(6)(h).
         (e)   Reconstruction or modification of existing bridges, culverts,
and approach roads.
            1.   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of
flood damage.
            2.   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant’s engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
            3.   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing
is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3708 (Floodway Construction in
Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued.
         (f)   On-stream structures built for the purpose of backing up water.
Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when compared to
the existing conditions, for all floodevents up to and including the 100-year
frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing
vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection
grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. A
permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from
IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the
stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as
defined in §
152.02 shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702
(Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity involves a
modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an impoundment, it shall
be demonstrated that:
            1.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by
providing flood control, public recreation, or regional stormwater detention;
            2.   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous
fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life
cycle, such as for spawning;
            3.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water
quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank
slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures, and a pre-sedimentation basin;
            4.   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants.
If there is more than 1 municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
            5.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
         (g)   Floodproofing of existing habitable, residential and commercial
structures. If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no further than 10 feet from the outside of the building.
Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for
floodproofing activities.
         (h)   Excavation in the floodway. When excavation is proposed in the
design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for
lost conveyance or other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be
provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios
shall be used unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through
engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be
used with the same efficiency:
            1.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of 1
foot horizontal for every 4 feet of the flooded stream’s length;
            2.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of 1 foot
horizontal for every 1 foot of the flooded stream’s length; and
            3.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical, a minimum
of 1 foot vertical transition for every 10 feet of stream length shall be used.
            4.    Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream
and downstream of the transition sections.
         (i)   If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, it
shall be demonstrated that:
            1.   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which
would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the
body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, flood proofing of existing structures, removal of structures
from the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the
establishment of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification
is acceptable if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water
quality and fish and wildlife habitat;
            2.   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values;
            3.   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria:
               A.   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross-
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
               B.    Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at
both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they
will prevent erosion.
               C.    One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation.
               D.    Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to
that which is essential for construction of the channel.
               E.    Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than 3:1 horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Native
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or rip-rap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as
concrete, gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
               F.   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall
be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
               G.    If the existing channel contains considerable bottom
diversity such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such
features shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and
flow characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established,
where appropriate.
               H.   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end
of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
               I.    New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and
all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
               J.    There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
               K.    Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and
            4.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
         (j)   Seeding and stabilization plan. For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
         (k)   Soil erosion and sedimentation measures. For all activities in
the floodway, including grading, filling, and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
            1.   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the
maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the
time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural
vegetation be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than 15 days prior to the
initiation of improvements.
            2.   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied
to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within 15 days after final grade is reached on any portion of the
site, and within 15 days to denuded areas which may not be at final grade but
will remain undisturbed for longer than 60 days.
            3.    Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion
ditches, and sediment traps and basins.
            4.   A vegetated buffer strip of at least 25 feet in width shall be
preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along existing channels (see
division (B)(6)(p) of this section). Construction vehicle use of channels shall
be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary,
to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or along channels shall be
restabilized immediately.
            5.   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented
consistent with “Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control in Illinois” (1988) also known as the “Green Book” and
“The Illinois Urban Manual” (NRCS, 1995).
         (l)   Public flood control projects. For public flood control
projects, the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if
the applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
         (m)   General criteria for analysis of flood elevations.
            1.   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in § 152.05, must be used for analysis of the base
conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or conditions have
changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and concurrence on the
appropriate base conditions data to use.
            2.   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of
the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet:
               A.   The requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency
flood elevations of the designated floodway conditions; and
               B.    Conditions with the receiving stream at normal water
elevations.
            3.   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments, or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified, or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next 5
years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
         (n)   Conditional Letter of Map Revision. If the appropriate use would
result in a change in the designated floodway location or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all
information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a conditional
designated floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional
concurrence of the designated floodway change before a permit is issued. The
final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA until as-built plans
or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging, or excavating
activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. In the case of non-
government projects, the municipality in incorporated areas and the county in
unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional designated
floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be given. No filling,
grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval
is issued. After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
         (o)   Professional engineer’s supervision. All engineering analyses
shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
         (p)   For all activities in the floodway involving construction within
25 feet of the channel, the following criteria shall be met:
            1.   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at
least 25 feet of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
            2.   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the
construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
            3.   After receipt of conditional approval of the designated
floodway change and issuance of a permit and a Conditional Letter of Map
Revision, construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may
proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction that is not an
appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map is
changed and a final Letter of Map Revision is received. The designated floodway
map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the
“as-built” plans.”
         (q)   After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway
change and issuance of a permit and a Conditional Letter of Map Revision,
construction as necessary to change the floodway designation may proceed but no
buildings or structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use
may be placed in that area until the designated floodway map is changed and a
final Letter of Map Revision is received. The designated floodway map will be
revised upon acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the “as-built”
plans.
      (6)   Development activities in delegated communities requiring state
review. For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the
following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and
concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or
county delegated state permitting authority in the floodway:
         (a)   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed
bridge pursuant to division (B)(6)(d) of this section.
         (b)   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, pursuant to division (B)(6)(e) of this section.
         (c)   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
storage pursuant to division (B)(6)(a), (b), and (h).
         (d)   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in §
152.02) and all other state, federal, or local units of government projects,
including projects of the municipality or county.
         (e)   An engineer’s determination that a proposed bridge affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.
         (f)   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles.
         (g)   Projects in public bodies of water.
      (7)   Other permits. In addition to the other requirements of this
chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be
issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation
that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to ILCS Ch. 615,
Act 5, §§ 5 et seq. No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has
delegated this responsibility to the Village.
      (8)   Permits for dams. Any work involving the construction, modification
or removal of a dam as defined in § 152.02 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702
(Rules for Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the
start of construction of a dam. If the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg
office. If the Director of Sustainability and Innovation finds a dam which is
believed to be in unsafe condition, the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR
Schaumburg office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
      (9)   Activities that do not require a Registered Professional Engineer’s
review. The following activities may be permitted without a Licensed
Professional Engineer’s review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
         (a)   Underground and overhead utilities that:
            1.   Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations,
or
            2.   Do not require the placement of above ground structures in the
floodway, or
            3.   In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the
pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of 3 feet below the existing streambed,
and
            4.   Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the
estimated 100-year frequency flood elevation or attached above the low chord of
an existing bridge (with the permission of the bridge owner). No supporting
towers shall be placed in the watercourse and shall be designed so as to not
catch debris.
            5.   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
            6.   A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution as defined by the Environmental Protection Act, 415 ILCS 5 (1992
State Bar Edition) shall be provided with shut-off valves on each side of the
body of water to be crossed.
            7.   All Illinois Commerce Commission, National Electric Safety
Codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met.
         (b)   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that:
            1.   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope; and
            2.    Do not result in an increase in ground elevation;
            3.   Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall
location.
         (c)   Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences),
properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
         (d)   Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:
            1.   Does not exceed 1,000 feet in length.
            2.   Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
            3.   Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross-sectional
area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
            4.    Stabilization utilizing native vegetation and gradual side
slopes are the preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems.
Where high channel velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use
of alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or rip-rap are preferred materials. Artificial materials such as concrete,
construction rubble, and gabions should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
         (e)   Temporary stream crossings in which:
            1.   The approach roads will be 2 foot or less above natural grade.
            2.   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up
the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert.
            3.   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least 2
feet below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be non-
erosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.
            4.   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise
stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
            5.   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within
1 year after authorization.
(Ord. C0-08-30, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.08 OCCUPATION AND USE OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE
NOT IDENTIFIED.
   In SFHA or floodplains, (including AE, AH, AO and Unnumbered A Zones) where
no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile,
no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative effect of the
proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated uses and
structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and passage of
the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation.
   (A)   Development permit.
      (1)   No person, firm, corporation, or governmental body, not exempted by
state law, shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain without first
obtaining a development permit from the Sustainability and Innovation Director.
Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Sustainability and Innovation Director. The application shall be accompanied by
drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions; and
existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or
filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or surveyor; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the elevations of
the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the
requirements of §
152.09. The application for a development permit shall also include the
following information:
         (a)   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose,
and intended use;
         (b)   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         (c)   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
         (d)   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include
as a minimum:
            1.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
            2.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations in mean sea level NAVD88, adjacent property lines
and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance between proposed
activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is in or near a
commercially navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and
orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;
            3.   Cross-section views of the project perpendicular to the flow
of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view,
existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency
flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical
scales (horizontal and vertical); and
            4.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post-construction maintenance.
         (e)   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of division (D) of this
section.
         (f)   Any and all other federal, state, and local permits or approvals
that may be required for this type of development.
      (2)   Based on the best available existing data according to the Illinois
State Water Survey’s Floodplain Information Repository, the Sustainability and
Innovation Director shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation information exist
for the site, the developer’s engineer shall calculate the elevation according
to §
152.05(E). Any development located on land that can be shown to have been
higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map
Identification is not in the SFHA and, therefore, not subject to the
requirements of this chapter. The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall
maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site
and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
      (3)   The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other federal, state, and local
permits, approvals or permit-not-required letters that may be required for this
type of activity. The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall not issue
the development permit unless all required federal, state, and local permits
have been obtained.
   (B)   Preventing increased damages.
      (1)   No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been
determined shall create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair
the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or
impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be
minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this chapter.
      (2)   Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been
determined, the following standards shall apply:
         (a)   The developer shall have a Registered Professional Engineer
state in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations, and data that
the project meets the engineering requirements of §
152.07(B)(6)(a) through (l) for the entire floodplain as calculated under the
provisions of §
152.05(E). As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study
performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR
for acceptance as a designated floodway. Upon acceptance of the floodway by
IDNR/OWR, the developer shall then demonstrate that the project meets the
requirements of §
152.07 for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be defined according to
the definition in §
152.02.
         (b)   A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant
first obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written documentation that a permit is
not required from IDNR/OWR.
         (c)   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has
delegated permit responsibility to the Village per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part, Part
3708 for designated floodways.
         (d)   Dam safety permits. Any work involving the construction,
modification or removal of a dam as defined in §
152.02 per 17 Ill. Adm. Code Part 3702 (Rules for Construction of Dams) shall
obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of a dam. If the
Director of Sustainability and Innovation finds a dam that does not have an
IDNR/OWR permit, the Sustainability and Innovation Director shall immediately
notify the IDNR/OWR Schaumburg office. If the Sustainability and Innovation
Director finds a dam which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the
Sustainability and Innovation Director shall immediately notify the owner of
the dam, the IDNR/OWRSchaumburg office, and the Illinois Emergency Management
Agency (IEMA).
         (e)   Activities allowed without engineer review. The following
activities may be permitted without a Licensed Professional Engineer’s review
or calculation of base flood elevation and designated floodway. Such activities
shall still meet the other requirements of this chapter.
            1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit number 2.
            2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 3.
            3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 4.
            4.   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit No. 5.
            5.   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit No. 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change
in grade) are covered by this permit.
            6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 7.
            7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 8.
            8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 9.
            9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 10.
            10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of
DNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 11.
            11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge
widenings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit No. 12.
            12.   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit No. 13.
            13.   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit No. 14.
            14.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from state floodway permit
requirements.
            15.   The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
         (f)   The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
      (3)   Compensatory storage. Whenever any portion of a floodplain is
authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the
authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.5 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In the case of streams and
watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas
so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(Ord. C0-08-30, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)  Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.09 PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS; PROTECTION
OF BUILDING.
   In addition to the requirements found in §§
152.06,
152.07 and
152.08 for development in flood fringes, designated floodways, and SFHA or
floodplains where no floodways have been identified (Zones A, AO, AH, AE, A1-
A30, A99, VO, V1-30, VE, V, M, E, or D), the following requirements shall be
met:
   (A)   Public health standards.
      (1)   No developments in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation (FPE).
      (2)   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      (3)   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (4)   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer
lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
   (B)   Carrying capacity and notification. For all projects involving channel
modification, fill, or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood
carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the
Village shall notify adjacent communities in writing 30 days prior to the
issuance of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
   (C)   Protecting buildings. All buildings located within a 100-year
floodplain also known as a SFHA, and all buildings located outside the 100-year
floodplain but within the 500-year floodplain, shall be protected from flood
damage below the flood protection elevation. This building protection criteria
applies to the following situations:
      (1)   Construction or placement of a new building valued at more than
$1,000 or 70 square feet;
      (2)   Substantial improvement to an existing building as defined in §
152.02, including an increase to the first floor area by more than 20%. This
alteration shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any alteration which
has taken place subsequent to April 1, 1990;
      (3)   Substantial damage to an existing building as defined in §
152.02. This alteration shall be figured cumulatively beginning with any
alteration which has taken place subsequent to April 1, 1990;
      (4)   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in §
152.02;
      (5)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured
home on an existing site. This building protection requirements does not apply
to returning a mobile home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it was
removed to avoid flood damage; and
      (6)   Installing a travel trailer on a site for more than 180 days per
year. This building protection requirement may be met by 1 of the following
methods.
   (D)   Residential or non-residential building, when allowed, may be
constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the
flood protection elevation.
      (2)   Fill requirements. The fill shall be placed in layers no greater
than 6 inches deep before compaction and should extend at least 10 feet beyond
the foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection
elevation. The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation.
However, the 10-foot minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies
an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic
pressures. The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour. The fill
shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage from or onto
neighboring properties.
   (E)   A residential or non-residential building may be elevated in
accordance with the following:
      (1)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base flood or
100-year frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or the permanent openings, 1 on each wall,
shall be no more than 1 foot above existing grade, and consists of a minimum of
2 openings. The openings must have a total net area of not less than 1 square
inch for every 1 square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding below the
base flood elevation.
      (2)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned
in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure
to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris.
      (3)   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed
of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement)
and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
      (4)   The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space.
      (5)   Manufactured homes, and travel trailers to be installed on a site
for more than 180 days, shall be elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for
the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code Part
870. In addition, all manufactured homes shall meet the following elevation
requirements:
         (a)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision, or in an existing manufactured home park
or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage
from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation.
         (b)   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured
home shall be elevated so that either the top of the lowest floor is above the
base flood elevation or the chassis is at least 36 inches in height above grade
and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of equivalent strength,
whichever is less.
      (6)   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet
the elevation and anchoring requirements of division (E)(5) above unless:
         (a)   They are on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
         (b)   They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only
for recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
   (F)   Only a non-residential building may be structurally dry floodproofed
(in lieu of elevation) provided that a registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the building has been structurally dry
floodproofed below the flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant
utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood. The building design shall take into
account flood velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
forces, the effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice. Floodproofing
measures shall be operable without human intervention and without an outside
source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not
considered floodproofing for the purpose of this division (F)).
   (G)   A building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the
flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and
      (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall have
openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of 1 opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than 1 square inch per 1 square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than 1 foot above grade; and
      (3)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood protection
elevation must not be more than 2 feet below the lowest adjacent exterior
grade; and
      (4)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the interior
grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not exceed 4 feet at
any point; and
      (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove floodwaters
from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period of time
after a flood event; and
      (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation must
be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; and
      (7)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above the
flood protection elevation.
   (H)   Critical facilities shall be protected to the 500-year flood
elevation. In addition, all ingress and egress from any critical facility must
be protected to the 500-year flood elevation.
   (I)   Tool sheds, detached garages, and other minor accessory structures on
an existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor
below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
      (1)   The building is not used for human habitation.
      (2)   All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material. Structures located in
a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on a building site so as
not to block the flow of flood waters and shall also meet the appropriate use
criteria of §
152.07. In addition, all other requirements of §§
152.06,
152.07 and
152.08 must be met.
      (3)   The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation.
      (4)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation.
      (5)   The building shall be valued at less than $10,000 and be less than
500 square feet in floor size.
      (6)   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or
tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses.
      (7)   The building shall meet the permanent opening criteria of division
(E)(1).
   (J)   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also
meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in §
152.07. Non-conforming structures located in a designated floodway may remain
in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered in accordance
with §
152.07(B)(4). A non-conforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or other
natural or man-made disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds 50% of
its market value before it was damaged, in which case it shall conform to this
chapter.
(Ord. C0-08-30, passed 7-15-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.10 OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent
that they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
   (A)   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements, and
planned unit developments (PUDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure
that the proposed developments are consistent with §§
152.06,
152.07,
152.08 and
152.09 and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new
subdivisions, mobile home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs) shall
include a signed statement by a Registered Professional Engineer that the plat
or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance
with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
   (B)   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel
trailer parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured
home parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing study filed with the Illinois
State Water Survey, the applicant’s engineer shall be responsible for
calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per §
152.05(E) and the floodway delineation per the definition in §
152.02. The applicant’s engineer shall submit the data to IDNR/OWR for review
and approval as best available regulatory data and then send it to the State
Water Survey.
   (C)   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   (D)   The Board of Trustees (City Council, Board of Trustees, County Board)
shall not approve any planned unit development (PUD) or plat of subdivision
located outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as
not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(Ord. C0-08-30, passed 7-15-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.11 VARIANCES.
   (A)   No variances shall be granted to any development located in a
designated floodway as defined in §
152.02. Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship on a
specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the Plan Commission/
Zoning Board of Appeals for a variance. The Zoning Administrator shall review
the applicant’s request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to
the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that
all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      (2)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      (3)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      (4)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance;
      (5)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public
facilities;
      (6)   The provisions of §§
152.06(B)(6) through (8) and
152.08(D) through (E) of this chapter shall still be met;
      (7)   The activity is not in a designated floodway;
      (8)   The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do not represent a
general problem; and
      (9)   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of §
152.09 that would lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
      (1)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as $25 per $100 of insurance coverage;
      (2)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      (3)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that they will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and
liability.
   (D)   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site
or historic structure as defined in §
152.02, may be granted using criteria more permissive than the requirements of
division (B)(6) and (C) of this section, subject to the conditions that:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      (2)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure.
(Ord. C0-08-30, passed 7-15-2008) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.12 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the SFHA,
will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create liability on
the part of the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage
that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision made
lawfully thereunder.
(Ord. C0-08-30, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 152.13 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
   (B)   Where this chapter and other ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
   (C)   This chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the Village
passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program.
(Ord. C0-08-30, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 152.14 SEPARABILITY.
   Each section, paragraph, clause and provision of this chapter is separable
and if any provision is held unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, such
decision shall not affect the remainder of this chapter, nor any part thereof,
other than that part affected by such decision.
(Ord. C0-08-30, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of a
variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. Upon due
investigation, the Sustainability and Innovation Director may determine that a
violation of the minimum standards of this chapter exist.
   (B)   The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall notify the owner in
writing of such violation.
      (1)   If such owner fails after 10 days’ notice to correct the violation:
         (a)   The Village may make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the Court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
         (b)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than $50 or more than $1,000 for each offense.
         (c)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues
         (d)   The Village shall record a notice of violation on the title to
the property.
      (2)   The Sustainability and Innovation Director shall inform the owner
that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages
and, therefore, may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.
         (a)   The Sustainability and Innovation Director is authorized to
issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-
work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and
shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring
the stop-work order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the
permit.
         (b)   1.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended
or revoked until a hearing is held by the Zoning Board of Appeals. Written
notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
               A.   The grounds for compliant or reasons for suspension or
revocation; and
               B.   The time and place of the hearing.
            2.   At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity
to present evidence on his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or
revoked.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(Ord. C0-08-30, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
CHAPTER 153: BILLBOARDS
Section
   
153.01   Definitions
   
153.02   When and where allowed
   
153.03   Regulations applicable to all billboards
   
153.04   Regulations applicable to electronic billboards
§ 153.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   BILLBOARD. A single or multi-faced outdoor advertising structure which is
erected, maintained and used for the display of information or pictures
unrelated to a business or other type of establishment which is located on the
same premises as the sign. Such term shall not include signs erected or
maintained on roofs, or signs attached to or painted upon the walls of
buildings, which are separately regulated by the Zoning Ordinance of the
Village of Maywood. The term BILLBOARD shall also not be held to include any
sign displaying official notices issued by any court or public office.
   ELECTRONIC BILLBOARD. A billboard whose message or messages are on
triangular louvered facings and are changed by electronic rotation of the
louvers (also known as Tri-Vision signs or multiple message signs); or whose
message(s) may be changed, without moving parts, by electronic process through
the use of moving or intermittent light or lights (also known as variable
message signs).
   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any highway designated by the Illinois Department of
Transportation and approved by the United States  Department of Transportation
as part of the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 153.02 WHEN AND WHERE ALLOWED.
   (A)   Billboards, other than electronic billboards as defined herein, are
allowed within the Village only where such billboard was legally in existence
as of December 31, 2009.
   (B)   Electronic billboards are allowed within the Village only where such
billboard was legally in existence as of December 31, 2009 or within 150 feet
of an interstate highway in C-3 General Commercial, C-4 Town Center, and I
Institutional Zoning Districts. No electronic billboards shall be allowed
within 75 feet of the 1st Avenue right-of-way. The faces of all permitted
electronic billboards must be directed at interstate highway traffic as opposed
to traffic on other roadways within the Village. In conformance with Section
6.03 of the Highway Advertising Control Act of 1971 (225 ILCS 440/6.03), no 2
billboards located along the same side of an interstate highway or expressway
may be erected less than 500 feet apart.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010)
§ 153.03 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL BILLBOARDS.
   It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, locate or maintain any billboard
except where the following requirements are met:
   (A)   Construction. Where construction of a billboard is authorized, the
manner of construction, placement, materials used, and performance of any
billboard shall comply with all applicable Village ordinances, codes, rules and
regulations.
   (B)   Light intensity. Electronic billboards shall not be illuminated to a
degree of brightness that is greater than necessary for adequate visibility,
and shall not be permitted if they contain flashing or distracting movement, or
if they cause a glare on the roadway. The Village shall have the right, but not
the obligation, to require that the degree of brightness of the billboard be
decreased to a level acceptable to the Village.
   (C)   Size. The maximum size of any billboard shall be 1,200 square feet.
   (D)   Display content. Billboards shall not display anything constituting a
nuisance, as defined in this Code, any advertisements relating to distilled
spirits, gentleman’s clubs, or display any other morally objectionable message
or picture.
   (E)   Maintenance. Any person who erects or maintains a billboard within the
Village shall keep the entire structure in good repair and sanitary condition
and shall not allow waste paper, garbage, debris or excessive weeds or other
vegetation to accumulate or grow in or about the premises on which the same are
erected or maintained. This includes, but is not limited to, prompt removal of
any graffiti on the billboard or related structures.
   (F)   Violations are public nuisance; abatement; removal. If a billboard is
installed or maintained that does not comply with the provisions of this
section, it is declared to be a public nuisance. The owner/ operator must
remedy any violation within 3 days of notification by the Village that a
violation exists, unless a longer period is agreed to by the Village. The
owner/operator shall correct the violation or remove the sign at his or her own
expense. Where violations are not corrected within the required time period,
the Village may proceed to abate the nuisance and lien the property in
accordance with §§ 92.22 and 92.23 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (G)   Other standards apply. These standards and regulations shall be in
addition to any applicable construction, material and performance standards
under this Code, regulations adopted under this Code, and the Zoning Ordinance
of the Village of Maywood, that may also apply to billboards.
   (H)   Illinois Department of Transportation compliance. If a proposed
billboard location is along a Controlled Route, as defined by the Illinois
Department of Transportation, the billboard owner/operator must comply with
applicable regulations, as set forth in Title 92 Ill. Adm. Code Part 522
(Control of Outdoor Advertising Adjacent to Primary and Interstate Highways).
The owner/operator must be, and remain, in good standing with the Illinois
Department of Transportation, including obtained required permit approval.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2023-46, passed 11-7-2023)
§ 153.04 REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ELECTRONIC BILLBOARDS.
   It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, locate or maintain any electronic
billboard in the Village except in conformance with the requirements of §
153.03 and where the following additional requirements are met:
   (A)   Display times. Electronic billboards display times shall be subject to
the following limitations:
      (1)   Tri-Vision or multiple message signs must have a minimum display
time of 6 seconds in a fixed position, and the louver rotation time to change a
message shall be 1 second or less. Additionally, Tri-Vision or multiple message
signs must contain a mechanism that will stop the sign in 1 position if a
malfunction occurs.
      (2)   Variable message signs must not display any 1 message for less than
½ of a second, and no message may be repeated at intervals of less than 2
seconds. No segmented messages shall be displayed. No traveling message shall
travel at a rate slower than 16 light columns per second or faster than 32
columns per second.
   (B)   Village approval. No electronic billboard may be erected in the
Village without a public hearing and approval of the Village President and
Board of Trustees. The party petitioning for approval must provide notice of
the public hearing, in accordance with division (C). Application for erection
of an electronic billboard shall be made by submitting information relative to
the billboard to the Community Development Department and payment of any fees
relative to any zoning relief required prior to erection. Where no zoning
relief is required, the public hearing may be held before the Village President
and Board of Trustees following payment of an administrative fee of $150. For
all electronic billboard requests, the petitioning party is required to submit
a deposit of$15,000 to cover the Village’s costs in considering placement of
the electronic billboard, including the Village’s engineering and attorney
consulting fees relative to such consideration and approval. The petitioning
party remains obligated to pay the balance of the total actual fees and costs
incurred by the Village, including any costs incurred in excess of the initial
deposit, whether or not the billboard application is approved. Any portion of
the deposit that remains following approval or denial by the Village President
and Board of Trustees of the electronic billboard request shall be returned to
the petitioning party. The party petitioning for placement of an electronic
billboard shall submit to the Village for consideration prior to the public
hearing a photometric study related to the proposed billboard that shall
encompass illumination impact findings and proposed remedial/corrective options
to mitigate the effects of light pollution and glare. Conversion of an existing
non- electronic billboard, replacement of an existing billboard that increases
the size, installing additional electronic screen(s)/monitors, or installation
or replacement of components that increase the illumination shall constitute a
new billboard and requires a public hearing and Village Board approval as set
forth in division (B). In addition, in the case of conversion of an existing
non-electronic billboard to an electronic billboard, any previously approved
variations or special uses related to the existing non-electronic billboard
shall not be applicable to the electronic billboard. The Village President and
Board of Trustees may deny the placement of any electronic billboard where they
determine that the placement will be detrimental to the Village and its
residents based on any reason, including, but not limited to, aesthetic
reasons, brightness, driver distraction or other safety reasons, and proximity
to residential areas. The Village President and Board of Trustees may also deny
the placement of any electronic billboard where the application fails to meet
the standards set forth in this section.
   (C)   Notice of hearing. The party petitioning for placement shall give
notice of the public hearing addressed and provided via mailing or personal
delivery to the “owners/occupants” of all properties located within 250 feet of
the proposed billboard placement. The notice shall include the date, time,
location and purpose of the hearing, the name of the body holding the hearing,
the name of the applicant, and the address of the subject property on which the
billboard is proposed to be located. Notice shall be given no less than 15
days, but not more than 30 days, prior to the hearing date. The applicant shall
provide an affidavit to the Community Development Department stating that
notice was mailed or delivered to every property within 250 feet of the
proposed billboard placement site. The applicant shall also provide the
Community Development Department with a list of addresses and property
identification numbers (PINs) of all notice recipients.
   (D)   Conditions of approval. If a Village building permit(s) for
installation is required, the building permit issuance is contingent upon
approval of the billboard by the Village President and the Board of Trustees,
and confirmation from the Director of Sustainability and Innovation that the
billboard will comply with all applicable regulations. Approval is also
conditioned upon provision of proof that the applicant has adequate insurance
coverage, including comprehensive general liability insurance. The scope of
insurance coverage will be fixes by the Village based on the scope of the
billboard installation. The Village reserves the right to impose additional
conditions of approval dependent upon the proposed site, public hearing, expert
consultant review, and other factors relevant to protecting Village safety,
health, and aesthetics.
   (E)   Impact fee. Prior to the issuance of a Village building permit(s) for
installation of the billboard, the party petitioning for placement must deposit
an impact fee in an amount determined by the Village Board. This impact fee
shall be payable to the Village Board to distribute to certain Village
residents to mitigate or remediate the potential effects of light pollution and
glare. The amount will be based on estimated cost of remediation options and
the number of affected property owners.
   (F)   Limitation on Village approval of application and operation of
electronic billboard. Village authorization and approval to operate an
electronic billboard shall cease upon the earliest of the following: (1) the
owner/operator is no longer the record title owner of the billboard property;
(2) an applicable lease term expires or is deemed invalid due to a breach; or
(3) the electronic billboard ceases operation for a period of 60 consecutive
calendar days following commencement of operation, excluding any period of non-
operation due to demonstrated replacement, repair, and maintenance work. Upon
termination or cessation of operations, the billboard owner/operator shall
remove the billboard and related structures within 30 calendar days. If the
owner/operator fails to remove the billboard within 30 days, the Village may
institute the nuisance abatement procedures in accordance with §§
99.22 and
99.23 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15-2010; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021; Am.
Ord. CO-2023-46, passed 11-7-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
CHAPTER 154: ZONING CODE
Section
   
154.01   Zoning regulations adopted
   
Appendix A: Zoning Code
Cross-reference:
   Village policies, see
Ch. 38
§ 154.01 ZONING REGULATIONS ADOPTED.
   The zoning regulations of the Village adopted by Ordinance 68-14 on October
24, 1968, and all amendments and supplements thereto, are repealed by Ordinance
No. CO-2010-006, which was adopted by the corporate authorities of the Village
on April 15, 2010. A new set of zoning regulations for the Village was approved
and adopted by the corporate authorities of the Village under Ordinance No. CO-
010-006 on April 15, 2010, and such zoning regulations are incorporated herein,
and are in full force and effect as of April 15, 2010. The full text of the
City Zoning Ordinance is hereby incorporated as Appendix A to this Chapter 154.
(1997 Code, § 22.01) (Am. Ord. CO-02-25, passed 9-23-2002; Am. Ord. CO-09-06,
passed 2-3-2009; Am. Ord. CO-2010-006, passed 4-15- 2010; Am. Ord. CO-2010-20,
passed 11-16- 2010; Am. Ord. CO-2011-01, passed 1-18-2011; Am. Ord. CO-2011-17,
passed 10-18-2011; Am. Ord. CO-2012-32, passed 8-21-2012; Am. Ord. CO-2012-33,
passed 8-21-2021; Am. Ord. CO-2013-14, passed 3-13-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2013-15,
passed 3-13-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2013-16, passed 3-13-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2013-17,
passed 3-13-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2013-27, passed 4-16-2013; Am. Ord. CO-2014-02,
passed 1-21-2014; Am. Ord. CO-2014-23, passed 7-15-2014; Am. Ord. CO-2014-26,
passed 7-15-2014; Am. Ord. CO-2014-41, passed 11-17-2014; Am. Ord. CO-2015-24,
passed 9-16-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2016-21, passed 10-5-2016; Am. Ord. CO-2016-35,
passed 12-21-2026; Am. Ord. CO-2020-22, passed 8-18-2020; Am. Ord. CO-2023-35,
passed 6-20-2023; Am. Ord. CO-2024-24, passed 6-4-2024; Am. Ord. CO-2024-28,
passed 7-18-2024; Am. Ord. CO-2025-03, passed 1-7-2025)
APPENDIX A: ZONING CODE
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD
ZONING ORDINANCE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3104.jpg]
Adopted
April 15, 2010
Amendments:
   (MAYWOOD ORDINANCE No.: (DATE)
   CO-2010-20: 11/16/2010
   CO-2011-01: 01/18/2011
   CO-2011-17: 10/18/2011
   CO-2012-32: 08/21/2012
   CO-2012-33: 08/21/2012
   CO-2013-14: 03/13/2013
   CO-2013-15: 03/13/2013
   CO-2013-16: 03/13/2013
   CO-2013-17: 03/13/2013
   CO-2013-27: 04/16/2013
   CO-2013-31: 04/30/2013
   (Map Amendment)
   CO-2014-02: 01/21/2014
   CO-2014-23: 07/26/2014
   CO-2014-26: 07/26/2014
   CO-2014-41: 11/20/2014
   CO-2015-24: 09/16/2015
   CO-2016-21: 10/05/2016
   CO-2016-35: 12/21/2016
   (Map + Text Amendment)
   CO-2020-22: 08-18-2020
   CO-2023-35: 06/20/2023
   CO-2024-24: 06/04/2024
   CO-2024-28: 07/18/2024
   CO-2025-03: 01/07/2025
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 1. Title, Purpose and Applicability
   
1.1   Title
   
1.2   Intent
   
1.3   Purpose
   
1.4   Applicability
   
1.5   Transition Rules
   
1.6   Severability
   
1.7   Effective Date
   
1.8   Repeal of Previous Zoning Ordinance
Section 2. Ordinance Administration
   
2.1   Purpose
   
2.2   Village Board
   
2.3   Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
   
2.4   Zoning Administrator
Section 3. Administrative Procedures
   
3.1   Purpose
   
3.2   Application
   
3.3   Notice
   
3.4   Public Hearing
Section 4. Applications & Approval Processes
   
4.1   Purpose
   
4.2   Zoning Amendment
   
4.3   Variation
   
4.4   Special Use
   
4.5   Planned Unit Development
   
4.6   Site Plan Review
   
4.7   Sign Permit
   
4.8   Zoning Permit
   
4.9   Zoning Interpretation
   
4.10   Appeals
   
4.11   Enforcement
Section 5. Planned Unit Developments
   
5.1   Purpose
   
5.2   Initiation
   
5.3   Authorization
   
5.4   General Standards for Planned Unit Developments
   
5.5   Exceptions from District Regulations
   
5.6   Procedure
   
5.7   Changes to Approved Final Plans
   
5.8   As Built Drawings
   
5.9   Revocations and Extensions
   
5.10   Conditions and Guarantees
   
5.11   Issuance of Building Permit
   
5.12   Enforcement of Planned Unit Development
Section 6. Zoning Districts
   
6.1   Purpose
   
6.2   Districts
   
6.3   Zoning Map
   
6.4   Annexed Land
   
6.5   Exemptions for Public Utilities and Certain Village Facilities
Section 7. Residential Zoning Districts
   
7.1   Residential Zoning Districts Purpose Statements
   
7.2   Permitted and Special Uses
   
7.3   Bulk and Yard Regulations
   
7.4   General Standards of Applicability
Section 8. Commercial Zoning Districts
   
8.1   Commercial Zoning Districts Purpose Statements
   
8.2   Permitted and Special Uses
   
8.3   Bulk and Yard Regulations
   
8.4   Commercial District Design Standards
   
8.5   General Standards of Applicability
Section 9. Office Park & Manufacturing Zoning Districts
   
9.1   Office Park and Manufacturing Zoning Districts Purpose Statements
   
9.2   Permitted and Special Uses
   
9.3   Bulk and Yard Regulations
   
9.4   Office Park and Manufacturing District Design Standards
   
9.5   General Standards of Applicability
Section 10. Special Purpose Zoning Districts
   
10.1   Special Purpose Zoning Districts Purpose Statements
   
10.2   Permitted and Special Uses
   
10.3   Bulk and Yard Regulations
   
10.4   General Standards of Applicability
   
10.5   E - Entertainment Overlay District
Section 11. Use Standards
   
11.1   Purpose
   
11.2   Use of Land and Structures
   
11.3   Generic Use Standards
Section 12. On-site Development Standards
   
12.1   Purpose
   
12.2   Use of Land and Buildings
   
12.3   Exterior Lighting
   
12.4   Accessory Structures and Uses
   
12.5   Permitted Encroachments
   
12.6   Temporary Uses and Structures
   
12.7   Environmental Performance Standards
Section 13. Off-street Parking and Loading
   
13.1   Purpose
   
13.2   General Provisions
   
13.3   Computation
   
13.4   Construction of Parking and Loading Facilities
   
13.5   Collective Provisions
   
13.6   Location of Off-street Parking Spaces
   
13.7   Design Standards
   
13.8   Accessible Parking
   
13.9   Stacking Spaces for Drive-through Facilities
   
13.10   Commercial Vehicles
   
13.11   Recreational Vehicles and Equipment in Residential Districts
   
13.12   Required Off-street Parking Spaces
   
13.13   Required Off-street Loading Spaces
   
13.14   Design of Off-street Loading Spaces
Section 14. Landscaping & Screening
   
14.1   Purpose
   
14.2   Enforcement of Landscape Provisions
   
14.3   Landscape Plan
   
14.4   Selection, Installation and Maintenance of Plant Materials
   
14.5   Landscape Design Standards
   
14.6   On-lot Landscaping
   
14.7   Building Foundation Landscaping
   
14.8   Parking Lot Landscaping
   
14.9   Parking Lot Perimeter Landscape Yard
   
14.10   Interior Parking Lot Landscaping
   
14.11   Buffer Yards
   
14.12   Required Landscaping Illustration
   
14.13   Screening Requirements
Section 15. Signs
   
15.1   Purpose
   
15.2   Sign Permit Required
   
15.3   Location
   
15.4   Sign Dimension Computations
   
15.5   General Construction Standards
   
15.6   Master Sign Plan Required
   
15.7   Prohibited Signs
   
15.8   Temporary Signs
   
15.9   Exempt Permanent Signs
   
15.10   Permanent Sign Standards
   
15.11   Nonconforming Signs
Section 16. Nonconformities
   
16.1   Purpose
   
16.2   General Standards of Applicability
   
16.3   Nonconforming Use
   
16.4   Nonconforming Structures
   
16.5   Nonconforming Lots of Record
   
16.6   Nonconforming Signs
Section 17. Definitions
   
17.1   Purpose
   
17.2   Interpretation
   
17.3   Rules of Generic Use Definitions
   
17.4   Generic Use Definitions
   
17.5   General Terms Definitions
SECTION 1. TITLE, PURPOSE & APPLICABILITY
1.1.   Title
1.2.   Intent
1.3.   Purpose
1.4.   Applicability
1.5.   Transition rules
1.6.   Severability
1.7.   Effective date
1.8.   Repeal of previous zoning ordinance
1.1.   TITLE
      This Ordinance shall be known, referred to and cited as "The Zoning
Ordinance of the Village of Maywood.”
1.2.   INTENT
      The intent of this document is to establish land use regulations to serve
the Village of Maywood. The regulations enumerated are based upon the Village’s
Comprehensive Plan, and the overall Village policies and objectives. Any
reference to this Ordinance shall include all amendments to this Ordinance.
1.3.   PURPOSE
      The purpose of this Ordinance is to:
      A.   Promote and protect the public health, safety, comfort and general
welfare of the people.
      B.   Divide the entire Village into districts of such number, shape,
area, and of such different classes, restricting and regulating therein the
location, erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of
buildings, structures and land, height and bulk of structures, or other
classification, as deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this
Ordinance.
      C.   Provide adequate light, air, privacy and convenience of access to
property.
      D.   To protect the character and stability of the Village of Maywood by
promoting the orderly and beneficial development of such areas.
      E.   Classify, regulate and restrict the location of structures designed
for specified industrial, commercial, residential, and other uses within the
Village.
      F.   Regulate and limit the intensity of the use of lots within the
Village.
      G.   Regulate and determine the area of open spaces and surrounding
structures within the Village necessary to provide adequate light and air and
to protect the public health.
      H.   Fix standards to which structures, or additions or alterations to
existing structures, shall conform.
      I.   Prohibit uses or structures incompatible with the character of
development or intended uses within specified zoning districts.
      J.   Limit congestion in the public streets and protect the public
health, convenience and general welfare by providing for the off-street parking
of motor vehicles and the loading and unloading of commercial vehicles.
      K.   Protect against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other hazards in
the interest of the public health, safety and welfare.
      L.   Regulate and limit the height, bulk and setback of structures
erected within the Village in order to prevent overcrowding of land and undue
concentration of structures.
      M.   Conserve the taxable value of land and structures within the Village
of Maywood.
      N.   Provide for the elimination of nonconforming uses of land and
structures that are adversely affecting the character and value of desirable
development in each district.
      O.   Define and limit the powers and duties of the administrative
officers and bodies with respect to the administration of this Ordinance.
1.4.   APPLICABILITY
      A.   Territorial Application
      This Ordinance shall apply to all land, uses and structures within the
corporate limits of the Village, including those owned by other municipal
corporations and government bodies.
      B.   General Application
      In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion and protection
of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare, and
shall be construed to achieve the purposes for which this Ordinance was
adopted.
      C.   General Prohibition
      Except as otherwise provided by this Ordinance, no portion or whole of
any structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no structure, in whole or
in part, shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or
structurally altered unless it conforms with the provisions of this Ordinance.
      D.   Private Agreements
      This Ordinance is not intended to abrogate or nullify any private
agreement, easement or covenant. However, where this Ordinance is more
restrictive or imposes higher standards or requirements than a private
agreement, easement or covenant, the requirements of this Ordinance shall
control.
      E.   Other Laws and Regulations
      Unless otherwise specifically provided, the Ordinance shall control over
less restrictive statutes, ordinances or regulations, and more restrictive
statutes, ordinances or regulations will control over the provisions of this
Ordinance.
1.5.   TRANSITION RULES
      In determining the applicability of this Ordinance, with respect to the
previously applicable zoning regulations, the following rules shall apply.
      A.   Existing Illegal Structures and Uses
         A structure or use that is illegal at the time of the adoption of, but
is made legal by the provisions of this Ordinance, is deemed lawful as of the
effective date of this Ordinance. However, if that structure or use does not
conform with each and every requirement of this Ordinance, then that structure
or use shall remain illegal.
      B.   Existing Permitted Uses
         If property is used in a manner that was classified as a permitted use
prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and that use is classified as a
special use by this Ordinance as of the effective date of this Ordinance, that
use shall be deemed a lawful special use. However, any subsequent addition,
enlargement or expansion of that use shall be required to conform to the
procedural and substantive requirements for special uses pursuant to this
Ordinance.
      C.   Certain Uses Rendered Nonconforming
         If property is used in a manner that was a lawful use before the
effective date of this Ordinance, and this Ordinance no longer classifies that
use as either a permitted or special use in the zoning district in which it is
located, that use shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use and shall be
controlled by the provisions of
Section 16 (Nonconformities).
      D.   Certain Structures or Lots Rendered Nonconforming
         If structure or lot existing on the effective date of this Ordinance
was a conforming structure or lot before the effective date of this Ordinance,
and such structure or lot does not meet all standards set forth in this
Ordinance, that structure or lot shall be deemed a legal nonconforming
structure or lot and shall be controlled by the provisions of
Section 16 (Nonconformities).
      E.   Previously Issued Building Permits
         If a building permit for a structure was lawfully issued prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance, and if construction has begun within one
hundred and eighty (180) days of the issuance of that permit, the structure may
be completed in accordance with the plans on the basis of which the building
permit was issued and may, upon completion, be occupied under an occupancy
permit for the use originally intended. When additional alterations to a
structure are undertaken or additional structures are constructed on the lot
that are not contained on the previously submitted and approved plans, this
Ordinance shall govern those alterations or additional structures. Such
additional alterations to existing structures or additional structures shall
also require approval of all permits as required by this Ordinance or the
Village Code.
      F.   Previously Granted Special Uses and Variation
         All special uses and variations granted prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. The recipient of the
special use or variation may proceed to develop the property in accordance with
the plans approved by the Village Board or Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals and any applicable conditions. However, if the recipient has failed to
act on the special use or variation before the approval expires, including any
periods of extension granted, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.
      G.   Pending Applications
         If an application is pending on the effective date of the Ordinance,
the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern that application.
1.6.   SEVERABILITY
      If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence or provision of
this Ordinance shall be ruled by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, that judgment shall not affect, impair, invalidate or nullify the
remainder of this Ordinance. The effect of the judgment shall be confined to
the section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, sentence or provision immediately
involved in the controversy in which judgment or ruling was rendered.
1.7.   EFFECTIVE DATE 
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
      The effective date of this Ordinance is the date of adoption, this date
April 15, 2010
1.8.   REPEAL OF PREVIOUS ZONING ORDINANCE
      After the effective date of this Ordinance, all provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance of the Village, as adopted on October 24, 1968, as amended from time
to time, are expressly repealed in their entirety. This repeal only applies to
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
SECTION 2. ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATION
2.1.   Purpose
2.2.   Village Board
2.3.   Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
2.4.   Zoning Administrator
2.1.   PURPOSE
      The purpose of this Section is to outline the specific powers of the
different boards, commissions and officials as they relate to this Zoning
Ordinance.
2.2.   VILLAGE BOARD
      The Village Board shall have the following specific powers, pursuant to
this Zoning Ordinance:
      A.   To make final decisions on zoning text and map amendment
applications (
Section 4.2).
      B.   To make final decisions on applications for zoning variations (
Section 4.3)
      C.   To make final decisions on special use applications (
Section 4.4).
      D.   To make final decisions on planned unit development applications (
Section 5).
      E.   To make final decisions on any other matter covered by this
Ordinance, except where another person or body has been given final decision-
making authority.
2.3.   PLAN COMMISSION/ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
      The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the following
powers, pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance:
      A.   To hear and make final decisions on appeals of any zoning
interpretation or determination made by the Zoning Administrator in regard to
this Zoning Ordinance (
Section 4.10).
      B.   To hear and make recommendations to the Village Board on zoning map
and text amendment applications (
Section 4.2).
      C.   To hear and make recommendations on applications for variations (
Section 4.3).
      D.   To hear and make recommendations to the Village Board on special use
applications (
Section 4.4)
      E.   To hear and make recommendations to the Village Board on planned
unit development applications (
Section 5).
      F.   To hear and report to the Village Board on such other matters as may
be referred to it by the Village Board.
2.4.   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
      The Director of Community Development, or his/her designee, shall be
considered the Zoning Administrator, and shall have the following powers,
pursuant to this Zoning Ordinance:
      A.   To review and make decisions on zoning interpretations (
Section 4.9).
      B.   To conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to
determine whether there is compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and
to issue citations whenever the provisions of this Ordinance are violated.
      C.   To review and make decisions on applications for sign permits (
Section 4.7).
      D.   To review applications for zoning permits for compliance with this
Ordinance (
Section 4.8).
      E.   To issue all permits provided for under this Ordinance and maintain
records thereof.
      F.   To receive and forward applications for zoning amendments,
variations, special uses, planned unit developments, zoning appeals and other
administrative reviews required by this Ordinance to the Plan Commission/Zoning
Board of Appeals or Village Board, as indicated.
      G.   To conduct site plan reviews (
Section 4.6).
      H.   To maintain permanent and current records as required by this
Ordinance including, but not limited to, all relevant information and official
action on zoning amendments, variations, special uses, site plan reviews,
planned unit developments, zoning appeals and other administrative reviews.
      I.   To maintain and make available the Village’s Official Zoning
Ordinance Text and Map, and all permanent and current records required by this
Ordinance.
      J.   To maintain for public distribution an adequate supply of the
compiled text of the Zoning Ordinance, including the Official Zoning Map, and
appropriate forms and instructional material for all required hearings and
review procedures provided for herein.
SECTION 3. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
3.1.   Purpose
3.2.   Application
3.3.   Notice
3.4.   Public hearing
3.1.   PURPOSE
      The purpose of this Section is to outline the general application, notice
and public hearing procedures for the zoning applications and approvals found
within this Zoning Ordinance.
3.2.   APPLICATION
      A.   Authorization
         An application for a variation, special use, planned unit development,
site plan review, sign permit, zoning appeal or other zoning relief may be
filed by an owner of any property in the Village or other person expressly
authorized by the owner in writing. An application for a request for a zoning
interpretation or a zoning amendment (text or map) may be filed by an owner of
any property in the Village or other person expressly authorized by the owner
in writing. The Village is also authorized to file any of these applications.
      B.   Filing
         1.   All applications shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator.
         2.   The application shall be on forms provided by the Village and
shall be filed in such number as the instructions provide. All plans shall be
at a scale sufficient to permit a clear and precise understanding of the
proposal.
         3.   The application shall include information, plans and data as
specified in Appendix A (Application Requirements) and sufficient to determine
whether the application conforms with the requirements set forth in this
Ordinance.
         4.   All signatures of the petitioner and/or property owner on an
application shall be notarized.
      C.   Completeness
         The Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the application is
complete. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing that
the application is complete or inform the applicant of any deficiencies. The
Zoning Administrator shall take no steps to process the application until all
deficiencies are remedied. Once the Zoning Administrator determines that the
application is complete, the application shall be scheduled for consideration
by the appropriate board, commission or official.
      D.   Fees
         1.   Every application shall be accompanied by a required,
nonrefundable application fee as established and modified, from time to time,
in the Village Code.
         2.   The failure to pay any fee under this section when due shall be
grounds for refusing to process the application, and for denying or revoking
any permit or approval for the subject property. The applicant shall be
required to pay another nonrefundable application fee in the event the initial
application is not completed within a six (6) month time period.
         3.   For planned unit developments, in addition to the application
fee, the applicant shall deposit with the Village an estimate of professional
consultant fees and expenses, including but not limited to fees and costs
associated with the review and processing of the application by Village staff,
Village engineer and Village attorney or other consultants retained by the
Village, including an administrative fee. No planned unit development
application shall be deemed complete until a deposit in the amount estimated is
received.
         4.   Before any application is accepted by the Zoning Administrator
for processing, the petitioner will be required to acknowledge in writing the
petitioner’s responsibility to pay all Village administrative fees,
professional consulting fees and public hearing fees, including court reporter
fees, incurred by the Village in reviewing, processing and acting upon such
application.
         5.   If during the course of the review of a planned unit development
application the Village Manager determines that the deposit fees paid by the
applicant will be insufficient to reimburse the Village for its consultants and
expenses, and if the Village provides the applicant with an estimate in writing
of the additional consultant fees that will be incurred by the Village, based
upon estimates from the consultants themselves, which shall be made available
to the applicant, it is the obligation of the applicant to pay to the Village
an additional deposit to cover the cost of those anticipated fees plus an
additional administrative fee. The Village reserves the right to delay any
further action on the application until this additional deposit is paid.
         6.   At the time of final action by the Village Board or the written
request by an applicant to withdraw a planned unit development application, an
itemization of costs for consultants and administrative costs pursuant to the
fee schedule established in the Village Code shall be sent to the applicant
either indicating payment in full, providing a refund to the applicant, or
billing the applicant an additional amount to be paid to the Village by the
applicant before final action on the application is taken.
      E.   Withdrawal of Application
         An applicant shall have the right to withdraw an application at any
time prior to the decision on the application by a board, commission or
official, including the ability to withdraw the application if it has been
tabled by a board or commission. There shall be no refund of fees other than
the return of any unused portion of the professional consultant fees and
expenses deposit. Requests for withdrawal shall be in writing and signed by the
applicant and delivered to the Zoning Administrator.
      F.   Successive Applications
         1.   Within one (1) year of the date of denial, a subsequent
application shall not be reviewed or heard unless there is substantial new
evidence available, or if a significant mistake of law or of fact affected the
prior denial, as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
         2.   If the application is resubmitted earlier than one (1) year from
the date of denial, such subsequent application shall include a detailed
statement of the grounds justifying its consideration.
         3.   The Zoning Administrator shall make a determination as to whether
the subsequent application is appropriate for resubmittal prior to the
expiration of the one (1) year wait requirement. If the Zoning Administrator
finds that there are no new grounds for consideration of the subsequent
application, he/she shall summarily, and without hearing, deny the request.
3.3.   NOTICE
      A.   Published Notices
         For all applications that require a public hearing, the Village shall
publish notice in a newspaper published in the Village, or if no newspaper is
published in the Village, in a newspaper of general circulation within the
Village. The notice shall include the date, time, place and purpose of such
hearing, the name of the applicant, and the address of the subject property, as
well as a brief statement of the zoning relief sought. Such notice shall be
published no less than fifteen (15) days, nor more than thirty (30) days, in
advance of the scheduled hearing date. The Village shall post the public
hearing notice on the Village's website. (Amended 10/05/2016: CO-2016-21)
      B.   Mailed Notice
         1.   All public hearings for variances, special uses and map
amendments require written notice, on forms provided by the Zoning
Administrator, to be mailed no less than fifteen (15), but not more than thirty
(30), days prior to the public hearing to the "owners/occupants" at the
property address, and to the taxpayers of record as shown in the on-line
records of the Cook County Treasurer, of all properties located within two
hundred fifty (250) feet from each of the property lines of the subject
property in the case of variances and special uses, and one hundred (100) feet
in the case of map amendments. The notice shall include the date, time, place
and purpose of such hearing, the name of the applicant, and the address of the
subject property. (Amended 10/05/2016: CO-2016-21)
         2.   The applicant shall be responsible for mailing proper notice.
Notice shall be sent by certified mail, properly addressed to the "owners/
occupants" at the property address, and to the taxpayers of record, as shown in
the on-line records of the Cook County Treasurer, with sufficient postage
affixed thereon and with return-receipt requested. The applicant shall provide
an affidavit to the Village stating that notice was mailed to every property
within two hundred fifty (250) feet of each of the property lines of the
subject property in the case of variances and special uses, and one hundred
(100) feet in the case of map amendments. The applicant shall also provide the
Village with a list of names, addresses and property identification numbers
(PIN) of all notice recipients. (Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01; Amended 10/05/
2016: CO-2016-21)
         3.   Giving notice pursuant to this section shall not be construed to
prevent the applicant from giving such additional notice as he/she may deem
appropriate.
         4.   The body conducting the hearing shall hear no application unless
the applicant complies in all respects with all notice requirements.
      C.   Posted Sign Notices
         The Village shall post a sign on the subject property for all public
hearings for variances, special uses and map amendments in accordance with the
following provisions:
         1.   Location and Time Period for Posting Signs
            The required posting period shall be no less than fifteen (15)
consecutive days, but no more than thirty (30) days, prior to the public
hearing (excluding the day of the hearing from this period). The sign shall be
posted at a prominent location on the property, near the sidewalk or public
right-of-way so that it is visible to passing pedestrians and motorists.
Properties with more than one (1) street frontage shall be required to post one
(1) sign visible from each street frontage. Where multiple contiguous
properties or areas are the subject of a proposed map amendment, signs need not
be posted on each individual property, but instead may be posted at points of
entry and other prominent locations within the perimeter of the area or as
otherwise deemed necessary by the Director of Community Development. (Amended
10/05/2016: CO-2016-21)
         2.   Responsibility for Posting Signs
            The Village shall provide and erect the sign on the property. The
applicant must maintain the sign during the required period.
         3.   Failure to Post
            Staff shall take a picture of the sign after posting. Failure to
post for the required time or where signs are compromised due to vandalism,
weather, accidental damage, removal by third parties, or for other reasons
shall not constitute grounds for suspension or continuance of the approval
process or otherwise act to invalidate any action taken. (Amended 10/05/2016:
CO-2016-21)
      D.   Public Examination and Copying of Applications and Other Documents
         During normal business hours, any person may examine the application
and material submitted in support of, or in opposition to, the application,
subject to the exceptions set forth in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act,
as amended (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.). Upon reasonable request, any person shall be
entitled to copies of the application and related documents. The Zoning
Administrator shall make copies of such materials available for a fee specified
by the Village.
3.4.   PUBLIC HEARING
      A.   Conduct of Public Hearings
         1.   All public hearings shall be subject to the Illinois Open
Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.), as amended.
         2.   Unless the Chair decides to alter the order of presentation, the
general procedure for public hearings shall be as follows:
            a.   Call to order and roll call.
            b.   The Chair presents a brief explanation of the public hearing
procedure and swears in those wishing to give testimony. All persons offering
testimony at a public hearing shall testify under oath. An attorney shall be
sworn if he/she offers testimony, but not if he/she is questioning a witness,
summarizing witness testimony, or addressing the board or commission on
procedural issues. All persons wishing to testify at the public hearing shall
state for the record his/her name and address.
            c.   Confirmation of notices being published and mailed in
accordance with state law and Ordinance requirements.
            d.   The application is placed into the record.
            e.   Village staff presentation.
               i.   Questions by the body conducting the hearing.
               ii.   Questions by public (objectors or interested persons).
               iii.   Rebuttal.
            f.   Applicant presentation.
               i.   Questions by the body conducting the hearing.
               ii.   Questions by public.
            g.   Objector’s presentation.
               i.   Questions by the body conducting the hearing.
               ii.   Questions by public.
            h.   Interested person’s presentation.
               i.   Questions by the body conducting the hearing.
               ii.   Questions by public.
            i.   Applicant’s rebuttal.
            j.   Final questions by the body conducting the hearing.
            k.   Closing remarks by petitioner, objectors, interested persons
and Village staff.
            l.   Hearing closed or continued by the approval of a motion of the
body conducting the hearing. If the hearing is closed, the body conducting the
hearing shall not accept any comment regarding the petition from outside
parties, except:
               i.   A staff report based on evidence presented at the public
hearing.
               ii.   Any person presenting information in response to a
specific question from the body conducting the hearing.
               iii.   Any person presenting testimony that directly rebuts
sworn testimony presented at the hearing.
      B.   Continuances
         The Chair, with approval of the body conducting the hearing, may
continue the public hearing. In order to reopen the hearing, no new notice
shall be required if a hearing is continued to a date specified, provided that
a public announcement of the future date, time, and place of the continued
hearing is made at the hearing and placed in the minutes. If the hearing is
adjourned, rather than continued to a date specified, in order to reopen the
hearing all notices must be given that would have been required for the initial
public hearing.
      C.   Evidence and Testimony
         1.   All interested parties may appear for themselves or be
represented by a person of their choosing. Written statements will be accepted
prior to the hearing to be entered into the public hearing record.
         2.   All testimony and evidence shall be given under oath or by
affirmation. Any person may appear at a hearing and submit evidence, upon
receiving recognition from the Chair of the body conducting the hearing. Each
person who submits evidence shall identify themselves and their address. Any
person may ask relevant, non-repetitive questions of other witnesses, but only
through the Chair and at the discretion of the Chair.
         3.   The Chair, with consent of a majority of the body conducting the
hearing, may limit testimony to a specific amount of time to provide a
reasonable opportunity for all interested persons to testify.
         4.   The body conducting the hearing is not bound by strict rules of
evidence, but the Chair may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent, or
unduly repetitious testimony or evidence.
SECTION 4. APPLICATIONS & APPROVAL PROCESSES
4.1.   Purpose
4.2.   Zoning amendment
4.3.   Variation
4.4.   Special use
4.5.   Planned unit development
4.6.   Site plan review
4.7.   Sign permit
4.8.   Zoning permit
4.9.   Zoning interpretation
4.10.   Appeals
4.11.   Enforcement
4.1.   PURPOSE
      The purpose of this Section is to delineate the scope of applicability,
specific procedures and requirements, and approval standards that are
applicable to each zoning application and approval.
4.2.   ZONING AMENDMENT
      A.   Purpose
         The regulations imposed and the districts created by this Ordinance
may be amended from time to time in accordance with this Section. This process
for amending the Zoning Ordinance text or the Zoning Map is intended to permit
modifications in response to changed conditions or changes in Village policy.
Amendments are not intended to relieve particular hardships or confer special
privileges or rights upon any person or party.
      B.   Initiation
         An owner of any property in the Village, any person expressly
authorized by a property owner in writing, the Village Board or the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may propose zoning text or map amendments.
      C.   Authority and Execution
         The Village Board, after receiving a recommendation from the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, shall take formal action on requests for
zoning text or map amendments.
      D.   Procedure
         All applications shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator in
accordance with the requirements of
Section 3.2 (Application). Once it is determined that the application is
complete, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule the application for
consideration by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals. Amendments
initiated by the Village also require an application, but are exempt from fees.
         1.   Action by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
            a.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a
public hearing on a proposed zoning amendment in accordance with
Section 3.4 (Public Hearing) no more than sixty (60) days of receipt of a
complete application. Notice for the public hearing shall be in accordance with
Section 3.3 (Notice). If, in the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals’
judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals to properly discharge its
responsibilities, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may request
additional information from the applicant. In that event, the sixty (60) day
period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information and/or
the public hearing may be continued.
            b.   Within sixty (60) days of the close of the public hearing, the
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall forward to the Village Board its
recommendation, together with the minutes of the hearing.
            c.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall evaluate the
application, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant
to each of the applicable standards in Paragraph E below. For zoning text
amendments, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall recommend
approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application. For zoning
map amendments, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall recommend
approval of the proposed zoning district, approval of a more restrictive zoning
district within the same general use category or denial of the application.
         2.   Action by the Village Board
            The Village Board shall consider the application within sixty (60)
days of receiving the findings of fact and recommendation from the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals. The Village Board may take action in the
form of approval, approval with conditions, or denial on applications for
zoning text amendments, and approval, approval of a more restrictive zoning
district within the same general use category or denial on applications for
zoning map amendments. The Village Board may also refer the application back to
the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals for further consideration. If the
application is not acted upon by the Village Board within six (6) months of
receiving the findings of fact and recommendation from the Plan Commission/
Zoning Board of Appeals, the application shall be deemed to have been denied.
      E.   Approval Standards for Zoning Amendments
         The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals recommendation and the
Village Board decision on any zoning amendment, whether text or map amendment,
is a matter of legislative discretion that is not controlled by any particular
standard. However, in making their recommendation and decision, the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and the Village Board shall consider the
following standards.
         1.   Map Amendments
            Where a map amendment is proposed, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board
of Appeals and Village Board shall make findings based upon the evidence
presented to it in each specific case with respect to, but not limited to the
following matters:
            a.   Existing uses of property within the general area of the
property in question.
            b.   The zoning classification of property within the general area
of the property in question.
            c.   The suitability of the property in question for the uses
permitted under the existing zoning classification.
            d.   The trend of development, if any, in the general area of the
property in question, including changes, if any, which have taken place in its
present zoning classification.
         2.   Text Amendments
            Where a text amendment is proposed, the Plan Commission/Zoning
Board of Appeals and Village Board shall make findings based upon the evidence
presented to it each specific case with respect to, but not limited to, the
following matters:
            a.   The degree to which the proposed amendment has general
applicability within the Village at large and is not intended to benefit
specific property.
            b.   The consistency of the proposed amendment with the objectives
of this Ordinance and the intent of any applicable zoning district regulations.
            c.   The degree, if any, to which the proposed amendment would
create nonconformity.
      F.   Written Protest of Map Amendment
         Whenever a written protest against the proposed map amendment has been
filed with the Village prior to approval of the amendment by the Village Board,
the ordinance providing for the proposed map amendment shall not be passed
except by the favorable vote of two-thirds () of the members of the Village
Board then holding office. Such written protest must be signed and acknowledged
by one (1) of the following: 1) the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
frontage proposed to be altered; or 2) the owners of twenty percent (20%) of
the frontage immediately adjoining in the same block or across an alley
therefrom; or 3) by twenty percent (20%) of the frontage owners immediately
opposite the frontage to be altered.
4.3.   VARIATION
      A.   Purpose
         The variation process is to provide a narrowly circumscribed means by
which relief may be granted from unforeseen applications of this Ordinance that
create practical difficulties or particular hardships.
      B.   Initiation
         An owner of any property in the Village or other person expressly
authorized by the owner in writing may request a variation for that property.
      C.   Authority and Execution
         Variations may be authorized after a public hearing, where the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall make recommendation on and the Village
Board shall decide upon a variation application in accordance with Paragraph E.
below, that owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this Ordinance will result in practical difficulties or
particular hardship for the owner of land or a structure.
      D.   Procedure
         All applications shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator in
accordance with the requirements in
Section 3.2 (Application). Once it is determined that the application is
complete, the Zoning Administrator shall forward a copy of the application to
the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals.
         1.   Action by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
            a.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a
public hearing in accordance with
Section 3.4 (Public Hearing) within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete
application, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Notice for the public
hearing shall be in accordance with
Section 3.3 (Notice). If, in the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals to properly discharge its
responsibilities, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may request
additional information from the applicant. In that event, the sixty (60) day
period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information and/or
the public hearing may be continued.
            b.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall evaluate the
application, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant
to each of the applicable standards in Paragraph E. below.
            c.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall recommend
approval, approval with conditions or denial of the application. The Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall, within sixty (60) days of the close
of the public hearing, forward its recommendation to the Village Board.
         2.   Action by the Village Board
            The Village Board shall consider the variation within sixty (60)
days of receipt of the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals recommendation.
The Village Board may also refer the application back to the Plan Commission/
Zoning Board of Appeals for further consideration. If the application is not
acted upon by the Village Board within six (6) months of receiving the findings
of fact and recommendation from the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals,
the application shall be deemed to have been denied.
         3.   Conditions and Restrictions
            The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend, and the
Village Board may impose, such conditions and restrictions upon the location,
construction, design and use of the property benefitted by a variation as may
be necessary or appropriate to protect the public interest, adjacent property
and property values. Failure to maintain such conditions or restrictions as may
be imposed shall constitute grounds for revocation of the variation. The terms
of relief granted, including any conditions or restrictions, shall be
specifically set forth in the recommendation and approval.
      E.   Approval Standards for Variations
         1.   No variation from the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
granted unless the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and Village Board
makes specific written findings based on the standards imposed by this section.
These standards are as follows:
            a.   The strict application of the terms of this Zoning Ordinance
will result in undue hardship.
            b.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances and not
applicable generally to other property within the same zoning classification.
            c.   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential
character of the locality.
         2.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and Village Board, in
making its findings, may inquire into the following evidentiary issues, as well
as any others deemed appropriate:
            a.   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property impose a particular hardship upon the
owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of the
regulations were to be carried out.
            b.   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by any
person presently having a proprietary interest in the property in question.
            c.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare in the neighborhood in which the property is located.
            d.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, substantially increase congestion in the
public streets, increase the danger of fire, endanger the public safety or
impair property values within the neighborhood.
            e.   The proposed variation is consistent with the spirit and
intent of this Ordinance and the adopted Comprehensive Plan.
            f.   The value of the property in question will be substantially
reduced if permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the
regulations governing the district in which it is located.
      F.   Variation Less Than Requested
         A variation less than that requested may be granted by the Village
Board when the record supports the applicant’s right to some relief, but not to
the entire relief requested.
      G.   Revocation of Variation
         No order of the Village Board granting a variation shall be valid for
a period longer than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of such order
unless a building permit is obtained within such period, and the erection or
alteration of a building is started or the use is commenced within such period.
The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend, and upon such
recommendation, the Village Board may grant, one (1) extension of this period,
valid for no more than one hundred eighty (180) additional days, upon written
application, and good cause shown, without notice or hearing.
4.4.   SPECIAL USE
      A.   Purpose
         The development and execution of a zoning ordinance is based upon the
division of the Village into districts. Within each district the use of land
and buildings, and the bulk and location of buildings and structures in
relation to the land, are substantially uniform. It is recognized, however,
that there are specific uses which, because of their unique characteristics,
cannot be properly classified in any particular district or districts without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring land
and of the public need for the particular use at the particular location. Such
uses may be either public or private, and are either of such an unusual nature
or are such unique uses of land that their operation or proposed location on a
site may give rise to unique challenges with respect to their impact on the
immediate area. Anything that requires relief from bulk regulations of this
Ordinance requires a separate application for a variation.
      B.   Initiation
         An owner of the subject property or other person expressly authorized
by the owner in writing may file an application to use such land for one (1) or
more of the special uses provided for in this Ordinance within the zoning
district in which the land is situated or to change an existing special use.
      C.   Authority and Execution
         The Village Board, after receiving a recommendation from the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, shall take formal action on special use
requests.
      D.   Procedure
         An application for a special use shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator. All applications for a special use shall be filed in accordance
with the requirements in
Section 3.2 (Application). Once it is determined that the application is
complete, the Zoning Administrator shall schedule the application for
consideration by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals at a public
hearing.
         1.   Action by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
            a.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a
public hearing on a proposed special use in accordance with
Section 3.4 (Public Hearing) within sixty (60) days from receipt of a complete
application. Notice for the public hearing shall be in accordance with
Section 3.3 (Notice). If, in the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
judgment, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable the
Board to properly discharge its responsibilities, the Plan Commission/Zoning
Board of Appeals may request additional information from the applicant. In that
event, the sixty (60) day period shall be suspended pending receipt of all
requested information and/or the public hearing may be continued.
            b.   Following a public hearing on an application for special use,
the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall determine whether or not to
recommend approval of the special use. The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals shall, within sixty (60) days of the close of the public hearing,
forward its recommendation or approval or approval with conditions to the
Village Board.
            c.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall vote to
recommend either approval, approval with conditions or denial of the special
use, and a written recommendation shall be forwarded to the Village Board. The
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall make findings, based upon the
evidence presented at the public hearing, pursuant to each of the applicable
standards in Paragraph E. below.
         2.   Action by the Village Board
            The Village Board shall consider the special use within sixty (60)
days of receipt of the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals recommendation.
In granting any special use, the Village Board may require such evidence and
guarantees, as it may deem necessary, to assure the applicant’s compliance with
the stipulated conditions. The application may be referred back to the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals for further consideration at the direction
of the Village Board. If the application is not acted upon by the Village Board
within six (6) months of receiving the findings of fact and recommendation from
the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, the application shall be deemed to
have been denied.
         3.   Conditions on Special Uses
            The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend, and the
Village Board may impose, such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the special
use as may be deemed necessary for the protection of the public interest.
Except as modified by the Village Board, the special use shall in all other
respects conform to the applicable regulations of the district in which it is
located.
      E.   Approval Standards for Special Uses
         No special use shall be recommended for approval by the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and approved by the Village Board unless it
has made findings, based upon the evidence presented at the public hearing, to
support each of the following conclusions:
         1.   The establishment, maintenance and operation of the special use
in the specific location proposed will not be unreasonably detrimental to or
endanger the public health, safety or general welfare of any portion of the
community.
         2.   The proposed special use is compatible with adjacent properties
and other property within the immediate vicinity of the special use.
         3.   The proposed special use will not substantially diminish and
impair property values within the immediate vicinity.
         4.   The establishment of the proposed special use will not impede the
normal and orderly development and improvement of surrounding property for uses
permitted in the district.
         5.   Adequate utilities, access roads, drainage or other necessary
facilities have been or are being provided.
         6.   The special use in the specific location proposed is consistent
with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.
      F.   No Presumption of Approval
         The listing of a use as a special use within a zoning district does
not constitute an assurance or presumption that such special use will be
approved. Rather, each proposed special use shall be evaluated on an individual
basis, in relation to all applicable standards of this Ordinance. Such
evaluation will determine whether approval of the special use is appropriate at
the particular location and in the particular manner proposed.
      G.   Revocation of Special Use Permit
         1.   Initiation
            A special use permit may be revoked by the Village Board after a
finding of the existence of any one (1) of the following conditions or of the
occurrence of any of the following events:
            a.   The operation of the use for which a special use permit has
been issued ceases for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days.
Such cessation shall result in an automatic termination of the special use
permit, subject to extension of the time period by the Village Board, for up to
ninety (90) days if the building is being remodeled or has been damaged and is
being repaired.
            b.   The licenses or permits required for the operation or
maintenance of the use are not obtained or are subsequently terminated. Such
failure or termination shall result in an automatic termination of the special
use permit, subject to extension of the time period by the Village Board, for
up to ninety (90) days if the building is being remodeled or has been damaged
and is being repaired.
            c.   Any of the provisions of this Section or Zoning Ordinance, or
any of the terms and conditions of the special use permit is violated.
            d.   A building permit for the construction of the structure(s) for
which a special use permit is approved but is not issued, through no fault of
the Village, within one (1) year of the granting of the special use permit by
the Village Board. Examples of situations where a building permit is not issued
include failure to pay the required building permit fees or to submit required
information missing from a building permit application. Such failure to issue
shall result in an automatic termination of the special use permit, subject to
extension of the time period approved by the Village Board, for up to ninety
(90) days if the building is being remodeled or has been damaged and is being
repaired.
            e.   Failure to commence the operation of the use for which the
special use permit has been issued within eighteen (18) months of the date the
special use permit was granted. Such failure to commence shall result in an
automatic termination of the special use permit, subject to extension of the
time period for up to ninety (90) days by the Village Board upon evidence of
progressive progress on the commencement of the use or other good causes shown.
         2.   Procedure
            a.   The Zoning Administrator shall send written notice to property
owner and/or operator to whom the special use permit was issued describing the
applicable conditions listed in Paragraph 1. above.
            b.   The holder of the special use permit shall have thirty (30)
days from the date of the written notice to file an appeal of the revocation of
the special use permit, on the form for application for an appeal of a Zoning
Administrator interpretation provided by the Village.
            c.   The filing of an appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of termination of the special use, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to
the Village Board, after the filing of the appeal application, that, by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the Administrator’s
opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In that event, the
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may
be granted by the Village Board or by a circuit court on application and on
notice to the Zoning Administrator, and on due cause shown.
            d.   The Village Board shall commence the hearing on the appeal of
revocation of the special use within sixty (60) days and shall give due notice
of the hearing date to the parties. At the hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney.
            e.   The Village Board shall decide and issue a written decision on
the appeal within sixty (60) days of the conclusion of the hearing. The Village
Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the revocation.
The final administrative decision of the Village Board on the appeal of a
special use revocation shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the
Administrative Review Law, as amended.
4.5.   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
      Where permitted within district regulations, planned unit developments
shall be a considered special uses, and subject to the requirements of both
special uses in
Section 4.4 (Special Uses) and planned unit developments. See
Section 5 (Planned Unit Developments) of this Ordinance for planned unit
development process and requirements.
4.6.   SITE PLAN REVIEW
      A.   Purpose
         The site plan review process is intended to promote orderly
development and redevelopment in the Village, and to assure that such
development or redevelopment occurs in a manner that is harmonious with
surrounding properties, is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, and promotes
the general welfare of the Village. This section provides standards by which to
determine and control the physical layout and design to achieve the:
         1.   Compatibility of land uses, buildings and structures.
         2.   Protection and enhancement of community property values.
         3.   Efficient use of land.
         4.   Minimization of traffic and safety hazards, and efficient parking
layout.
         5.   Minimization of environmental problems, including stormwater
management and incorporation of sustainable design techniques.
      B.   Authority and Execution
         1.   The Zoning Administrator shall approve site plans. The Zoning
Administrator may convene a Technical Review Committee comprised of Village
staff the Zoning Administrator deems appropriate to conduct site plan reviews.
         2.   Site plan review and approval is required for all new
construction, additions and enlargement of building footprint, accessory
structures, parking lots and any action that may increase the impervious
surface on private property.
         3.   No building permit shall be issued until site plan approval has
been granted. If the Zoning Administrator approves a site plan, a building
permit may then be issued, provided that all other requirements of all other
applicable Village codes and ordinances are satisfied.
      C.   Procedure
         Applications for site plan review shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with the requirements in
Section 3.2 (Application).
         1.   The Zoning Administrator shall review the completed site plan
review application no more than forty-five (45) days from receipt of a complete
application. If, in the Zoning Administrator’
         2.   The Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with conditions
or deny the site plan and shall notify the applicant of such decision within
ten (10) days of the action taken. The Zoning Administrator shall evaluate the
site plan pursuant to the applicable standards in Paragraph D. below.
         3.   The Zoning Administrator may request modification of the
submitted site plan and resubmittal of such revised site plan. The revised site
plan shall be processed in the same manner as the initial site plan review
application. No new fees shall be required.
         4.   The Zoning Administrator may approve the site plan subject to
certain conditions or minor modifications to be listed in the resolution
approving the application. All plans and drawings submitted as part of the
application for a building permit must include those conditions or minor
modifications in order for a building permit to be issued.
      D.   Standards for Site Plan Review
         Each site plan submitted for review shall include the following
details: the location of principal and accessory structures, infrastructure,
open space, landscaping, exterior lighting, traffic movement and flow, number
of parking spaces, design of parking lots, and location of landscaping and
screening. In reviewing site plans, the relationship of the site plan to
adopted land use policies, and the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan shall be evaluated.
         In addition, the following characteristics shall also be considered:
         1.   Degree of conformity with existing standards.
         2.   Regulations of this Zoning Ordinance, and any other applicable
regulations within the Village’s Municipal Code, and the goals and policies of
the Comprehensive Plan.
         3.   The location, arrangement, size, design and general site
compatibility of buildings, lighting and signs, including:
            a.   Efficient use of land that responds to the existing off-site
utilities and service conditions in order to minimize the demand for additional
municipal services, utilities and infrastructure.
            b.   Compatibility with, and mitigation of, any potential impact
upon, adjacent property.
            c.   Site illumination designed and installed to minimize adverse
impact on adjacent properties.
            d.   Signs in accordance with
Section 15 (Signs).
            e.   Off-street parking design.
         4.   Landscaping and the arrangement of open space or natural features
on the site should:
            a.   Create a desirable and functional environment for motorists,
pedestrians, bicyclists and occupants of residential dwellings, business owners
and employees. To achieve such an environment, landscaping may take advantage
of open space design features such as bike paths, running paths and outdoor
relaxation areas.
            b.   Preserve unique natural resources, including measures to
preserve and protect existing healthy, mature trees.
            c.   Protect natural resources and landscaping on adjacent sites.
            d.   Design drainage facilities to promote the use and preservation
of natural watercourses and patterns of drainage.
            e.   Utilize plant materials suitable to withstand the climatic
conditions of the Village and microclimate of the site. The use of species
native to northeastern Illinois is encouraged.
            f.   Use of screening to buffer the impact of the development on
adjacent uses and enhance the appearance and image of the Village by screening
incompatible uses and certain site elements, and creating a logical transition
to adjoining lots and developments. For screening requirements for refuse
disposal dumpsters, refuse storage areas and other uses, see
Section 14.13.
         5.   Circulation systems and off-street parking shall be designed to:
            a.   Provide adequate and safe access to the site for motor
vehicles as well as alternate modes of transportation, including pedestrians
and bicyclists.
            b.   Minimizing potentially dangerous traffic movements.
            c.   Separate pedestrian and auto circulation and provide for
bicycle parking or storage insofar as practical.
            d.   Minimize curb cuts by using cross-access easements and shared
parking.
            e.   Design off-street parking lots or garages to minimize adverse
impacts on adjacent properties, particularly through the use of perimeter and
interior landscaping, and promote logical and safe parking and internal
circulation.
            f.   Clearly define pedestrian access from the parking area to the
building(s). A clearly defined visible and identifiable network of pedestrian
connections should be provided in and between parking lots, street sidewalks,
open spaces and buildings.
      E.   Amendments to Approved Site Plan Reviews
         1.   Application
            An application for an amendment to an approved site plan shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator. Amendment applications shall include a
written description of the proposed change, including the reason for such
change, and a notation of the location on the approved site plan.
         2.   Minor Changes
            a.   Minor changes, as required by technical engineering or other
physical site circumstances not foreseen at the time that the site plan was
approved, and verified by the Village Engineer, may be authorized by the Zoning
Administrator.
            b.   However, in the case of site plans that were submitted as part
of an application originally approved by the Village Board, the Village Board
must approve any modification to an approved site plan, including minor
changes.
            c.   The Zoning Administrator may determine that a proposed
amendment to an approved site plan requires submittal of a revised site plan
for proper evaluation. Such revised site plan shall only include those
components of the site plan submittal package impacted by the proposed change.
Until such revised site plan is submitted, the application shall not be
considered complete. Nothing within this section shall prevent an applicant
from submitting a complete revised site plan with the amendment application at
the time of initial submission.
            d.   Any change considered a major change in Paragraph 3. below
cannot be considered a minor change.
         3.   Major Changes
            a.   Major changes to site plans constitute a new site plan review
application and are subject to the complete site plan review provisions of this
section. Major changes to an approved site plan include, but are not limited
to:
               i.   An increase in the gross floor area.
               ii.   A change in building height.
               iii.   A change in the number of dwelling units.
               iv.   A reduction in open space or yards.
               v.   A reduction in the number of parking spaces or an increase
of more than four (4) parking spaces.
               vi.   A change in the number and/or location of access to public
streets or alleys.
               vii.   A change in excess of five (5) feet in the location of
walkways, vehicle circulation ways and parking areas, or exterior walls.
               viii.   A change to the landscape plan that results in a
reduction in the net amount of plant material. Changes to the landscape plan
that do not result in a reduction in the net amount of plant material or
violate the landscaping requirements of the Ordinance, are considered minor
changes.
            b.   However, in the case of site plans that were part of
applications originally approved by the Village Board, the Village Board must
approve the new site plan application.
4.7.   SIGN PERMIT
      A.   Applicability
         No sign, except those identified as exempt in
Section 15 (Signs), shall be erected, constructed, altered or relocated without
first obtaining a sign permit.
      B.   Authority and Execution
         The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for determining
compliance with this Ordinance and shall be responsible for issuing a sign
permit.
      C.   Permit Issuance
         Upon the filing of an application for a permit for erection,
alteration or relocation of a sign, the Zoning Administrator shall determine
whether the application is complete. Once it is determined that the application
is complete, the Zoning Administrator shall:
         1.   Examine the plans and specifications and the premises upon which
the proposed structure is to be erected.
         2.   Issue or cause to be issued a permit if the structure complies
with the requirements of this Ordinance and all other ordinances of the
Village.
      D.   Approval of Electrified Signs
         The application for a sign permit for the erection of a sign in which
electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the
Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall examine the plans and
specifications to determine compliance with the Electrical Code of the Village
as a condition of granting the sign permit.
      E.   Inspection
         The Zoning Administrator may inspect, at such times as deemed
appropriate, each sign or other advertising structure regulated by this
Ordinance. The purpose of the inspection is to ascertain whether the structure
is secure or insecure, whether in need of repair or removal, or not in
conformance with the permit application or otherwise in violation of the
provisions of this Ordinance.
      F.   Termination or Revocation of Permit
         Upon the termination or revocation of the sign permit, the licensee
shall remove the sign without cost or expense of any kind to the Village. In
the event of the failure, neglect or refusal on the part of the licensee to do
so, the Village may proceed to remove the same and charge the expense to the
licensee.
      G.   Expiration of Permit
         If the work authorized under a sign permit is not completed within one
hundred eighty (180) days after the date of issuance, the sign permit shall
expire without further notice from or action by the Village and be null and
void.
4.8.   ZONING PERMIT
      A.   Applicability
         Before proceeding with the erection, enlargement, alteration, repair,
moving or removal of any structure or change of use in the Village, a zoning
permit for such erection, enlargement, alteration, repair, removal or change of
use shall first be obtained by the owner or his agent from the Zoning
Administrator. As part of the zoning permit application process, the Zoning
Administrator shall review the application for compliance with this Ordinance.
Said permit shall be posted in a prominent place on the premises prior to and
during the period of erection, reconstruction, enlargement or moving.
      B.   Authority and Execution
         The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for determining
compliance with this Ordinance and all other applicable ordinances, prior to
issuance of a building permit. A record of all zoning permits shall be kept on
file and copies shall be available on request to any person for a fee specified
by the Village.
      C.   Procedure
         1.   Written application for a zoning permit shall be made to the
Zoning Administrator.
         2.   If the proposed use or structure is in conformity with the
provisions of this Ordinance, the zoning permit shall be issued within ten (10)
days after the application has been filed. Each zoning permit shall state that
the structure or use complies with all of the provisions of this Ordinance.
         3.   A zoning permit shall be applied for at the same time as the
written application for a building permit or occupancy permit.
         4.   A building permit or occupancy permit may not be issued until the
Zoning Administrator has issued the required zoning permit.
         5.   An applicant may appeal the Zoning Administrator’s decision to
the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to
Section 4.10.
4.9.   ZONING INTERPRETATION
      A.   Purpose
         This interpretation authority is not intended to add or change the
essential content of the Ordinance. The interpretation authority is intended to
recognize that the provisions of this Ordinance, though detailed and extensive,
cannot, as a practical matter, address every specific zoning issue.
      B.   Initiation
         Applications for zoning interpretations may be filed in writing by an
owner of any property in the Village on a form provided by the Zoning
Administrator. In addition, the Village Board or the Plan Commission/Zoning
Board of Appeals may request that the Zoning Administrator render an
interpretation. All applications for interpretations shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements in
Section 3.2 (Application). Requests initiated by the Village require an
application, but are exempt from fees. All interpretation requests shall be for
the purpose of furthering an application or written development proposal that
has been filed with the Village.
      C.   Authority and Execution
         The Zoning Administrator shall review and make final decisions on
written requests for interpretations.
      D.   Procedure
         The Zoning Administrator shall review a written request for an
interpretation and render the interpretation in writing within thirty (30)
days. The Zoning Administrator shall have the ability to request additional
information prior to rendering an interpretation.
      E.   Appeals
         An applicant may appeal the Zoning Administrator’s decision to the
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals pursuant to
Section 4.10.
4.10.   APPEALS
      A.   Purpose
         The zoning appeals process for review of interpretations, orders,
requirements, determinations or decisions of the Zoning Administrator is
intended to provide appropriate checks and balances on administrative authority
and to conform to Section 11-13-12 of the Illinois Municipal Code, as amended
(65 ILCS 5/11-13-12).
      B.   Initiation and Limitations on Appeals
         Applications for appeals, on a form provided by the Village, may be
filed by any owner of any property in the Village that is directly affected by
an interpretation, order, requirement, determination or decision of the Zoning
Administrator. An interpretation, order, requirement, determination or decision
may only be appealed if an application is filed in writing and on the form
provided by the Village within forty-five (45) days of that interpretation,
order, requirement, determination or decision being made or imposed in relation
to the property.
      C.   Procedure
         1.   The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall transmit to the
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals all papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken.
         2.   The filing of an appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
an action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken
certifies to the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, after the filing of
the appeal application, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a
stay would, in the officer’s opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
In that event, the proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals or by a circuit court on application and on notice to the officer from
whom the appeal is taken , and on due cause shown.
         3.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall commence the
hearing on the appeal within sixty (60) days and shall give due notice of the
hearing date to the parties. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or
by agent or by attorney.
         4.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide and
issue a written decision on the appeal within sixty (60) days of the conclusion
of the hearing. The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises and to that
end has all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
         5.   All final administrative decisions of the Plan Commission/Board
of Appeals shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the Administrative
Review Law, as amended.
4.11.   ENFORCEMENT
      A.   Enforcement
         This Ordinance shall be enforced by the Zoning Administrator. The
Zoning Administrator may secure the assistance of the Village Attorney to seek
an injunction, abatement or other appropriate actions to enjoin, abate, or stop
any violation of this Ordinance. At times, the aid of the Police Department may
be sought to enforce this Ordinance. The property owner charged with the
violation may be held responsible for any legal expenses incurred by the
Village.
      B.   Penalties
         Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of
the provisions of this Ordinance, upon conviction, shall be fined for each
offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense for the purposes of the penalties and remedies available to the
Village. The accumulation of penalties for violations, but not the obligation
for payment for violations already committed, shall cease upon correction of
the violation.
      C.   Fines
         Each violation, and each day that such violation continues, shall be
subject to a fine as established in the Village Code. Each day such violation
is committed or permitted to continue or exist shall constitute a separate
offense.
[Table 4-1 begins on following page]
[image]
 
SECTION 5. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
5.1.   Purpose
5.2.   Initiation
5.3.   Authorization
5.4.   General standards for planned unit developments
5.5.   Exceptions from district regulations
5.6.   Procedure
5.7.   Changes to approved final plans
5.8.   As-built drawings
5.9.   Revocations and extensions
5.10.   Conditions and guarantees
5.11.   Issuance of building permit
5.12.   Enforcement of planned unit development
5.1.   PURPOSE
      A planned unit development is a type of special use. Planned unit
developments are of such substantially different character from other special
uses that specific and separate standards, exceptions and procedures for
approval are hereby established to govern the recommendations of the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals and the action of the Village Board. The
purpose of these planned unit development regulations is to:
      A.   Encourage flexibility in the development of land and in the design
of structures.
      B.   Encourage planned diversification in the location of structures.
      C.   Encourage a creative approach to the use of land that results in
better development and design than might otherwise be accomplished under the
strict application of other Sections of this Ordinance.
      D.   Provide for the efficient use of land to facilitate a more effective
arrangement of land uses, buildings, circulation systems and utilities.
      E.   Provide for more usable and suitably located open space and
recreation areas than might otherwise be provided under the application of
other Sections of this Ordinance.
      F.   Encourage the construction of appropriate aesthetic amenities which
will enhance the character of the site.
      G.   Guarantee quality construction commensurate with other developments
within the community, and compatible with the character of the surrounding area
and adjoining properties.
      H.   Facilitate the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan,
particularly with respect to redevelopment areas designated within the
Comprehensive Plan or any other plans or planning documents or studies approved
or adopted by the Village.
      I.   Encourage quality construction and design through an efficient
application procedure that is sensitive to the need for expeditious development
review.
5.2.   INITIATION
      Applications for planned unit developments may be filed by an owner of
any property in the Village for that property, or by other persons authorized
by the owner, or by the Village, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 5.3 (Authorization).
5.3.   AUTHORIZATION
      A planned unit development may be authorized as a special use in any
zoning districts. A planned unit development shall be granted in accordance
with the procedures and standards of this Section, and the special use
provisions of
Section 4.4 (Special Use). Unless specifically approved by the ordinance
granting or amending the planned unit development as a special use, the
requirements of the underlying district shall apply. The ordinance granting or
amending the planned unit development as a special use may depart from the
normal procedures, standards and other requirements of this Ordinance.
5.4.   GENERAL STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
      A.   The site of the planned unit development shall be under common
ownership and/or unified control. If there are two (2) or more owners, the
application for the planned unit development shall be jointly filed by all such
owners.
      B.   There is no minimum size requirement for planned unit developments
in any zoning district.
      C.   The ordinance authorizing the special use for a planned unit
development may grant exceptions to the regulations contained in this Ordinance
including, but not limited to, use, density, area, bulk, setbacks, off-street
parking and loading, and signs, as may be desirable to achieve the objectives
of the proposed planned unit development, provided that such exceptions are
fully consistent with and authorized by this Section.
      D.   Planned unit developments shall be compatible with the purpose and
intent of this Ordinance and the Village’s Comprehensive Plan. A planned unit
development shall not substantially diminish the market value of surrounding
properties, and it shall cause no substantial impairment of the use of those
properties.
      E.   Planned unit developments shall not adversely affect the natural
environment of the community as a whole. Natural assets and features, such as
existing trees and native vegetation, shall be protected and preserved to the
greatest extent practical.
      F.   The site shall be accessible to public streets that are adequate to
carry the traffic that will be generated by the proposed development. The
streets and driveways within the proposed development shall be adequate to
serve the uses within the development. The applicant shall be responsible for
the cost and installation of additional traffic controls and regulating devices
that are required.
      G.   All proposed streets, alleys and driveways shall be adequate to
serve the residents, occupants, visitors or other anticipated traffic. Access
points to public streets and the location of private streets, alleys and
driveways shall be subject to the approval of the Village Board when granting
the planned unit development special use.
      H.   The pedestrian circulation system and its related walkways shall be
located to provide for separation of pedestrian and vehicular movement and for
maximum pedestrian safety.
      I.   All planned unit developments, to the extent possible, shall provide
for underground installation of utilities, including electricity, cable and
telephone. Provisions shall be made for acceptable design and construction of
storm sewer facilities and appropriate storm retention and detention devices.
The construction and maintenance of all utilities, roadways, parking facilities
and other site improvements shall be in accordance with the requirements of
this Ordinance and other regulations of the Village.
5.5.   EXCEPTIONS FROM DISTRICT REGULATIONS
      A.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may recommend and the
Village Board may grant exceptions to the district bulk regulations where a
planned unit development is located. The planned unit development is subject to
the underlying district regulations unless such exception is specifically
granted. Exceptions from district regulations may be granted for planned unit
developments, if the Village Board finds that such exceptions:
         1.   Enhance the overall merit of the planned unit development.
         2.   Promote the objectives of both the Village and the development.
         3.   Enhance the quality of the design of the structures and the site
plan.
         4.   Enable the development to offer environmental and pedestrian
amenities.
         5.   Will not cause such an adverse impact on neighboring properties
so as to outweigh the benefits of the development.
         6.   Is compatible with the land use policies of the Village’s
Comprehensive Plan.
         7.   Provide a public benefit to the Village, as described in
Paragraph C. below.
      B.   The planned unit development is subject to the underlying district
use regulations unless the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals recommends
and the Village Board permits uses other than those allowed within the district
when it is determined by the Village Board to be desirable in achieving the
objectives of the planned unit development. However, there must be clear
evidence that such uses are desirable and appropriate with respect to the
primary purpose of the development, and are not of such a nature, or so
located, as to exercise a detrimental influence on the development or the
surrounding neighborhood.
      C.   The underlying zoning district requirements shall apply, unless an
exception is granted by ordinance as part of the approved special use.
Exceptions to district regulations may be granted where it is determined that
such modifications shall not negatively affect the value and enjoyment of
surrounding property, the provision of municipal services, or the flow of
traffic. To be granted such exceptions, the applicant must demonstrate superior
design and enhanced amenities, including use of green building and
sustainability techniques. In no case shall an exception to district
regulations within a planned unit development be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates a substantial benefit to the community.
      D.   The following design characteristics and amenities are provided as a
guide for consideration as to whether to grant an exception to district
requirements. The following items are a guide and not an exclusive list of
requirements. Additional design characteristics and amenities not listed may be
considered as part of the approval process. One (1) or more of the following
may be required as a condition or approval of a planned unit development:
         1.   Landscaping, buffering or screening within or around the
perimeter of the planned unit development that is in addition to the minimum
required by this Ordinance.
         2.   The provision of underground parking, parking available for
public use, and additional landscaping and screening of parking lots and
structures in addition to the minimum required by this Ordinance. (Amended 01/
07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         3.   Reduced use of impervious surface materials, including cluster
development and use of semi-pervious materials such as pervious pavers and
grass-crete.
         4.   The use of green building and sustainable development techniques,
including LEED or LEED-equivalent certification of structures or use of
landscape design techniques capable of reducing energy consumption. (Amended
01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         5.   Community amenities including plazas, malls, formal gardens,
places to congregate, outdoor seating, public art, and pedestrian and transit
facilities, which engage and integrate with the public realm along sidewalks
and streets adjoining the site. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         6.   Preservation of environmental or historical features.
         7.   Open space and recreational amenities such as:
            a.   Swimming pools
            b.   Tennis courts
            c.   Recreational open space accessory buildings
            d.   Jogging trails and fitness courses
            e.   Playgrounds
            f.   Natural water features and conservation areas
            g.   Detention areas which are accessible to occupants or the
public via nature trails, boardwalks, and/or perimeter walkways, but only if
they are designed as natural water features and are landscaped with native
vegetation
            h.   Dog parks
         8.   Additional public infrastructure improvements in addition to the
minimum required by the planned unit development, such as new or repaved
streets, installation of gutters and sewers, and traffic control devices to
improve traffic flow.
         9.   Senior or affordable housing set-aside.
         10.   Provision of accessible dwelling units with accessible features
beyond what is required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or any
other applicable codes.
         11.   Provision of car sharing facilities.
5.6.   PROCEDURE
      In its establishment and authorization as a special use/planned unit
development, in addition to the special use standards of
Section 4.4 (Special Use), the following procedures, requirements,
restrictions, and conditions shall be observed. In addition to the special use
procedures, approval of a planned unit development is a four-step process,
which includes a pre-application consultation, optional concept plan,
Preliminary Plan, and Final Plan. No plats shall be recorded and no building
permit shall be issued until a Final Plan has been approved.
      A.   Pre-Application Consultation
         Prior to the filing of an application for a planned unit development,
the applicant shall confer with the Zoning Administrator, as well as other
Village staff the Zoning Administrator deems appropriate to confer with,
regarding the proposed development. At the pre-application meeting the
applicant shall provide information as to the location of the proposed planned
unit development, the proposed uses, proposed public and private improvements,
a list of any known exceptions to this Ordinance and other ordinances of the
Village, and any other information necessary to clearly explain the planned
unit development. The purpose of such pre-application presentation and
conference is to make advice and assistance available to the applicant before
preparation of the optional concept plan or required preliminary plan, so that
the applicant may determine:
         1.   Whether the proposed planned unit development appears in general
to be in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance and other applicable
regulations.
         2.   Whether any zoning exceptions are required in connection with the
proposed planned unit development.
         3.   Whether the proposed planned unit development will be in
conformity with the Comprehensive Plan, and the goals and policies of the
Village for development. The pre-application conference does not require formal
application, fee or filing of a planned unit development application.
         Any opinions or advice provided by the Zoning Administrator shall be
in no way binding with respect to any official action the Plan Commission/
Zoning Board of Appeals or Village Board may take on the subsequent formal
application.
      B.   Optional Concept Plan
         1.   Before submitting a formal application for a planned unit
development, the applicant may present a concept plan before the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals for the purpose of obtaining information and
guidance prior to entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial
expense. At minimum, the concept plan shall consist of the following:
            a.   A map or maps in general form containing the proposed land
uses, the natural features of the development site, the character and
approximate location of all roadways and access drives proposed within the
planned unit development, the location of all adjacent public streets,
thoroughfares and public utilities, and schematic drawings showing the size,
character and disposition of buildings on the site.
            b.   A written statement containing a general explanation of the
planned unit development, including a statement of the present ownership of all
the land within said development and the expected schedule of construction.
         2.   At the request of the applicant or Zoning Administrator, the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the concept plan at a public
meeting and provide such information and guidance as it deems appropriate. Any
opinions or advice provided by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
shall be in no way binding with respect to any official action the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals or Village Board may take on the subsequent
formal application. The review of the concept plan shall not be a public
hearing, and any failure to observe formal procedures shall not affect the
ultimate validity of any enabling legislation.
      C.   Preliminary Plan
         All applications for planned unit developments shall contain a
Preliminary Plan, which shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator, who shall
forward a copy of the same to the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals.
         1.   Minimum Requirements
            Every Preliminary Plan shall contain the following:
            a.   A plat of survey of the parcel or parcels of land comprising
the zoning lot that is less than one (1) year old. The plat shall be drawn to
scale showing the actual dimensions of this zoning lot, including all parcels
or lots within the zoning lot. The plat shall be drawn in accordance with the
recorded plat of such land.
            b.   Proof of ownership.
            c.   A site location map drawn to an appropriate scale showing the
proposed planned unit development in relation to surrounding streets and
property located within three hundred (300) feet in all directions of the
development site. The map shall indicate the location, yards, height and land
use of all existing buildings and structures immediately adjacent to the
development site.
            d.   A site plan drawn to an appropriate scale showing:
               i.   The location, ground area, height, bulk and approximate
dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings and structures within the
planned unit development.
               ii.   The use or uses to be made of such existing and proposed
buildings and structures.
               iii.   The dimensions of all perimeter yards and the distance
between all buildings and structures.
               iv.   The location and dimensions of all pedestrian walkways,
driveways, streets, parking and loading facilities, including the number of
parking spaces serving each building or land use type and all parking related
screening and landscaping.
               v.   The location, height, design and illumination
characteristics of all external lighting fixtures within the development.
               vi.   The location and dimensions of any areas proposed to be
conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, places of
worship, school sites, public buildings or for any other public or quasi-public
use.
            e.   Typical building elevations and schematic design presentations
indicating the general architectural character of all proposed structures,
including proposed building materials. The drawings need not be the result of
final architectural decisions.
            f.   A traffic circulation plan and traffic impact analysis
prepared by a qualified professional indicating the proposed movement of
vehicles, goods and pedestrians within the planned unit development, and to and
from adjacent streets, and the impact of the proposed planned development upon
existing traffic patterns. Such studies shall also include an examination of
the adequacy of on-site parking facilities, vehicular circulation patterns and
pedestrian access and safety.
            g.   A drainage plan prepared by a qualified professional
indicating the manner in which surface drainage will be controlled and managed,
consistent with all Village and other governmental jurisdictions, regulations
and requirements.
            h.   A utilities study prepared by a qualified professional
indicating the adequacy of the utility systems serving the proposed planned
unit development, including water distribution lines, sanitary sewers and
stormwater drainage facilities.
            i.   A landscape plan prepared by a qualified landscape architect
indicating the general character of all proposed landscaping, screening and
fencing, including all open space areas around buildings and structures. Said
landscape plan need not be the result of final architectural decisions.
            j.   A separate schedule setting forth any proposed exceptions to
any Village regulations. This schedule shall cite by Section number each
regulation from which an exception is sought.
            k.   An exterior lighting plan.
         2.   Preliminary Plan Procedure
            The procedure for approval of the Preliminary Plan shall be:
            a.   Action by the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals
               The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the
Preliminary Plan and special use at a public hearing within sixty (60) days of
receipt of a complete application in accordance with
Section 3.4 (Public Hearing). Notice shall be in accordance with
Section 3.3 (Notice). If, in the judgment of the Plan Commission/Zoning Board
of Appeals, the application does not contain sufficient information to enable
the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals to properly discharge its
responsibilities, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may request
additional information from the applicant. In that event, the sixty (60) day
period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information and/or
the public hearing continued. Within sixty (60) days of the close of the public
hearing, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall either:
               i.   Recommend approval, with or without conditions, or denial
of the Preliminary Plan and special use, and submit its written recommendation
to the Village Board. The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may, upon the
request of the applicant and recommendation of the Zoning Administrator,
recommend approval of the preliminary plan as the final plan in appropriate
cases.
               ii.   Advise the applicant in writing of any recommended
changes, additions or corrections to the Preliminary Plan. The applicant may,
within thirty (30) days, submit the revised Preliminary Plan for Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals consideration at a continuation of, or at a
new, public hearing. The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall then
recommend approval or denial of the Preliminary Plan and special use and submit
its written recommendation to the Village Board. In the event that the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals recommends changes, additions or corrections
to the Preliminary Plan and the applicant declines to make such changes, then
the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall issue a written
recommendation on the plans per paragraph i. above.
            b.   Approval Standards for Planned Unit Developments
               The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals recommendation to
the Village Board shall set forth in what respects the planned unit development
is or is not in the public interest including, but not limited to, evaluation
of the following standards for approval:
               i.   The establishment, maintenance and operation of the planned
unit development in the specific location proposed will not be unreasonably
detrimental to or endanger the public health, safety or welfare.
               ii.   The proposed planned unit development is compatible with
adjacent properties and other property within the immediate vicinity of the
special use.
               iii.   The proposed planned unit development will not
substantially diminish and impair property values within the immediate
vicinity, and the location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks,
lighting and appurtenant facilities are compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood and adjacent land uses.
               iv.   The establishment of the proposed planned unit development
will not impede the normal and orderly development and improvement of
surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
               v.   There is provision for adequate utilities, drainage, off-
street parking and loading, pedestrian access and all other necessary
facilities within the planned unit development.
               vi.   The planned unit development in the specific location
proposed is consistent with the spirit and intent of this Ordinance and the
Comprehensive Plan.
            c.   Action by the Village Board
               The Village Board, after receipt of the recommendations from the
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, shall approve, approve with conditions
or deny the Preliminary Plan and special use within sixty (60) days following
the receipt of the recommendations of the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals.
               i.   If the Preliminary Plan is denied, the Village Board shall
state in writing the reasons for the denial, and such writing shall be filed
with the Zoning Administrator and a copy shall be sent to the applicant.
               ii.   If the Preliminary Plan and special use is approved, the
applicant shall submit a Final Plan for the planned unit development.
               iii.   A Preliminary Plan and special use may not be approved by
the Village Board except by a vote of three-fourths (¾) of the members present
when the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals recommends denial of the
Preliminary Plan and special use.
               iv.   If the application is not acted upon by the Village Board
within six (6) months of receiving the findings of fact and recommendation from
the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, the application shall be deemed to
have been denied.
      D.   Final Plan
         1.   Final Plan Procedure
            Within one (1) year following the approval of the Preliminary Plan
the applicant shall file with the Zoning Administrator a Final Plan containing,
in final form, the information required for the Preliminary Plan. If the
planned unit development is to be developed in phases, the applicant need only
file a Final Plan for the first phase of development, as indicated in the
development and construction schedule prescribed below. The Final Plan for the
remaining phases shall be filed in accordance with the development and
construction schedule. Every Final Plan shall contain the following information
and documentation:
            a.   A final site plan drawn to an appropriate scale on material
suitable for recording withthe Cook County Recorder of Deeds. The final site
plan shall include the following information:
               i.   Final designation of the location, ground area, height,
bulk and exact dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings and structures
within the planned unit development.
               ii.   A detailed tabulation of each separate land use area,
including land and building areas, and where applicable, the total number of
residential dwelling units, the number of bedrooms in each unit, and the
residential density.
               iii.   The use or uses to be made of such existing and proposed
buildings or structures.
               iv.   The dimensions of all setbacks and the distances between
all buildings and structures.
               v.   The final location and dimensions of all pedestrian
walkways, driveways, streets, parking and loading facilities, including the
number of parking spaces serving each building or land use type and all parking
related screening and landscaping.
               vi.   The exact location and dimensions of any areas to be
conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, parkways, playgrounds, places of
worship, school sites, public buildings, or for any other public or quasi-
public use.
            b.   An accurate legal description of the entire zoning lot upon
which the planned unit development is to be located, and a legal description of
each separate subdivided parcel, including any areas to be conveyed, dedicated
or reserved for public or quasi-public uses.
            c.   All covenants, easements, agreements and other provisions
required to govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned
unit development, along with an agreement assuring that the applicant, any
subsequent owner or, where applicable, a homeowners association shall be
responsible for all street, utility and common open space maintenance within
said development and for snow plowing and refuse disposal.
            d.   All plats, certificates, seals and signatures required for the
dedication or vacation of land and/or the recording of the final site plan.
            e.   If subdivision of the development site is included in the
planned unit development, a plat of subdivision shall be prepared suitable for
recording with the Cook County Recorder of Deeds. In like manner, if a vacation
or dedication of a public street or alley is included, a plat of vacation or
dedication shall be prepared.
            f.   A detailed landscape plan based on final architectural
decisions indicating the specific location and character of all landscaping,
including the size and species of all trees, shrubs, hedges and other
groundcover, the location, size and type of all screening and fencing and the
location, height, design and illumination characteristics of all external
lighting fixtures within the development.
            g.   A detailed utilities and drainage plan based on final
architectural decisions indicating the size and location of all water
distribution lines, sanitary sewers and storm drainage facilities required to
serve the planned unit development and the manner in which surface drainage
will be controlled and managed consistent with all applicable Village
regulations.
            h.   A development and construction schedule indicating the
following:
               i.   The date when construction of the planned unit development
will begin or, if developed in phases, the date when construction of the
initial phase will begin.
               ii.   If the planned unit development is to be developed in
phases, a map indicating the phases in which the planned unit development will
be built, the dates when the Final Plans for all but the initial phase will be
filed, and the approximate dates when construction of each subsequent phase
will begin.
               iii.   The date when construction of the planned unit
development will be completed, and the date when a specific use or uses will be
established, or if developed in phases, the date when construction of each
phase will be completed, and the date when a specific use or uses will be
established for each phase.
            i.   Building elevations and schematic design presentations
indicating the architectural character of all proposed structures, including
building materials, based on final architectural decisions and prepared in
detail.
            j.   Detailed drawings and design presentations of all signs to be
erected within the planned unit development.
            k.   A detailed exterior lighting plan showing the types and
locations of all exterior lights within the planned unit development.
            l.   An updated survey or an affidavit of no changes for a
previously submitted survey of the planned unit development.
         2.   Action
            The Zoning Administrator shall review the Final Plan within sixty
(60) days from the receipt of the complete Final Plan and shall take the
following actions:
            a.   Conformance with Preliminary Plan
               The Zoning Administrator shall recommend approval of the Final
Plan to the Village Board if it is in substantial compliance with the
Preliminary Plan as approved by the Village Board and all Village regulations.
The Zoning Administrator shall certify to the Village Board that the Final Plan
is in substantial conformance with the previously approved Preliminary Plan.
Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the Zoning Administrator’s recommendation,
the Village Board shall review and act on the Final Plan.
            b.   Nonconformance with Preliminary Plan
               i.   If the Zoning Administrator finds that the Final Plan is
substantially changed from the approved Preliminary Plan, or is otherwise not
in accordance with Village regulations, then the Zoning Administrator shall
recommend to the Village Board that the Final Plan be denied. If the Final Plan
is held not to be in conformity with the Preliminary Plan or other Village
regulations, the Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant with regard to
specific areas found not to be in compliance, and the applicant may resubmit
the Final Plan to the Zoning Administrator with changes to those areas found
not to be in compliance.
               ii.   Once resubmitted and the Zoning Administrator has
determined the Final Plan to be in substantial compliance with the Preliminary
Plan, the Zoning Administrator shall certify to the Village Board that the
Final Plan is in substantial conformance with the previously approved
Preliminary Plan. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the Zoning
Administrator’s recommendation, the Village Board shall review and act on the
Final Plan.
            c.   Approval
               After the approval of the Final Plan, the use of the land and
the construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or structures
within the planned unit development will be governed by the approved Final Plan
and any conditions imposed by the special use/planned unit development
ordinance rather than by other provisions of this Ordinance. The ordinance
granting a special use for a planned unit development shall set forth all the
requirements, special conditions and agreements made a part of the planned unit
development as reflected in the Final Plan. The plans and other documents
required as part of the Final Plan shall be attached to and made a part of the
ordinance granting the permit for the planned unit development.
5.7.   CHANGES TO APPROVED FINAL PLANS
      No changes may be made in the approved Final Plan, except upon
application to the Village and approval by the Village Board, according to the
following provisions.
      A.   During Construction
         During the construction of the planned unit development, the procedure
shall be as follows:
         1.   Minor Changes
            Minor changes, as required by engineering or other physical site
circumstances not foreseen at that time that the Final Plan was approved, and
verified by the Village Engineer, may be authorized by the Zoning
Administrator, who shall reserve to the right to forward any requests for
changes to the Village Board. Any item listed in
Section 5.7.A.2.c. is considered a major change and cannot be approved as a
minor change. Any changes to the Final Plan must be filed as amendments to the
planned unit development ordinance with the Village Clerk. If changes are
allowed in a final site plan, then a new site plan reflecting such changes must
be filed with the Village noting the date of the changes.
         2.   Major Changes
            a.   Major changes are those changes that substantially affect the
basic design, density or bulk of the development. All changes in land use,
building height or density, or in the design, density or bulk of the
development shall be considered a major change, and must be approved by the
Village Board as an amendment to the planned unit development ordinance. Any
major changes to the Final Plan must be recorded with Cook County Recorder of
Deeds as amendments to the planned unit development ordinance.
            b.   The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall review the
request for a major change at a public hearing within sixty (60) days of
receipt of a completed application request. If, in the Plan Commission/Zoning
Board of Appeals judgment, the application does not contain sufficient
information to enable the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals to property
discharge its responsibilities, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals may
request additional information from the applicant. In that event, the sixty
(60) day period shall be suspended pending receipt of all requested information
and/or the public hearing continued. Within sixty (60) days of the close of the
public hearing, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall recommend
either approval or denial of the request for a major change, and submit its
written recommendation to the Village Board. The Village Board, after receipt
of a recommendation from the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, shall
approve, approve with modifications or deny the request for a major change
within sixty (60) days following the receipt of the recommendation of the Plan
Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals. The Village Board may also decide that the
request for a major change is so significant that it must be considered a new
planned unit development application and should be resubmitted as such.
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
            c.   Major changes shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
               i.   A change in the number of dwelling units, the gross floor
area of the development, or the gross floor area devoted to any particular use.
               ii.   A change in building height.
               iii.   An increase in building coverage.
               iv.   A decrease in open space.
               v.   A change in the location of any open space in any manner
that detracts from its intended function in the previously approved plan.
               vi.   A change in excess of five (5) feet in the location of
walkways, vehicle circulation ways and parking areas, or exterior building or
structure walls.
               vii.   A change in the location and arrangement of land uses
within the development as shown on the previously approved final plan.
               viii.   A change or relocation of rights of way shown on the
approved final plan in any manner or to any extent that decreases their
functionality, adversely affects their relation to surrounding land use and
rights-of-way elements, or reduces their effectiveness as buffers or amenities.
               ix.   An alteration, whether an increase or decrease, in the
amount of any land use in any stage of the development by more than ten percent
(10%) or a change in the overall final approved and use mix.
               x.   A reduction in the number of parking spaces or an increase
of more than five (5) parking spaces. An increase of up to five (5) spaces
shall be considered a minor change. Any change related to the use of parking
lifts shall be considered a major change.
               xi.   A change to the landscape plan that results in a reduction
in the net amount of plant material. Changes to the landscape plan, which do
not result in a reduction in the net amount of plant material, a change in
species or does not violate the landscaping requirements of this Zoning
Ordinance shall be considered a minor change.
      B.   After Construction
         After the completion of construction of the planned unit development,
all changes to the Final Plan must be approved by the Village Board as an
amendment to an approved special use ordinance. No changes may be made in the
Final Plan unless they are required for the continued successful functioning of
the planned unit development, or unless they are required by changes in
conditions that have occurred since the Final Plan was approved or by changes
in the development policy of the Village.
5.8.   AS-BUILT DRAWINGS
      Upon completion of construction of the planned unit development, two (2)
complete sets of “as-built” plans shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for retention in the Village files.
5.9.   REVOCATIONS AND EXTENSIONS
      If construction work on the proposed planned unit development has not
begun within twelve (12) months from the date of authorization by the Village
Board, the authorization shall become null and void and all rights shall lapse.
However, the applicant can request an extension, upon his/her written
application, filed prior to the termination of the twelve (12) month time
limit. The Village Board may authorize a single extension of not more than six
(6) months without a public notice. Also, as part of the approval of a Planned
Unit Development, the Village Board may permit a longer time limit than twelve
(12) months.
5.10.   CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES
      Prior to granting any special uses, the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of
Appeals may recommend, and the Village Board may stipulate, such conditions and
restrictions upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and
operation of the planned unit development as deemed necessary to guarantee
performance of all conditions.
5.11.   ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT
      Building permits may only be issued if the construction work in question
is in conformity with the approved Final Plan and with all other applicable
ordinances and regulations.
5.12.   ENFORCEMENT OF PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
      A.   The Zoning Administrator shall periodically review all permits
issued for the planned unit development in conjunction with the construction
that has taken place on the planned unit development site, and compare actual
development with the approved development and construction schedule.
      B.   If the Zoning Administrator shall find that the applicant has failed
to meet the approved development and construction schedule, the Zoning
Administrator shall notify the Village Board in writing. Within thirty (30)
days of such notice, the Village Board shall either revoke the special use and
the land shall revert to the requirements of the existing zoning classification
or, for good cause shown by the applicant, the development and construction
schedule may be extended for one hundred and eighty (180) days.
SECTION 6. ZONING DISTRICTS
6.1.   Purpose
6.2.   Districts
6.3.   Zoning map
6.4.   Annexed land
6.5.   Exemptions for public utilities and certain Village facilities
6.1.   PURPOSE
      The purpose of this Section is to outline the different zoning districts
within this Zoning Ordinance and introduce the Official Zoning Map.
6.2.   DISTRICTS
      In order to carry out the purpose and intent of this Ordinance, the
Village of Maywood shall be divided into the following zoning districts:
      A.   Residential Districts
         R-1      Single-Family Residential Zoning District
         R-2      Single-Family Residential Zoning District
         R-3      Two-Family Residential Zoning District
         R-4      Multi-Family Residential Zoning District
         R-5      Multi-Family Residential Zoning District
      B.   Commercial Districts
         C-1      Local Commercial Zoning District
         C-2      Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Zoning District
         C-3      General Commercial Zoning District
         C-4      Town Center Zoning District
         RMC   Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay Zoning District
(Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
      C.   Office Park and Manufacturing Districts
         BIP      Business Industrial Park Zoning District
         M-1   General Manufacturing Zoning District
         RMC   Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay Zoning District
(Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
      D.   Special Purpose Districts
         OS      Open Space Special Purpose Zoning District
         I      Institutional Special Purpose Zoning District
         GL      Governmental Lands Special Purpose Zoning District
6.3.   ZONING MAP
      A.   Location of Districts
         The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by
this Ordinance are set forth in the Official Zoning Map, as periodically
amended. The Official Zoning Map is incorporated into, and made an integral
part of, this Ordinance. It is the intent of this Ordinance that the entire
area of the Village, including all land and water areas, be included in the
zoning districts established by this Ordinance. Any land lying within the
Village, but not shown on the Official Zoning Map as being included within a
district, shall be classified as the R-1 Single-Family Residential District.
         The RMC Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overla y Zoning District
shall only be located within designated areas of the C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1 and BIP
Districts. (Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
      B.   Interpretation of Boundary Lines
         1.   Right-of-Way Lines
            Where zoning district boundary lines coincide with streets, alleys,
highways, easements, or right-of-way lines of railroads, toll roads or
expressways, the boundary line shall be construed to be the centerline of the
right-of-way, unless the boundary line for the Village extends to the far side
of the right-of-way.
         2.   Property Lines
            Where zoning district boundary lines coincide with a recorded
property line, the property line shall be construed to be the boundary line of
the district.
         3.   Scaled Lines
            Where the district boundary lines do not coincide with a right-of-
way line or recorded property line, the district boundary shall be determined
by measuring such boundary line(s) by using the map scale as provided on the
Official Zoning Map.
         4.   Clarification of Boundary Lines
            The Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals shall decide all
interpretations of zoning district boundary lines, where the application of
Paragraphs 1 through 3 above leaves doubt as to the boundary between two (2)
zoning districts.
6.4.   ANNEXED LAND
      Any territory annexed into the Village shall automatically, upon
annexation, be classified as R-1 Single-Family Residential District. That land
shall be subject to the requirements of the R-1 Single-Family Residential
District, unless otherwise provided for in the annexation agreement or until
the territory is rezoned.
6.5.   EXEMPTIONS FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES AND CERTAIN VILLAGE FACILITIES
      The following essential services are permitted to be erected,
constructed, altered, or maintained in any zoning district, provided they are
located in easement areas or rights-of-ways on private or public land:
      A.   Traffic signals, fire hydrants, and similar equipment and
accessories.
      B.   Gas, electric, communication, water supply, and transmission/
distribution systems.
      C.   Elevated or underground water storage tanks.
      D.   Storm and sanitary sewer collection and disposal systems.
      E.   Utility poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits and cables
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by public
utilities, municipal or other governmental agencies for the public health,
safety, convenience, comfort and general welfare.
      F.   Village-owned parking facilities for general public use, subject to
the requirements of this Ordinance.
SECTION 7. RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
7.1.   Residential zoning districts purpose statements
7.2.   Permitted and special uses
7.3.   Bulk and yard regulations
7.4.   General standards of applicability
7.1.   RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS PURPOSE STATEMENTS
      A.   Purpose of R-1 Single-Family Residential Zoning District
         The R-1 Single-Family Residential Zoning District is intended for
those areas of single-family homes located upon slightly larger zoning lots
than those typical to the Village. Limited non-residential uses that are
compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods may be permitted, as
provided herein.
      B.   Purpose of R-2 Single-Family Residential Zoning District
         The R-2 Single-Family Residential Zoning District is intended for
those areas of single-family homes located upon zoning lots typical to single-
family housing within the Village. Limited non-residential uses that are
compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods may be permitted, as
provided herein.
      C.   Purpose of R-3 Two-Family Residential Zoning District
         The R-3 Two-Family Residential Zoning District is intended for areas
of moderate density where single-family and two-family dwellings are located,
similar in dimension to the typical lot size for single-family housing within
the community. Limited non-residential uses that are compatible with
surrounding residential neighborhoods may be permitted, as provided herein.
      D.   Purpose of R-4 Multi-Family Residential Zoning District
         The R-4 Multi-Family Residential Zoning District is intended to create
a moderate density environment of single-family, two-family, townhouse and
multi-family dwellings of up to six (6) dwelling units. This district may
function as a transition zone between single-family neighborhoods and adjacent
higher intensity land uses. Limited non-residential uses that are compatible
with surrounding residential neighborhoods may be permitted, as provided
herein.
      E.   Purpose of R-5 Multi-Family Residential Zoning District
         The R-5 Multi-Family Residential Zoning District is intended to create
a higher density environment of multi-family dwellings and townhomes. Such
areas may function as a transition zone between residential neighborhoods and
adjacent higher intensity and non-residential land uses. Limited non-
residential uses that are compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods
may be permitted, as provided herein.
7.2.   PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
      
Table 7-1: Residential Zoning Districts Permitted and Special Uses lists
permitted and special uses for the residential districts. A “P” indicates that
a use is considered permitted within that district. An “S” indicates that a use
is considered a special use in that district and must obtain a special use
permit as required in
Section 4.4 (Special Use). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of
the use from the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that
district.
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 7-1: RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
P = Permitted Use S = Special Use
USE1 DISTRICT            SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
     R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 7-1: RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
P = Permitted Use S = Special Use
USE1                                 DISTRICT            SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
                                     R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
   RESIDENTIAL USES
Assisted Living Facility                             P   Section 11.3.A
Bed and Breakfast                    S   S   S   S   S    
Community Residence, Large (More                 P   P   Section 11.3.B
than 8 persons)
Community Residence, Small (8 or     P   P   P   P   P   Section 11.3.B
less persons)
Dwelling, Multi-Family                           P2  P   Section 11.3.H
Dwelling, Single-Family              P   P   P   P   P    
Dwelling, Townhouse                              P   P   Section 11.3.H
Dwelling, Two-Family                         P   P   P    
Independent Living Facility                          P   Section 11.3.A
Nursing Home                                         P   Section 11.3.A
   COMMERCIAL USES
Day Care Home, Adult or Child        P   P   P   P   P   Section 11.3.E
Day Care Center, Adult or Child 7.1      S   S   S   S   Section 11.3.D
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
   CULTURAL USES
Group Assembly Uses                  P   P   P   P   P   Section 11.3.M
   OPEN SPACE USES
Parks and Playgrounds                P   P   P   P   P    
   OTHER                                          
Planned Unit Development             S   S   S   S   S   Section 5
Utilities, Private                               S   S   Section 11.3.T
 
TABLE 7-1: FOOTNOTES
1 The terms in this column (“Use”) are defined in
Section 17 (Definitions).
2 In the R-4 Districts, multi-family dwellings are permitted only up to six
dwelling units.
7.3.   BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
      
Table 7-2: Residential Zoning Districts Bulk and Yard Regulations establishes
bulk and yard regulations for the residential zoning districts.
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 7-2: RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
BULK REGULATION R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 7-2: RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
BULK       R-1                        R-2                        R-3                        R-4                                                    R-5
REGULATION
                                                                 SF: 3,125sf
MINIMUM                                                          2F: 4,500sf                SF & 2F: 4,500sf                                       SF & 2F: 4,500sf
LOT AREA   5,000sf                    4,500sf                    Any new lots created by    Townhouse: 1,500sf/du                                  Townhouse: 1,200sf/du
                                                                 subdivision must be a      MF (up to 6 du): 1,500sf/du                            Multi-Family: 800sf/du
                                                                 minimum of 4,500sf
                                                                 SF: 25 ft
MINIMUM                                                          2F: 35 ft                  SF & 2F: 35 ft                                         SF & 2F: 35 ft
LOT WIDTH  50 ft                      35 ft                      Any new lots created by    Townhouse: 15 ft/du                                    Townhouse: 12 ft/du
                                                                 subdivision must have a    MF: 50 ft                                              Multi-Family: 50 ft
                                                                 minimum lot width of 35 ft
MINIMUM    90 ft                      90 ft                      90 ft                      90 ft                                                  90 ft
LOT DEPTH
MAXIMUM
PRINCIPAL  35 ft but no more than 2½ 35 ft but no more than 2½ 35 ft but no more than 2½ SF, 2F & Townhouse: 35 ft but no more than 2½ stories SF, 2F & Townhouse: 35 ft but no more than 2½ stories
BUILDING   stories                    stories                    stories                    MF: 45 ft but no more than 4 stories                   MF: 65 ft but no more than 6 stories
HEIGHT
                                                                                            SF & 2F:                                               SF & 2F:
MAXIMUM    Interior Lot: 30%          Interior Lot: 30%          Interior Lot: 30%          Interior Lot: 30%                                      Interior Lot: 30%
BUILDING   Corner Lot: 35%            Corner Lot: 35%            Corner Lot: 35%            Corner Lot: 35%                                        Corner Lot: 35%
COVERAGE                                                                                    Townhouse: 40%                                         Townhouse: 40%
                                                                                            MF: 60%                                                MF: 65%
MAXIMUM
IMPERVIOUS 50%                        50%                        50%                        SF & 2F: 50%                                           SF & 2F: 50%
SURFACE                                                                                                                                            MF: 70%
COVERAGE
 
 
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 7-2: RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
YARD         R-1          R-2          R-3          R-4           R-5
REQUIREMENT
MINIMUM      25 ft        25 ft        25 ft        25 ft         15 ft
FRONT YARD
                                                    SF & 2F: 10%  SF & 2F: 10%
                                                    of lot width, of lot width,
                                                    but a minimum but a minimum
                                                    of 3 ft       of 3 ft
MINIMUM      10% of lot   10% of lot   10% of lot   Townhouse &   Townhouse &
INTERIOR     width, but a width, but a width, but a MF: 10% of    MF: 10% of
SIDE YARD    minimum of 3 minimum of 3 minimum of 3 lot width or  lot width or
             ft           ft           ft           10 ft,        10 ft,
                                                    whichever is  whichever is
                                                    less; but a   less; but a
                                                    minimum of 5  minimum of 5
                                                    ft            ft
MINIMUM                                             SF & 2F: 5 ft SF & 2F: 5 ft
CORNER SIDE  10 ft        5 ft         5 ft         Townhouse &   Townhouse: 10
YARD                                                MF: 10 ft     ft
MINIMUM REAR 30 ft        30 ft        30 ft        30 ft         30 ft
YARD
 
7.4.   GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
      A.   Temporary Uses
         See
Section 12.6 (Temporary Uses and Structures) for standards governing temporary
uses.
      B.   Accessory Structures and Uses
         See
Section 12.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory
structures and uses. Attached garages are not considered an accessory structure
but are subject to the requirements of
Section 12.4.D.1. (Attached Garages).
      C.   Permitted Encroachments
         See
Section 12.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments.
      D.   Environmental Performance Standards
         See
Section 12.7 (Environmental Performance Standards) for standards governing
environmental performance standards.
      E.   Off-Street Parking and Loading
         See
Section 13 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street
parking and loading.
      F.   Landscaping and Screening
         See
Section 14 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and
screening.
      G.   Signs
         See
Section 15 (Signs) for standards governing signs.
SECTION 8. COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
8.1.   Commercial zoning districts purpose statements
8.2.   Permitted and special uses
8.3.   Bulk and yard regulations
8.4.   Commercial district design standards
8.5.   General standards of applicability
8.1.   COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS PURPOSE STATEMENTS
      A.   Purpose of C-1 Local Commercial Zoning District
         The C-1 Local Commercial District is intended to provide primarily for
retail uses, personal service uses, and professional offices. The district is
intended for application where there exists a grouping of commercial uses that
are neighborhood-serving, pedestrian-oriented and where residential areas are
in close proximity. The district regulations are designed to encourage
compatibility with adjacent or nearby land uses.
      B.   Purpose of C-2 Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial District
         The C-2 Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial District is intended to provide
for transit-oriented development at areas near public transit and pedestrian-
oriented commercial corridor areas, such as that within the Village’s Downtown.
Standards for the C-2 District are designed to maintain and enhance the
appearance of these areas, maintain a pedestrian-oriented environment,
encourage a range of uses both commercial and residential, and provide adequate
buffering for residential neighborhoods adjacent to the district.
      C.   Purpose of C-3 General Commercial Zoning District
         The C-3 General Commercial District is intended to provide sufficient
space in appropriate locations for a variety of retail uses, personal service
uses, and professional offices, generally serving a wider area. While
pedestrian-friendly environments are encouraged, the C-3 District is designed
to accommodate auto-oriented commercial uses, including hotels and retail,
which may require significant parking.
      D.   Purpose of C-4 Town Center Zoning District
         The purpose of the C-4 Town Center District is to facilitate the
development of a regional mixed-use center adjacent to and directly accessible
from the Eisenhower Expressway. The C-4 District provides for development of a
variety of commercial, office, hotel, entertainment and recreation, industrial
and residential uses on larger development sites that generate a sizeable
amount of traffic and a significant demand for off-street parking.
      E.   Purpose of RMC Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay Zoning
District (Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
         The purpose of the RMC Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay
Zoning District is to allow adult use and medical cannabis dispensing
organizations to operate within the Village. Cannabis dispensing organizations
are enterprises unique and different from other uses and, as such, in addition
to the regulations imposed by the underlying zoning district, require the
imposition of certain specific regulations intended to promote the public
health, safety, comfort, morals and convenience by ensuring that such uses are
compatible with their surroundings. The district regulations are designed to
encourage compatibility with adjacent or nearby land uses.
         The RMC Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay Zoning District is
intended to only regulate adult use and medical cannabis dispensing
organizations. All other uses shall be subject to the regulations of the
underlying zoning district.
         The RMC Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay Zoning District
shall consist of the following areas, which are shown on the Official Zoning
Map and the Submap “RMC District #1" and “RMC District 4":
         1.   RMC North (St. Charles Road-Main Street): All M-1, BIP and C-
2 zoned areas abutting the north and south side of St. Charles Road from 15th
Avenue to 5th Avenue. The C-2 areas abutting the north side of Lake Street
along 9th and 8th Avenue; and the M-1 zoned areas abutting the south side of
Lake Street between 9th Avenue and 8th Avenue.
         2.   RMC Northeast (St. Charles Road-Lake Street): All C-1 and C-
2 zoned areas abutting Lake Street between 3rd Avenue and 1st Avenue, including
the C-1 and C-2 zoned areas to the east of 1st Avenue, from Ohio Street south
to Main Street. The C-1 and C-2 zoned areas east of 1st Avenue from Main Street
south to Oak Street.
         3.   RMC West (Maywood Drive): All M-1 zoned lots abutting the south
side of Madison Street between 22nd Avenue and 18th Street; all M-1 zoned lots
abutting the south side of South Maywood Drive between 22nd Avenue and 19th
Avenue; and all M-1 zoned lots abutting the north side of South Maywood Drive
between 22nd Avenue and 17th Avenue.
         4.   RMC Middle (5th Avenue): All C-2 zoned lots abutting the west
side and east side of 5th Avenue between Warren Avenue and Madison Street; all
C-2 zoned lots abutting the east side of 6th Avenue between School Street and
Madison Street; and all C-2 zoned lots abutting the west side of 4th Street
between School Street and Madison Street, except for the southwest corner lot
of School Street and 4th Avenue.
         5.   RMC East (1st Avenue): All C-3 zoned lots abutting the west side
of 1st Avenue between Adams Street and Harrison Street.
         6.   RMC South (Roosevelt Road - Medical Cannabis Only): All C-3 zoned
lots abutting the north side of Roosevelt Road between 1st Avenue and 2nd
Avenue.
         7.   RMC South (Roosevelt Road - All Dispensaries Allowed): All C-
3 zoned lots abutting the north side of Roosevelt Road between 13th Avenue and
5th Avenue.
8.2.   PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
      
Table 8-1: Commercial Zoning Districts Permitted and Special Uses lists
permitted and special uses for the commercial districts. A “P” indicates that a
use is considered permitted within that district. An “S” indicates that a use
is considered a special use in that district and must obtain a special use
permit as required in
Section 4.4 (Special Use). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of
the use from the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that
district.
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 8-1: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED & SPECIAL USES
(Amended 08/21/2012: CO-2012-33; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-23 & CO-
2014-26; Amended 11/20/2014: CO-2014-41; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
Use1 Zoning District         Specific Use Standards
     C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 RMC * E
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 8-1: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED & SPECIAL USES
(Amended 08/21/2012: CO-2012-33; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-23 & CO-2014-26;
Amended 11/20/2014: CO-2014-41; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
Use1                             Zoning District         Specific Use Standards
                                 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 RMC * E
RESIDENTIAL USES
(Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
Assisted Living Facility            S   S   S         Section 11.3.A
Bed and Breakfast                   P              P  
Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor P   P   P   P          
Dwelling, Live-Work                 P              P Section 11.3.G
Dwelling, Multi-Family                    S         Section 11.3.H
Dwelling, Townhouse                       S         Section 11.3.H
Dwelling, Two-Family                P              P Section 11.3.I
Independent Living Facility         S   S   S         Section 11.3.A
Nursing Home                        S   S   S         Section 11.3.A
CULTURAL USES
Cultural Facility                P   P   P   P         Section 11.3.C
 
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 8-1: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED & SPECIAL USES
(Amended 08/21/2012: CO-2012-33; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-23 & CO-
2014-26; Amended 11/20/2014: CO-2014-41; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
Use1 Zoning District         Specific Use Standards
     C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 RMC * E
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 8-1: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED & SPECIAL USES
(Amended 08/21/2012: CO-2012-33; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-23 & CO-2014-26;
Amended 11/20/2014: CO-2014-41; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
Use1                          Zoning District         Specific Use Standards
                              C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 RMC * E
COMMERCIAL USES
(Amended 08/21/2012: CO-2012-33; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-23 & CO-2014-26;
Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35; Amended 01/07/
2025: CO-2025-03)
Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing             P      Section 11.3.U
Organization
Body Art Establishment              S             
Art Gallery                   P   P   P   P          
Artisan Manufacturing            P              P  
Animal Hospital               S   P   P   P          
Brewpub                          P              P  
Brewery/Winery/Distillery                      P  
Car Wash                            S             
Commercial/Community Kitchens    P              P  
Commercial Services           P   P   P   P          
Establishment
Coworking Space                  P              P  
Currency Exchange                S   S   S          
Day Care Center, Adult or     S   S   S   S         Section 11.3.D
Child
Drive-Through Facility           S   S   S         Section 11.3.F
Financial Institution         P   P   P   P          
Food Hall                        P              P  
Funeral Home                  P   P   P             
Gas Station                         P   S         Section 11.3.L
Greenhouse/Nursery                  P             
Heavy Retail, Rental and            S   S          
Service
Hospital                            S             
Hotel/Motel                         S   P          
Indoor Entertainment             S   P   S         Section 11.3.K
Indoor Recreation                P   P   S         Section 11.3.K
Kennel/Pet Day Care Service      S   P   P         Section 11.3.N
Live Entertainment               S   S   S          
Medical Cannabis Dispensing      S   S   S   P      Section 11.3.U
Organization
Medical/Dental Clinic         P   P   P   P          
Microbrewery/Microwinery/     P   P   P   P          
Microdistillery
Motor Vehicle Dealership            P            Section 11.3.O
Motor Vehicle Rental                P            Section 11.3.O
Establishment
Motor Vehicle Service and           S            Section 11.3.P
Repair
Music and Production Studios     P              P  
Office Business               P   P   P   P          
Outdoor Entertainment               S   S         Section 11.3.K
Outdoor Dining                P   P   P   P         Section 11.3.R
Outdoor Recreation                  S   S         Section 11.3.K
Payday or Title Loan Agency   S      S   S          
Personal Care Establishment   P   P   P   P         Section 11.3.V
Pop-Up Business                  P              P Section 11.3.W
Residential Amenity Space     P   P   P   P        P Section 11.3.X
Restaurant                    P   P   P   P          
Restaurant with Drive-Through    S   P   P         Section 11.3.Y
Retail Goods Establishment -
No Sales of Alcohol or        P   P   P   P          
Tobacco
Retail Goods Establishment
with Sales of Beer, Wine, and                         (See also
Tobacco - Minimum 3,200sf in     P   P   P         Chapter 117 of Municipal
Gross Floor Area or More                              Code)
Required
Retail Goods Establishment
with Sales of Liquor/Spirits                          (See also
Package Goods - Minimum             S            Chapter 117 of Municipal
10,000sf in Gross Floor Area                          Code)
or More Required
Smoke or Tobacco Shop               S            Section 11.3.Z
Smoking Lounge                      S            Section 11.3.AA
Special Event Space                 S   S         Section 11.3.BB
Video Gaming within Full-           S            Section 11.3.CC
Service Restaurant
 
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 8-1: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED & SPECIAL USES
(Amended 08/21/2012: CO-2012-33; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-23 & CO-
2014-26; Amended 11/20/2014: CO-2014-41; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
Use1 Zoning District         Specific Use Standards
     C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 RMC * E
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 8-1: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS PERMITTED & SPECIAL USES
(Amended 08/21/2012: CO-2012-33; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-23 & CO-
2014-26; Amended 11/20/2014: CO-2014-41; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
Use1                      Zoning District         Specific Use Standards
                          C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 RMC * E
TRANSPORTATION USES
(Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
Electric Vehicle Charging P   P   P   P        P Section 13.15
Stations - Public Use
Electric Vehicle Charging P   P   P   P        P Section 13.15
Stations - Restricted Use
Electric Vehicle Charging P   P   P   P        P Section 13.15
Stations - Commercial Use
Off-Street Parking Lot    S   S   S   S         Section 11.3.Q.2
Parking Structure         S   S   S   S         Section 11.3.Q.1
GOVERNMENT AND EDUCATIONAL USES
(Amended 11/20/2014: CO-2014-41)
Educational Facilities,      S                
Vocational School
   OTHER
Planned Unit Development  S   S   S   S         Section 5
Utilities, Private        S   S   P   P         Section 11.3.T
 
TABLE 8-1: FOOTNOTES
1 The terms in this column (“Use”) are defined in
Section 17 (Definitions).
* The RMC Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay Zoning District is intended
to only regulate adult use and medical cannabis dispensing organizations. All
other uses shall be subject to the regulations of the underlying zoning
district.
8.3.   BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
      
Table 8-2: Commercial Zoning Districts Bulk and Yard Regulations establishes
bulk and yard regulations for the commercial zoning districts.
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 8-2: COMMERCIAL DISTRICT BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
(Amended 1/18/2011: CO-2011-01; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
 Zoning District
 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 8-2: COMMERCIAL DISTRICT BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
(Amended 1/18/2011: CO-2011-01; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
                Zoning District
                C-1             C-2             C-3           C-4
BULK REGULATIONS
                Residential:    Residential:    Residential:  Residential:
MINIMUM LOT     1,000sf/du      None            1,000sf/du    800sf/du
AREA            Non-            Non-            Non-          Non-Residential:
                Residential:    Residential:    Residential:  None
                None            None            None
MINIMUM LOT     None            None            None          None
WIDTH
MAXIMUM         35 ft but no    50 ft but no    40 ft but no  65 ft but no
BUILDING HEIGHT more than 3     more than 4     more than 3   more than 6
                stories         stories (1)(2)  stories       stories
DESIGN          See             See             See           See
STANDARDS       Section 8.4     Section 8.4     Section 8.4   Section 8.4
YARD REGULATIONS
FRONT YARD      Maximum of 10   Maximum of 15   Maximum of 10 Minimum of 25 ft
                ft              ft (3)          ft
                                                              Non-Residential:
                                                              20 ft
MINIMUM                                                       Residential: 10%
INTERIOR SIDE   None Required   None Required   10 ft         of lot width or
YARD                                                          10 ft, whichever
                                                              is less; but a
                                                              minimum of 5 ft
                                                              Non-Residential:
MINIMUM CORNER  Maximum of 10   Maximum of 10   Maximum of 10 20 ft
SIDE YARD       ft              ft              ft            Residential: 10
                                                              ft
                None required   None required
                unless:         unless:
                1) Buildings    1) Buildings
                over 2 stories  over 2 stories
                require a 20 ft require a 20 ft
                rear yard; or   rear yard; or
MINIMUM REAR    2) A non-       2) A non-
YARD            residential     residential     20 ft         20 ft
                rear lot line   rear lot line
                is shared by a  is shared by a
                rear or side    rear or side
                lot line of a   lot line of a
                residential     residential
                district, then  district, then
                20 ft           20 ft
Notes:
(1)   The Planning Commission may allow a height increase of up to 65 feet or
6 stories when at least 30% of the dwelling units provided on-site are deed
restricted to be affordable relative to 80% of the Cook County Median Income.
(2)   The Planning Commission may allow a building height increase of up to 65
feet or 6 stories when an additional 20% of the parking required under
Section 13.12 Required Off-Street Parking Spaces is provided over the minimum
quantity required and is made available for use by the public.
(3)   If provided, the area resulting from the front yard shall be used for
outdoor dining, seating, landscape planters or a similar activity-generating
use.
 
8.4.   COMMERCIAL DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS
      Development within the commercial districts shall comply with the design
standards of this section.
      A.   Façade Articulation (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         Articulation involves the horizontal and vertical variation of the
façade so that walls are subdivided into bays or sections that are vertically
proportioned. The following provisions for façade articulation shall apply to
any building elevations facing a public street right-of-way or property in a
residential district.
         1.   The frontage of the building shall be divided into
architecturally distinct sections or bays with each section taller than it is
wide.
         2.   Sections or bays shall be visually established by architectural
features such as columns, ribs, pilasters, piers, recesses, projections,
windows. awnings, arcades, or an equivalent element that visually subdivides
the wall with a roof or cap features that provides a rational terminus and
integrates with the overall design of the façade.
         3.   The required dividing elements shall have a minimum width of one
(1) foot and minimum projection to width ratio of 1:4.
         4.   Predominant façade colors must be subtle, neutral or earth-tone
colors. "Earth tone colors" is generally defined by reference to the Pantone
earth tone color palette chart, copies of which shall be made available in the
Community Development Department. Primary colors, high-intensity colors,
metallic or fluorescent colors, and black are prohibited as predominant façade
colors. Trim and accent areas may be brighter and include primary colors.
Variations from the requirements of this subsection may be granted by the
Village President and Board of Trustees pursuant to a request from an
applicant, where the President and Board, in its discretion, and by a vote of
no less than four (4) members, finds unique circumstances support such
variation and that a variation is in the best interests of the public. (Amended
03/13/2013: CO-2013-17)
FIGURE 8-1: FAÇADE ARTICULATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3106.jpg]
      B.    Exterior Cladding Colors (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         1.   Predominant façade colors must be subtle, neutral, or earth-tone
colors. “Earth tone colors” is generally defined by reference to the Pantone
earth tone color palette chart, copies of which shall be made available in the
Community Development Department.
         2.   Primary colors, high-intensity colors, and metallic or
fluorescent colors, are prohibited as predominant façade colors. Trim and
accent areas may be brighter and include primary colors.
         3.   Black finish may be used as trim, accent, and on siding panels as
approved by the Zoning Administrator.
         4.   Brick façades shall not be coated in paint and shall be retained
in a natural finish.
         5.   Variations from the requirements of this subsection may be
granted by the Village President and Board of Trustees pursuant to a request
from an applicant, where the President and Board, in its discretion, and by a
vote of no less than four (4) members, finds unique circumstances support such
variation and that a variation is in the best interests of the public.
      C.   Transparency (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         1.   Transparency Required.
            When the ground floor of a structure is designed for non-
residential use, the ground floor shall maintain a transparency quantity as
follows:
 
Table 8-3 Transparency Standards
Zoning District         Elevation Facing Yard
                        Front Corner Side
C-2 District            80%   60%
C-1, C-3, C-4 Districts 60%   40%
 
         2.   Transparency Standards
            a.   Windows shall be constructed of clear or lightly tinted glass.
Tinting above twenty percent (20%) or reflective glass is prohibited.
            b.   Tinted glass or reflective materials above twenty percent
(20%) may be approved by the Zoning Administrator for Indoor Recreation or Day
Care Center uses located on the first floor of a building.
         3.   Transparency to be Dispersed
            Required glazing shall not be aggregated into a single, undivided
area of glazing treatment. Individual glazing areas shall not span more than
fifteen (15) linear feet.
         4.   Obstructions Prohibited
            a.   For all commercial uses situated on the first or ground floor,
no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing shall be permitted in
the windows or doors facing the street or inside the premises that results in
the window or door from being more than twenty-five percent (25%) obstructed at
any time when viewed from a public right-of-way.
            b.   No booth, screen, partition or other obstruction, or any
arrangement of lights or lighting, shall be permitted in or about the interior
of such premises that prevents a full view of the entire interior of such
premises from the public right-of-way.
            c.   This prohibition does not apply to temporary backdrops in
buildings owned by the Village, rolling security shutters approved in
compliance with subsection 4. below, or to structures that are under
construction or are being rehabilitated so long as a valid building permit has
been obtained and is displayed. (Amended 03/13/2013: CO-2013-16)
         5.   Rolling Security Shutter and Bars.
            a.   Rolling Security Shutters. Rolling Security Shutters are
permitted on the ground floor of building elevations fronting a public street
in the Village's non-residential zoning district facades only when such
shutters comply with all of the following: (Amended 03/13/2013: CO-2013-16)
               1.   Rolling security shutters may not display any signage or
artwork:
               2.   Rolling security shutters must be concealed from view to
the greatest extent possible when not in use by an awning, architectural
features or other method;
               3.   Buildings where rolling security shutters are installed
must maintain an active fire alarm system and be an active participant at all
times in the Village's wireless fire alarm program;
               4.   Rolling security shutters cannot be of a bright metal
construction, and must be complimentary or similar (but not identical) in color
to the façade of the building on which they are installed; and
               5.   No part of the rolling security shutters shall be mounted
or installed in a manner that damages or obscures architectural, historic or
decorative materials on existing buildings.
               6.   Rolling security shutters shall not be displayed or visible
on any building elevation from a public right-of-way between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
      D.   Security Bars (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         Security bars shall be prohibited on the interior or exterior of any
window visible from a public right-of-way.
      E.   Rooflines (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         1.   Roofs shall be designed as an integral part of the façade design.
         2.   Roof lines must either be varied with a change in height or with
the incorporation of a major focal point feature, such as a dormer, gable or
projected wall feature, every one hundred (100) linear feet in length.
         3.   Mansard roofs are prohibited.
         4.   Parapet walls are encouraged and shall feature three-dimensional
cornice treatments or other shadow-creating detail elements along their tops.
         5.   “Green roof” designs are encouraged.
      F.   Entrances (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         1.   All structures shall have a public entrance from the sidewalk
along the street frontage facing a front or corner side lot line. Public
entrances should be articulated from the structure mass.
         2.   Entrances shall be designed for the pedestrian and shall feature
one or more of the following features as follows.
            a.   Entrance Set Back From Lot Line.
               Any entrance setback three (3) or more feet from the front or
corner side lot line shall feature at least one (1) of the following features:
               i.   Canopy
               ii.   Awning
               iii.   Portico
               iv.   Arch
               v.   Other as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
            b.   Entrance At Lot Line.
               Any entrance positioned directly at the front or corner side lot
line shall have one (1) of the following features:
               i.   Recessed entrance
               ii.   Recessed arch
               iii.   Other as approved by the Zoning Administrator.
         3.   Façades that abut parking areas and contain a public entrance
shall make provision for pedestrian walkways and landscape areas.
      G.   Building Materials (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         1.   The following materials are permitted for use on exterior
elevations:
            a.   Clay brick
            b.   Natural or cast stone
            c.   Stucco
            d.   Wood
            e.   Architectural precast concrete
            f.   Hardie board
            g.   Decorative concrete block
            h.   Non-corrugated architectural metal panels and other metal
siding of a decorative quality
         2.   The following building materials are prohibited. However, such
materials may be used as part of decorative or detail elements, or as part of
the exterior construction that is not used as a surface finish material.
            a.   Plain concrete block
            b.   Utility brick
            c.   Aluminum, steel or other metal sidings
            d.   Metal wall panels including corrugated metal, however, such
materials may be used in the M-1 or BIP Districts
            e.   Exposed aggregate (rough finish) concrete wall panels
            f.   Exterior insulating finish systems (EIFS)
            g.   Plastic
      H.   C-2 District Standards. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         The following standards shall apply to all nonresidential and mixed-
use development in the C-2 District. The standards of this Section shall apply
in addition to any applicable Commercial District Design Standards of
Section 8.4.
         1.   Building Step Back
            a.   Applicability. This subsection shall apply to any mixed-use or
nonresidential development exceeding three (3) stories.
            b.   Requirement. All portions of the building above the ground,
second, or third floor facing a front or corner side lot line shall step back
from the primary façade of the building by a minimum of ten (10) feet.
            c.   Use. The use of a building step back area for outdoor dining,
residential amenity space, or a similar activity-generating use is encouraged.
         2.   Proportional Height
            a.   Applicability. This section shall apply to any site
immediately adjacent to a lot with an existing storefront located along the
front or corner side lot line.
            b.   Proportional Height Required. The height of the first floor of
new development shall be consistent with the height of the first floor of
existing adjacent development fronting along a front or corner side lot line.
The height consistency shall be emphasized using storefronts and decorative
cornices.
         3.   Canopies and Awnings
            a.   Building canopies, awnings, or similar weather protection
devices are encouraged on the first floor of all buildings.
            b.   If provided, the canopy, awning, or similar weather protection
device shall project a minimum of three (3) feet and a maximum of five (5) feet
from the façade.
            c.   If awnings or canopies are provided, the use of cloth or
fabric is encouraged.
         4.   Balconies
            a.   Balconies shall be accessible from inside the dwelling unit
and shall have a minimum area of twenty-five (25) square feet.
            b.   Balconies shall either project or recess at least two (2) feet
and a maximum of six (6) feet from the façade wall, as measured from the edge
of the railing to the façade wall but shall not project into a public right-of-
way.
            c.   Where balconies are included, the developer is encouraged to
remove trees, vegetation, and mechanical equipment that would exceed the height
of the balcony and obstruct the view from the balcony to off-site.
         5.   Lighting
            The use of decorative lighting such as string lights or downcast
fixtures is encouraged on building façades along a front or corner side yard.
      I.   Shopping Center Design
         In addition to the above design standards, multi-tenant shopping
centers are subject to the following:
         1.   Siting
            a.   When a shopping center is situated behind a large parking lot,
a street presence for the shopping center shall be created by locating part of
the center or an outlot building, near the lot line, at the primary street
corner or the shopping center entrance. When the center’s frontage on the
primary street exceeds two hundred fifty (250) feet in width, outlot buildings
should hold at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the front lot line. (See
Figure 8-2: Building Siting)
FIGURE 8-2: BUILDING SITING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3108.jpg]
            b.    If outlot buildings are part of a large shopping center
development , outlot buildings must define the street frontage by placement
near the street with showcase windows and entrances oriented toward the street,
as well as to the interior parking lot.
            c.   The primary façade of the structure shall be oriented toward
the street with entrances facing or clearly visible from the primary street.
Main entrances to the structure must be well defined.
            d.   The site shall be designed so that there is safe pedestrian
access to the center and safe pedestrian circulation within the development.
            e.   A cohesive shopping center character shall be required through
the use of coordinated hardscape treatment (special paving materials, lighting,
street furniture), coordinated signs and landscaping.
         2.   Façade Articulation and Design
            a.   Façades visible from the public right-of-way (excluding
alleys) shall have with unique design elements that break down their scale.
Blank walls are only acceptable on rear or side elevations not visible from the
public right-of-way (excluding alleys). Structural bays should be twenty (20)
feet in width, and articulated by columns or pilasters that project at least
three (3) inches from the wall face.
            b.   Outlot buildings designed to reflect the architectural style
of the main structure are encouraged where appropriate.
         3.   Roof Design
            a.   The roofline at the top of the structure must not run in a
continuous plane for more than seventy-five (75) feet without offset of the
roof plane. Rooflines must be “broken up” by providing articulations in the
façade of structures, change in the height of portions of roofs, or change in
color, material, forms, etc.
            b.   Structures must use decorative roof elements, such as
projecting cornices, to enhance roof edges and define public entrances, main
pedestrian routes or activity areas.
8.5.   GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
      A.   Temporary Uses
         See
Section 12.6 (Temporary Uses and Structures) for standards governing temporary
uses.
      B.   Accessory Structures and Uses
         See
Section 12.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory
structures and uses.
      C.   Permitted Encroachments
         See
Section 12.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments.
      D.   Environmental Performance Standards
         See
Section 12.7 (Environmental Performance Standards) for standards governing
environmental performance standards.
      E.   Environmental Performance Standards
         See
Section 12.7 (Environmental Performance Standards) for standards governing
environmental performance standards.
      F.   Off-Street Parking and Loading
         See
Section 13 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street
parking and loading.
      G.   Landscaping and Screening
         See
Section 14 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and
screening.
      H.   Signs
         See
Section 15 (Signs) for standards governing signs.
SECTION 9. OFFICE PARK & MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS
9.1.   Office Park and Manufacturing Zoning Districts purpose statements
9.2.   Permitted and special uses
9.3.   Bulk and yard regulations
9.4.   Office Park and Manufacturing District design standards
9.5.   General standards of applicability
9.1.   OFFICE PARK AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS PURPOSE STATEMENTS
      A.   Purpose of BIP Business Industrial Park/Flex Zoning District 
(Amended 12/21/2016: CO-2016-35)
         The purpose of the BIP Business Industrial Park/Flex Zoning District
is to accommodate developments of office structures, light manufacturing,
warehousing/distribution, contractor/ landscaping yards, and auto-oriented
uses. This District is intended to accommodate office and industrial
structures, yards and auto uses which may be located in close proximity to
residential neighborhoods. This District may also include uses such as
restaurants, retail goods establishments, outdoor dining, financial
institutions and personal services establishments that complement the daily
function of the surrounding heavier M-1 Industrial uses in addition to
buffering nearby residential uses.
      B.   Purpose of M-1 General Manufacturing Zoning District
         The purpose of the M-1 General Manufacturing Zoning District is to
provide for fabrication and assembly-type manufacturing and general industrial
uses, as well as warehousing, storage, office, and research and development
facilities. Development standards are intended to buffer surrounding non-
industrial uses from the impact of the industrial uses within the district.
      C.   Purpose of RMC Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay Zoning
District (Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
         The purpose of the RMC Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay
Zoning District is to allow adult use and medical cannabis dispensing
organizations to operate within the Village. Cannabis dispensing organizations
are enterprises unique and different from other uses and, as such, in addition
to the regulations imposed by the underlying zoning district, require the
imposition of certain specific regulations intended to promote the public
health, safety, comfort, morals and convenience by ensuring that such uses are
compatible with their surroundings. The district regulations are designed to
encourage compatibility with adjacent or nearby land uses.
         The RMC Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay Zoning District is
intended to only regulate adult use and medical cannabis dispensing
organizations. All other uses shall be subject to the regulations of the
underlying zoning district.
         The RMC Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay Zoning District
shall consist of the following areas, which are shown on the Official Zoning
Map and the Submap as “RMC District #2" and “RMC District #3":
         1.   RMC North #1 (Lake Street-Main Street): All M-1 zoned areas
located between Lake Street to the north, Main Street to the south, 8th Avenue
to the east and 9th Avenue to the west.
         2.   RMC North #2 (St. Charles Road-Main Street): All M-1 and BIP
zoned areas north and south of St. Charles Road between 15th Avenue and 6th
Avenue. All BIP zoned lots abutting the north side of Main Street between 7th
Avenue and 6th Avenue.
         3.   RMC West (Maywood Drive): All M-1 zoned lots abutting the south
side of Madison Street between 22nd Avenue and 18th Street; all M-1 zoned lots
abutting the south side of South Maywood Drive between 22nd Avenue and 19th
Avenue; and all M-1 zoned lots abutting the north side of South Maywood Drive
between 22nd Avenue and 17th Avenue.
         4.   RMC Middle #1 (Madison Street-4th Avenue-2nd Avenue): All C-
3 zoned lots abutting the north side of Madison Street between 2nd Avenue and
4th Avenue. The C-3 zoned lots abutting the south side of Madison Avenue to the
east of 2nd Avenue.
         5.   RMC East (Maybrook Drive-Green Street): All M-1 zoned lots
bounded by Maybrook Drive to the south, Green Street to the north, 1st Avenue
to the east and Des Plaines River to the west.
9.2.   PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
      
Table 9-1: Office Park and Manufacturing Zoning Districts Permitted and Special
Uses lists permitted and special uses for the Office Park and Manufacturing
Districts. A “P” indicates that a use is considered permitted within that
district. An “S” indicates that a use is considered a special use in that
district and must obtain a special use permit as required in
Section 4.4 (Special Use). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of
the use from the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that
district.
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 9-1: OFFICE PARK AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED &
SPECIAL USES
(Amended 03/13/2013: CO-2013-15; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-26; Amended
12/21/2016: CO-2016-35; Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023:
CO-2023-35; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
USE1 DISTRICT      SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
     BIP M-1 RMC *
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 9-1: OFFICE PARK AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED & SPECIAL
USES
(Amended 03/13/2013: CO-2013-15; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-26; Amended 12/
21/2016: CO-2016-35; Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023: CO-
2023-35; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
USE1                                      DISTRICT      SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
                                          BIP M-1 RMC *
   COMMERCIAL USES
Body Art Establishment                        S          
Brewery/Winery/Distillery                 P   P          
Commercial Services Establishment         P              
Day Care Center, Adult or Child           S2            Section 11.3.D
Drive-Through Facility                    S2            Section 11.3.F
Financial Institution                     P              
Gas Station                                   S         Section 11.3.L
Greenhouse/Nursery                        P              
Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center       S   S         Section 11.3.U
Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization  S   S         Section 11.3.U
Heavy Retail, Rental and Service          P   P          
Kennel/Pet Day Care Service                   P         Section 11.3.N
Motor Vehicle Dealership                  P             Section 11.3.O
Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment        P             Section 11.3.O
Motor Vehicle Service and Repair          P   P         Section 11.3.P
Office Business                           P   P          
Outdoor Dining                            P             Section 11.3.R
Restaurant                                P              
Restaurant with Drive-Through             P              
Retail Goods Establishment - No Sales of  P              
Alcohol or Tobacco
Retail Goods Establishment with Sales of
Beer, Wine, and Tobacco - Minimum 3,200sf P              
in Gross Floor Area or More Required
 
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 9-1: OFFICE PARK AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED &
SPECIAL USES
(Amended 03/13/2013: CO-2013-15; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-26; Amended
12/21/2016: CO-2016-35; Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023:
CO-2023-35; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
USE1 DISTRICT      SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
     BIP M-1 RMC *
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 9-1: OFFICE PARK AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED &
SPECIAL USES
(Amended 03/13/2013: CO-2013-15; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-26; Amended
12/21/2016: CO-2016-35; Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023:
CO-2023-35; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
USE1                                   DISTRICT      SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
                                       BIP M-1 RMC *
   TRANSPORTATION USES
Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting        S   S         Section 11.3.U
Organization or Transporter
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations -   P   P          
Public Use
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations -   P   P          
Restricted Use
Electric Vehicle Charging Stations -   P   P          
Commercial Use
Off-Street Parking Lot (Principal Use) S   S         Section 11.3.Q.2
Parking Structure (Principal Use)          S         Section 11.3.Q.1
 
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 9-1: OFFICE PARK AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED &
SPECIAL USES
(Amended 03/13/2013: CO-2013-15; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-26; Amended
12/21/2016: CO-2016-35; Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023:
CO-2023-35; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
USE1 DISTRICT      SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
     BIP M-1 RMC *
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 9-1: OFFICE PARK AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED & SPECIAL
USES
(Amended 03/13/2013: CO-2013-15; Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-26; Amended 12/21/
2016: CO-2016-35; Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-
35; Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
USE1                                       DISTRICT      SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
                                           BIP M-1 RMC *
   MANUFACTURING, STORAGE AND RESEARCH USES
Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower            S   S         Section 11.3.U
Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center      S   S         Section 11.3.U
Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization         P     Section 11.3.U
Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or S   S         Section 11.3.U
Infuser
Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization S   S         Section 11.3.U
or Processor
Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting            S   S         Section 11.3.U
Organization or Transporter
Contractor Storage Yard                    S   P         Section 11.3.S
Manufacturing, General                     P   P          
Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center        S   S         Section 11.3.U
Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization           P     Section 11.3.U
Outdoor Storage Yard                       S   P         Section 11.3.S
Recycling Center                           S   P          
Research and Development Facility          P   P          
Self-Storage Facility                          P          
Solid Waste Transfer Facility                  P          
Warehouse/Distribution                     P   P          
   OTHER
Planned Unit Development                   S   S         Section 5
Utilities, Private                         S   S         Section 11.3.T
 
TABLE 9-1: FOOTNOTES
1 The terms in this column (“Use”) are defined in
Section 17 (Definitions).
2 Allowed only when accessory to developments of large office structures,
research and development facilities, and/or light manufacturing uses, and
integrated into the larger development to serve the employees.
* The RMC Recreational and Medical Cannabis Overlay Zoning District is intended
to only regulate adult use and medical cannabis dispensing organizations. All
other uses shall be subject to the regulations of the underlying zoning
district.
9.3.   BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
      
Table 9-2: Office Park and Manufacturing Zoning Districts Bulk and Yard
Regulations establishes bulk and yard regulations for the manufacturing
districts.
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 9-2: OFFICE PARK AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS
BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
 DISTRICT
 BIP M-1
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 9-2: OFFICE PARK AND MANUFACTURING ZONING DISTRICTS
BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
                              DISTRICT
                              BIP                      M-1
BULK REGULATIONS
MINIMUM LOT AREA              5000sf                   20,000sf
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH             50 ft                    100 ft
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT       45 ft but no more than 4 45 ft but no more than 4
                              stories                  stories
YARD REGULATIONS
MINIMUM FRONT YARD            15 ft                    15 ft
MINIMUM INTERIOR SIDE YARD
NON-RESIDENTIAL USE ABUTTING  10 ft                    10 ft
NON-RESIDENTIAL USE OR
DISTRICT
MINIMUM INTERIOR SIDE YARD
ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL USE OR   25 ft                    25 ft
DISTRICT
MINIMUM CORNER SIDE YARD      15 ft                    15 ft
MINIMUM REAR YARD NON-
RESIDENTIAL USE ABUTTING NON- 20 ft                    20 ft
RESIDENTIAL USE OR DISTRICT
MINIMUM INTERIOR SIDE YARD
ABUTTING RESIDENTIAL USE OR   30 ft                    30 ft
DISTRICT
 
9.4.   OFFICE PARK AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICT DESIGN STANDARDS
      A.   Façade Articulation and Reduction of Mass and Scale
         The following standards for façade articulation and reduction of mass
and scale apply to all façades that face a public street and the façade where
the public entrance is located.
         1.   All façades shall have at least two (2) of the following
architectural features to avoid the appearance of blank walls: change in plane
of at least one (1) foot, reveals, windows and openings, and changes in color,
texture and/or material to add interest to the building elevation.
         2.   Large expanses of highly reflective wall surface material and
mirror glass on exterior walls are prohibited to prevent heat and glare impacts
on the adjacent public streets and properties.
         3.   Façades over one hundred (100) feet in length shall incorporate
wall projections or recesses, or changes in wall plane a minimum of two (2)
feet in depth every fifty (50) feet.
         4.   In multi-structure complexes, a comprehensive architectural
concept shall be developed and maintained, as well as a campus-like design.
Various site components must be unified through the use of similar design
features, construction, material and colors. Structures within such complexes
must be compatible in height and scale. If different scale is required for
functional reasons, adequate transition shall be provided between structures.
         5.   The design of accessory structures, such as security kiosks,
maintenance buildings, and outdoor equipment enclosures, shall be incorporated
into, and compatible in design concept with, the overall design of the project
and the main structures on the site.
         6.   Predominant façade colors must be subtle, neutral or earth-tone
colors. "Earth tone colors" is generally defined by reference to the Pantone
earth tone color palette chart, copies of which shall be made available in the
Community Development Department. Primary colors, high-intensity colors,
metallic or fluorescent colors, and black are prohibited as predominant façade
colors. Trim and accent areas may be brighter and include primary colors.
Variations from the requirements of this subsection may be granted by the
Village President and Board of Trustees pursuant to a request from an
applicant, where the President and Board, in its discretion, and by a vote of
no less than four (4) members, finds unique circumstances support such
variation and that a variation is in the best interests of the public. (Amended
03/13/2013: CO-2013-17)
      B.   Roof Design
         1.   The roofline at the top of the structure shall not run in a
continuous plane for more than seventy-five (75) feet without offset of the
roof plane. Rooflines must be “broken up” by providing articulations in the
façade of structures, change in the height of portions of roofs, or change in
color, material, forms, etc.
         2.   Structures shall use decorative roof elements, such as projecting
cornices, to enhance roof edges and define public entrances, waiting areas,
main pedestrian routes or activity areas.
         3.   The following roof materials are prohibited:
            a.   Corrugated metal (standing seam metal roofs permitted)
            b.   Reflective surfaces that produce glare
         4.   “Green roof” designs are encouraged.
      C.   Site Layout
         1.   Public entrances and primary elevations shall face public
streets. Main entrances shall be well defined. Service doors shall be recessed
and integrated into the overall design of the structure.
         2.   The entry to office or guest facilities shall address the street,
with direct access to office or guest facilities from street frontages and
parking areas. In the BIP District, manufacturing and warehouse structures
shall be set back towards the center of the site to minimize impact on adjacent
parcels.
         3.   In multi-structure complexes, a distinct visual link shall be
established among various structures by using architectural or site design
elements such as courtyards, plazas, landscaping, and walkways to unify the
project.
         4.   The parking lot shall not be the dominant visual element of the
site along the primary roadway. Large expansive paved areas located between the
street and the structure are prohibited. Smaller multiple lots separated by
landscaping and structures, or placement behind structures, is required.
      D.   Building Materials
         1.   Permitted Materials
            Permitted building materials for exterior use in the construction
of new office park and industrial uses are as follows:
            a.   Brick
            b.   Wood
            c.   Natural or cast stone
            d.   Tinted and/or textured concrete masonry units
            e.   Stucco
            f.   For manufacturing buildings, high quality metal may be used as
exterior siding or in large expanses only if approved during site plan review
(metal may be used for minor architectural features and trims)
            g.   Architectural precast concrete
            h.   Pre-fabricated steel panels may be used for accent features
only, not as the primary façade material
            i.   Decorative concrete block
         2.   Prohibited Materials
            Prohibited materials for a predominant surface finish material in
the construction of new office park and industrial uses are as follows:
            a.   Plain concrete block
            b.   EIFS panels on the ground floor; EIFS panels discouraged on
upper floors
            c.   Vinyl
9.5.   GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
      A.   Temporary Uses
         See
Section 12.6 (Temporary Uses and Structures) for standards governing temporary
uses.
      B.   Accessory Structures and Uses
         See
Section 12.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory
structures and uses.
      C.   Permitted Encroachments
         See
Section 12.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments.
      D.   Environmental Performance Standards
         See
Section 12.7 (Environmental Performance Standards) for standards governing
environmental performance standards.
      E.   Off-Street Parking and Loading
         See
Section 13 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street
parking and loading.
      F.   Landscaping and Screening
         See
Section 14 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and
screening.
      G.   Signs
         See
Section 15 (Signs) for standards governing signs.
SECTION 10. SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS
10.1.   Special purpose zoning districts purpose statements
10.2.   Permitted and special uses
10.3.   Bulk and setback regulations
10.4.   General standards of applicability
10.5.   E - Entertainment Overlay District
10.1.   SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS PURPOSE STATEMENTS
      A.   Purpose of OS Open Space Zoning District
         The purpose of the OS Open Space Zoning District is to provide and
protect public and private open space, natural areas, and passive and active
outdoor recreation facilities located within the Village.
      B.   Purpose of I Institutional Zoning District
         The purpose of the I Institutional Zoning District is to accommodate
group assembly, educational and cultural facilities located within the Village.
      C.   Purpose of GL Governmental Lands Zoning District
         The purpose of the GL Governmental Lands Zoning District is to
accommodate Village-owned land and facilities, group assembly and other unique
uses within the Village.
10.2.   PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
      
Table 10-1: Special Purpose Zoning Districts Permitted and Special Uses lists
permitted and special uses for the special purpose districts. A “P” indicates
that a use is considered permitted within that district. An “S” indicates that
a use is considered a special use in that district and must obtain a special
use permit as required in
Section 4.4 (Special Use). No letter (i.e., a blank space), or the absence of
the use from the table, indicates that use is not permitted within that
district.
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 10-1: SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED & SPECIAL USES
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
USE1 DISTRICT SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
     OS I GL
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 10-1: SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS PERMITTED & SPECIAL USES
S = Special Use P = Permitted Use
USE1                               DISTRICT SPECIFIC USE STANDARDS
                                   OS I GL
COMMERCIAL USES
Adult Uses                            P   See Village Code for licensing
                                            requirements
Day Care Center, Adult or Child      S S   Section 11.3.D
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
GOVERNMENTAL AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Educational Facilities, College/     P    Section 11.3.J
University
Educational Facilities, Primary      P    Section 11.3.J
Educational Facilities, Secondary    P    Section 11.3.J
Educational Facilities, Vocational   P     
School
Government Facilities              P  P P    
Methadone Clinic                      S    
CULTURAL USES
Cultural Facility                    P    Section 11.3.C
Group Assembly                       P P   Section 11.3.M
OPEN SPACE USES
Cemetery                           S       
Driving Range                      P       
Forest Preserve                    P       
Golf Course                        S       
Outdoor Entertainment              S      Section 11.3.K
Outdoor Recreation                 S      Section 11.3.K
Park/Playground                    P       
   OTHER
Planned Unit Development           S  S S   Section 5
 
TABLE 10-1: FOOTNOTES
1 The terms in this column (“Use”) are defined in
Section 17 (Definitions).
10.3.   BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS
      
Table 10-2: Special Purpose Zoning Districts Bulk and Setback Regulations
establishes bulk and setback regulations for the special purpose districts.
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 10-2: SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS YARD & BULK REGULATIONS
                        DISTRICT
BULK & YARD REGULATIONS OS I GL
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 10-2: SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS YARD & BULK REGULATIONS
                        DISTRICT
BULK & YARD REGULATIONS OS    I                        GL
BULK REGULATIONS
MINIMUM LOT AREA        none  15,000sf                 10,000sf
MINIMUM LOT WIDTH       none  100 ft                   75 ft
MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT 35 ft 45 ft                    45 ft
YARD REGULATIONS1
MINIMUM FRONT SETBACK   20 ft 10 ft                    10 ft
                              10 ft, unless abutting a 10 ft, unless abutting a
MINIMUM REAR SETBACK    25 ft residential use, then 25 residential use, then 25
                              ft                       ft
MINIMUM INTERIOR SIDE         10 ft, unless abutting a 10 ft, unless abutting a
SETBACK                 10 ft residential use, then 20 residential use, then 20
                              ft                       ft
MINIMUM CORNER SIDE     10 ft 10 ft                    10 ft
SETBACK
 
TABLE 10-2: FOOTNOTES
1 For the OS District, setback regulations apply only to those uses with
structures.
10.4.   GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
      A.   Temporary Uses
         See
Section 12.6 (Temporary Uses and Structures) for standards governing temporary
uses.
      B.   Accessory Structures and Uses
         See
Section 12.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses) for standards covering accessory
structures and uses.
      C.   Permitted Encroachments
         See
Section 12.5 (Permitted Encroachments) for standards governing encroachments.
      D.   Environmental Performance Standards
         See
Section 12.7 (Environmental Performance Standards) for standards governing
environmental performance standards.
      E.   Off-Street Parking and Loading
         See
Section 13 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) for standards governing off-street
parking and loading.
      F.   Landscaping and Screening
         See
Section 14 (Landscaping and Screening) for standards governing landscaping and
screening.
      G.   Signs
         See
Section 15 (Signs) for standards governing signs.
10.5.   E - ENTERTAINMENT OVERLAY DISTRICT
(Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
      A.   Purpose
         The E - Entertainment Overlay District is intended to allow for the
clustering of certain uses to enhance those areas where a concentration of such
uses can create a vibrant entertainment environment.
      B.   Applicability
         1.   The E - Entertainment Overlay District applies only when the base
underlying zoning district is the C-2 Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial District.
When the E - Entertainment Overlay District is applied over a district other
than the C-2 Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial District, the E - Entertainment
Overlay District regulations do not apply.
         2.   Unless specifically modified by the E - Entertainment Overlay
District, the requirements and regulations of the C-2 Pedestrian-Oriented
Commercial District continue to apply.
      C.   Use Permissions
         1.   Permitted Uses
            The following uses are specifically allowed in the E -
Entertainment Overlay District. These uses remain subject to the use standards
of
Section 11, unless specifically modified below.
            a.   Body Art Establishment. A Body Art Establishment is allowed as
a permitted use.
            b.   Smoking Lounge. A Smoking Lounge is allowed as a permitted
use, subject to the license limitations in
Chapter 116 of the Village Code and review by the Joint Commission for Tobacco
and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing.
            c.   Special Event Space. A Special Event Space is allowed as a
permitted use.
            d.   Video Gaming within Full-Service Restaurant. Video Gaming
within a Full-Service Restaurant is allowed as a special use.
            e.   Live Entertainment. Live Entertainment is allowed as a
permitted use.
         2.   Prohibited Uses
            The following uses are specifically prohibited in the E -
Entertainment Overlay District:
            a.   Drive Through Facility.
            b.   Restaurant with Drive-Through.
            c.   Retail Goods Establishment with Sales of Liquor/Spirits
Package Goods.
            d.   Smoke or Tobacco Shop.
SECTION 11. USE STANDARDS
11.1.   Purpose
11.2.   Use of land and buildings
11.3.   Generic use standards
11.1.   PURPOSE
      The purpose of this Section is to set forth additional requirements for
certain uses of land. These standards are intended to ensure that the use is
compatible with the surrounding area.
11.2.   USE OF LAND AND STRUCTURES
      No structure or premises shall be used or occupied except in conformity
with the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. No
structure shall be erected, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, altered or moved
except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is
located. The only exception to this subsection is where zoning relief is
granted by the Village President and Board of Trustees.
11.3.   GENERIC USE STANDARDS
      In addition to the use standards below, all uses are required to comply
with all provisions of this Ordinance including, but not limited to,
Section 12 (Site Development Standards),
Section 13 (Off-Street Parking and Loading),
Section 14 (Landscaping and Screening), and
Section 15 (Signs), and all other Village regulations.
      A.   Assisted Living Facility, Independent Living Facility and Nursing
Home
         Assisted living facilities, independent living facilities and nursing
homes shall meet all federal, state and local requirements including, but not
limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements. In
addition, the following criteria shall be required:
         1.   The location, design and operation of the facility shall be
compatible with, and shall not adversely affect, adjacent properties and the
surrounding area.
         2.   The facility shall be harmonious with surrounding buildings, in
respect to scale, architectural design and building placement. If located
within a residential district, the facility shall not alter the residential
character of the neighborhood.
         3.   The surrounding street network shall be capable of accommodating
the traffic generated by the facility.
      B.   Community Residence
         Community residences shall meet all federal, state and local
requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and
building code requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be
required.
         1.   The location, design and operation of the facility will not alter
the residential character of the neighborhood.
         2.   The facility shall retain a residential character, which shall be
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood.
         3.   The operation of the facility shall not adversely impact
surrounding properties.
         4.   The facility shall be located at least one thousand two hundred
(1,200) feet from any existing facility, as measured from lot line to lot line.
      C.   Cultural Facility
         Cultural facilities shall be designed so that the location of
entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading
facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards, and adverse
impacts on adjoining properties.
      D.   Day Care Center, Child or Adult
         Day care centers shall meet all federal, state and local requirements
including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code
requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be required:
         1.   Adequate on-site drop-off zones, sidewalks and exterior lighting
shall be provided.
         2.   The amount of traffic or noise to be generated shall not be
excessive.
         3.   Adequate open space and recreational areas shall be provided.
      E.   Day Care Home, Child or Adult
         Day care homes shall meet all federal, state and local requirements
including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code
requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be required:
         1.   Adequate on-site drop-off zones, sidewalks and exterior lighting
shall be provided.
         2.   The amount of traffic or noise to be generated shall not be
excessive.
         3.   Adequate open space and recreational areas for child day care
homes shall be provided.
         4.   The day care home shall retain a residential character and the
affect of the day care home shall not alter the residential character of the
neighborhood.
         5.   The operation of the day care home shall not adversely impact
surrounding properties.
      F.   Drive-Through Facility
         A drive-through facility is considered a separate use, rather than
accessory to the principal use, and shall be subject to the following
standards:
         1.   All drive-through facilities shall provide adequate stacking
spaces, in accordance with
Section 13 (Off-Street Parking and Loading).
         2.   All drive-through lanes must be located and designed to ensure
that they will not adversely affect the safety and efficiency of traffic
circulation on adjoining streets.
         3.   No exterior lighting shall produce a glare into, or upon, the
surrounding area or any residential premises. All drive-through facilities
shall be properly screened or fenced, in accordance with
Section 14.13.D (Drive-Through Facilities), to prevent glare from vehicles
passing through service lanes.
         4.   Drive aisles shall be separated from landscaped areas by a six
(6) inch curb.
         5.   The volume on all intercom menu displays shall be maintained at a
level so as not to be audible in adjoining residential districts. The volume on
all intercom menu displays shall comply with all local noise regulations.
         6.   The operator of the drive-through facility shall provide adequate
on-site outdoor waste receptacles and shall provide daily litter clean-up of
the facility and along the rights-of-way abutting the property.
      G.   Dwelling, Live-Work (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         1.   The work area shall occupy a maximum of one thousand eight
hundred (1,800) square feet.
         2.   The non-residential area shall be limited to the first floor of
the site's principal building only.
         3.   A maximum of five (5) non-residential workers or employees are
allowed to occupy the non-residential area at any one (1) time.
         4.   The same tenant shall occupy the work area and living area.
      H.   Dwelling, Multi-Family and Dwelling, Townhouse
         1.   Façades must be designed to be viewed from multiple directions
and, therefore, they must be designed with consistent materials and treatment
that wraps around all façades. There must be a unifying architectural theme for
an entire multi-family or townhouse development, utilizing a common vocabulary
of architectural forms, elements, materials and colors in the entire structure.
         2.   Windows and doors must have raised elements to create shadow and
articulation. In addition, three-dimensional elements, such as balconies and
bay windows, should be incorporated to provide dimensional elements on a
façade. Windows must be set back (“punched”) into or projected out from the
façade to provide façade depth and shadow, vertical in orientation and of a
consistent style.
         3.   Roof forms must be articulated so that varied planes and massing
within the overall roof are provided. Large, monotonous, simple pitched roofs,
without breaks in the expanse of the roof, are prohibited. Dormers and gables
can be used to break up large expanses of roof area. For flat roofs, cornices
and parapets should be used to add variety and break up the roofline. Rooflines
must be modulated at minimum every seventy-five (75) feet through the use of
varied roof heights. (See
Figure 11-1: Roof Design)
FIGURE 11-1: ROOF DESIGN
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3110.jpg]
         4.    There shall be a minimum separation of ten (10) feet between
sidewalls among rows of townhouse development s and multi-family dwellings.
Where the front or rear wall of a row of townhouse or multi-family dwellings
faces the front or rear wall of another row of townhouse or multi-family
dwellings, the minimum required separation between such buildings shall be a
minimum of thirty (30) feet. Driveways and parking areas may be located within
this minimum separation area.
         5.   Large, flat façades must be avoided, which can be accomplished by
articulating the building mass to create substantial shadows and visual
interest. Windows, projected entrances and overhangs must be included on the
street facing façade to add variety and maintain a pedestrian-scale. When the
sidewalls of multi-family or townhouse development face a street, building
façades must be designed with elements of a front façade, including doors and/
or windows.
         6.   All townhouses must be designed with the front or side façade of
the units facing the street with either detached garages located in the rear
yard or attached garages oriented to the rear of the units.
      I.   Dwelling, Two Family (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         In the C-2 District, Dwelling, Two-Family uses shall be located
entirely south of Main Street only.
      J.   Educational Facilities, Primary, Secondary, College/University
         1.   Educational facilities shall be designed so that the location of
entrances and exits, exterior lighting, outdoor recreation areas, service
areas, and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion,
pedestrian hazards and adverse impacts on adjoining properties.
         2.   Changes to outdoor recreation facilities that are part of an
educational institution’s campus require site plan review approval for the
construction of any buildings, accessory structures and exterior lighting.
      K.   Entertainment and Recreation Facilities, Indoor or Outdoor
         Entertainment and recreation facilities shall be designed so that the
location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking
and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards and
adverse impacts on adjoining properties.
      L.   Gas Station
         1.   Gas station canopies shall be designed with luminaires recessed
under the canopy to minimize light pollution. Light intensity directly under
the canopy shall not exceed ten (10) footcandles at any location. All lighting
mounted under the canopy, including auxiliary lighting within signage and
panels over the pumps, shall be included in the ten (10) footcandle limit.
         2.   All gas station driveways must be located and designed to ensure
that they will not adversely affect the safety and efficiency of traffic
circulation on adjoining streets.
         3.   Gas stations may offer convenience items for sale as a secondary
activity. A maximum of ten percent (10%) of the retail floor area may be used
to sell tobacco/hemp products and smoking paraphernalia. Retail floor area
includes the area located behind the service counter. Storage of tobacco/hemp
products inventory prior to display for sale cannot be visible to the public.
No storage of tobacco/hemp products is permitted in end caps or other public
retail floor areas or areas visible to the public behind the service counter.
(Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
         4.   Gas stations may also include an automatic car wash with one (1)
bay. Stacking spaces shall be in accordance with
Section 13 (Off-Street Parking and Loading).
         5.   In addition, gas stations may be included accessory to a “Motor
Vehicle Repair and Service Shop.” However, they shall be subject to the
provisions of this section and the standards of Paragraph P. (Motor Vehicle
Repair and Service) below.
         6.   Gas stations shall not be subject to the maximum front yard
requirements, when applicable. However, a minimum five (5) foot landscaped
setback shall be provided.
         7.   The volume on all gas station monitors and speaker systems shall
conform to all local noise regulations.
      M.   Group Assembly
         Group assembly facilities shall be designed so that the location of
entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading
facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards and adverse
impacts on adjoining properties.
      N.   Kennel/Pet “Day Care” Service
         1.   Exterior enclosures and runs shall provide protection against
weather extremes. Floors of runs shall be made of impervious material to permit
proper cleaning and disinfecting.
         2.   All animal quarters and runs are to be kept in a clean, dry and
sanitary condition.
         3.   Fencing surrounding exercise areas and/or runs shall be of a
sufficient height to prevent escape and shall be buried as part of installation
to prevent escape by digging beneath the fence posts.
         4.   Noise shall be mitigated so as not to create a public nuisance
for adjoining properties and shall comply with all local noise regulations.
This shall exclude noise from exercise or training while outdoors during the
daytime.
      O.   Motor Vehicle Dealership or Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment 
(Amended 03/13/2013: CO-2013-15)
         Motor vehicle dealerships or rental establishments shall have a
minimum lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet. Any service and repair
facilities must also comply with the standards of Paragraph P. (Motor Vehicle
Service and Repair) below.
      P.   Motor Vehicle Service and Repair (Amended 03/13/2013: CO-2013-15)
         1.   Motor vehicle service and repair establishments shall have a
minimum lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet.
         2.   All driveways must be located and designed to ensure that they
will not adversely affect the safety and efficiency of traffic circulation on
adjoining streets.
         3.   All repair operations shall be fully enclosed. Motor vehicle
service and repair shops may not store the same vehicles outdoors on the site
for longer than fifteen (15) days. Wrecked or junked vehicles shall not be
stored for longer time periods than those specified in this section and shall
be screened from the public right-of-way and any adjacent residential
districts.
         4.   Motor vehicle service and repair shops may also include gas
stations as an accessory use. All gas stations which are part of such an
establishment must comply with the regulations of Paragraph L. (Gas Station)
above.
      Q.   Off-Street Parking and Loading, Structure or Lot
         Off-street parking may be open to the sky or enclosed in a building.
Required parking shall be provided on the zoning lot to which such parking is
accessory, unless otherwise authorized by this Ordinance.
         1.   Parking Structure
            a.   Parking structures located in the C-1 or C-2 Districts shall
include commercial uses along at least fifty percent (50%) of the length of a
façade adjacent to a public right-of-way, excluding alleys. Those areas of the
façade adjacent to a public right-of-way, excluding alleys, that do not contain
commercial uses must maintain a ten (10) foot landscaped yard.
            b.   Where no commercial frontage is required, a landscaped yard a
minimum of ten (10) feet in width shall be provided adjacent to a public right-
of-way, excluding alleys.
         2.   Off-Street Parking Lot
            a.   The off-street parking lot shall be solely for the parking of
passenger vehicles for periods of less than one (1) day and shall not be used
as an off-street loading area.
            b.   No sales display, repair or service of any kind shall be
conducted in any off-street parking lot.
            c.   No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances,
exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on any off-street parking lot.
            d.   No buildings other than those for shelter of attendants shall
be erected upon any off-street parking lots. The allowable shelters shall not
exceed ten (10) feet in height and fifty (50) square feet in area.
            e.   The off-street parking lot shall be screened and landscaped in
accordance with
Section 14 (Landscaping and Screening).
            f.   The off-street parking lot shall be kept free from refuse and
debris. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy growing condition, and
be neat and orderly in appearance.
      R.   Outdoor Dining (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         Outdoor dining is considered a separate use, subject to annual
licensing requirements, rather than accessory to the principal use, and shall
be subject to the following standards:
         1.   Outdoor dining may be located on the same lot as the principal
use to be served and as follows:
            a.   Adjacent to the principal use on the lot. If located in a
required yard that abuts a residential use or district, a fence, landscape
hedge, or wall with a height of four (4) feet shall be used to separate the
outdoor dining area.
            b.   On a rooftop or a step back area on the upper floor of a
building.
         2.   All outdoor dining permits shall be subject to review and
approval by the Zoning Administrator following technical review and approval by
other Village departments, including hours of operation and other requirements
deemed appropriate.
         3.   Hours of operation shall be limited to the posted operational
hours of the associated business but shall not extend past 10:00 p.m. when
located adjacent to a residential use.
         4.   If utilizing the public-right-of-way, the applicant must enter
into a license agreement with the Village or another type of agreement for use
of the right-of-way if another public entity owns the right-of-way.
         5.   In no case shall the operation of an outdoor dining facility
reduce the open portion of a public sidewalk to less than five (5) feet clear
of all obstructions. The applicant may apply to the Village to use the entire
width of a private sidewalk to locate the outdoor dining facility, but in such
case an adequate, alternate means of access will have to be demonstrated and
dedicated for use in the event a private sidewalk is required for access
purposes to a building or structure.
         6.   All maintenance and upkeep of the public right-of-way and any
private property associated with the operation of the outdoor dining facility
shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator, including cleanup of
tables, trash, litter and washing of sidewalks and the replacement of damaged
public property. The owner or operator shall provide and maintain in a clean
and neat manner at least one (1) covered trash receptacle within or adjacent to
the outdoor dining facility. The covered trash receptacle(s) shall be emptied
once full and also each day upon closing of the outdoor dining.
         7.   The service or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited,
unless the Village Board has created a liquor license for such activity and a
liquor license has been issued to the outdoor dining operator by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner.
         8.   Outdoor dining shall not interfere with the pedestrian access or
parking spaces and aisles. Unless otherwise permitted by the Village, outdoor
dining areas shall be located only on private property.
         9.   All tables, chairs and other appurtenances shall be removed
during the months of December through March or if required by the Village at
any other time. During cold or inclement weather, outdoor dining may be fully
or partially enclosed by temporary wind blocks, provided that the temporary
structure is approved by the Zoning Administrator on a case-by-case basis. Upon
construction, the Zoning Administrator shall confirm that it conforms to the
applicable provisions of this Ordinance.
         10.   The operation of the outdoor dining facility shall comply with
state and local fire and health code regulations, accessibility laws and
regulations and all other applicable provisions of federal, state, county or
local law and this Ordinance.
         11.   The outdoor dining shall not be detrimental to the health,
safety or general welfare of persons residing or working near the outdoor
dining. In approving the layout of a proposed outdoor dining facility that is
adjacent to residential property, the Village Board will give consideration to
requiring architectural elements, such as fencing, screening, vegetation or
other appropriate structures that can serve as a buffer to minimize the impact
of noise on the adjacent residential property.
         12.   Outdoor dining permits may be revoked by action of the Village
Board at any time within thirty (30) days’ notice or immediately by the
Director of Community Development in the event of a public health or safety
issue.
      S.   Outdoor Storage Yard and Contractor Storage Yard
         1.   All outdoor storage must comply with the screening requirements
of
Section 14.13 (Screening Requirements).
         2.   The storage area shall be located to the rear of the lot.
         3.   Outdoor storage areas shall be surfaced, and graded and drain all
surface water. Outdoor storage areas may be surfaced with partially permeable
materials, if adequate drainage and erosion and dust control are provided.
         4.   Any lighting used to illuminate an outdoor storage area shall be
directed and shielded as to not illuminate any adjacent residential areas.
      T.   Utilities, Private
         Private utilities shall be designed so that the location of entrances
and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and loading facilities
will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards, and adverse impacts on
adjoining properties. Additional landscaping and screening may be required. Any
aboveground private utility structures, such as pedestals for cable wire access
or other access points for underground infrastructure (communications wiring,
fiber optic, etc.) may not encroach into the required front yard and shall be
screened from view of any public right-of-way.
      U.   Cannabis Business Establishments. (Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-26;
Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22
         In zoning districts in which a Cannabis Business Establishment may be
located as a permitted or special use, the proposed facility must comply with
the following regulations:
         1.   Cannabis Business Establishments are subject to all regulations,
requirements, and restrictions set forth in the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1, et seq.) and the Cannabis Regulation and
Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/ 1, et seq.) rules formulated thereunder, including,
without limitation, geographic location restrictions, and shall at all times
comply with the terms and conditions of any special use permit that may be
granted.
         2.   A site plan, security plan, and signage plan relative to a
Cannabis Business Establishment must be submitted for review by the Zoning
Administrator for compliance with State and Village requirements. No business
license, building permit or other Village approval related to the siting of
such a Cannabis Business Establishment other than a special use shall be
authorized until such approvals have been given. The Village may impose
reasonable requirements relative to security and security cameras as necessary
to ensure the safety of employees and customers and in excess of the
requirements imposed by the Acts.
         3.   Any Special Use granted for a Cannabis Business Establishment
shall not run with the land, but shall instead terminate upon any change in
ownership or upon abandonment of the use by the owner who received the special
use for a period in excess of one hundred and eighty (180) days.
         4.   A Medical or Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization shall not
be located in a multi-tenant building.
         5.   All applications for Village approval relating to the siting of
Cannabis Business Establishments including but not limited to special use
permits, building permits, business licenses and/or business registration will
be processed using a first in time, first in right method. All applications
will be date and time stamped when they are received by the Village. Once an
application is deemed complete, it will be processed by the Village in the
order it was received. If at any time an application is withdrawn, denied or
deemed incomplete, the next complete application will be processed.
         6.   Cannabis Business Establishments shall comply with all rules and
regulations contained in the Village of Maywood Municipal Code.
         7.   Cannabis Business Establishments shall be designed so that the
location of entrances and exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking
and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, pedestrian hazards and
adverse impacts on adjoining properties.
      V.   Personal Care Establishment (Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35; Amended
07/18/2024: CO-2024-28)
         1.   Personal care establishments under two thousand (2,000) square
feet must be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any other
personal care establishment under two thousand (2,000) square feet, except
where both establishments are located in a building over two thousand (2,000)
square feet (i.e., strip centers, spa suites or office buildings where separate
suites exist).
      W.   Pop-Up Business (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         1.   The number of pop-up businesses operations shall be limited to
four (4) per calendar year on one (1) given parcel.
         2.   The duration of each pop-up business operation shall be approved
by the Zoning Administrator. The maximum duration for any individual pop-up
business shall be ninety (90) days.
         3.   Pop-up businesses shall maintain all relevant registration and
licenses with State offices.
      X.   Residential Amenity Space (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         1.   Residential amenity space may be located within the building, on
a rooftop, or on a building step back resulting from the requirements of this
Ordinance.
         2.   Residential amenity space may be provided within a building
containing solely residential uses or a mixed-use building with both commercial
and residential uses.
      Y.   Restaurant with Drive-Through (Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
         1.   In the C-2 Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial District, a restaurant
with a drive-through must be located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet
from any other restaurant with a drive-through.
      Z.   Smoke or Tobacco Shop (Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
         1.   Smoke or tobacco shops must be located a minimum of one thousand
(1,000) feet from any other smoke or tobacco shop.
         2.   Smoke or tobacco shops require a permit pursuant to
Chapter 116 of the Village Code and review by the Joint Commission for Tobacco
and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing.
      AA.   Smoking Lounge (Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
         1.   Smoking lounges must be located a minimum of one thousand (1,000)
feet from any other smoking lounge.
         2.   Smoking lounges require a permit pursuant to
Chapter 116 of the Village Code and review by the Joint Commission for Tobacco
and Cannabis Regulation and Licensing.
      BB.   Special Event Space (Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
         1.   A special event space must be a minimum of three thousand two
hundred (3,200) square feet in gross floor area.
         2.   A special event space is prohibited within a mixed-use building
that includes residential uses.
         3.   Special event spaces must be located a minimum of five hundred
(500) feet from any other special event space unless legal title to both spaces
are held and operated or to be held and operated by the same liquor licensee or
owner or are to be held and operated by different corporations where the
ownership of the corporations are comprised of at least fifty percent (50%) of
the same shareholders or owners. The word corporation includes a limited
liability company.
         4.   A special event space requires commercial kitchen facilities for
the preparation or catering of food.
         5.   A manager of a special event space must be on-site during all
events.
         6.   A special event space is not operated as a restaurant with
regular hours of operation. Food may only be served as part of a scheduled
event.
         7.   A special event space may only charge a general admission fee or
other payment to the general public for entrance when such event and the
corresponding admission fee is allowed by a Live Entertainment Permit issued by
the Village and/or for fundraisers or events for bona fide non-profit
organizations, places of worship, educational facilities, or similar uses.
         8.   In providing parking spaces as required by
Table 13-1: Off-Street Parking Requirements, special event spaces:
            a.   Are eligible for a reduction in the total required amount of
parking spaces in
Section 13.12.A.4.
            b.   May, when located in the C-2 Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial
District discount the first two thousand (2,000) square feet of space as
allowed in
Section 13.12.A.2.
            c.   May, when located in the C-2 Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial
District, count on-street spaces toward this parking requirement, as allowed in
Section 13.12.A.3.
            d.   Are permitted to use the collective parking requirements in
Section 13.15.
         9.   Hours of operations are as regulated by the Village Code.
         10.   Security must be provided as required as part of the Village
business license for any ticketed events or where a per person admission is
charged.
      CC.   Video Gaming within Full-Service Restaurant (Amended 06/20/2023:
CO- 2023-35)
         1.   Video gaming within a full-service restaurant must be located a
minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any other establishment with video
gaming within a full-service restaurant.
         2.   The video gaming within a full-service restaurant use is only
permitted as part of a full-service restaurant. A full-service restaurant is a
restaurant where customers are seated at tables and served by waitstaff and/or
through technology that simulates full-service waitstaff, who take their
orders, serve their meals, and attend to their needs throughout the meal.
         3.   Video gaming within a full-service restaurant requires a permit
as per the Municipal Code.
SECTION 12. ON-SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
12.1.   Purpose
12.2.   Use of land and buildings
12.3.   Exterior lighting
12.4.   Accessory structures and uses
12.5.   Permitted encroachments
12.6.   Temporary uses and structures
12.7.   Environmental performance standards
12.1.   PURPOSE
      The purpose of this Section is to address the regulation of those other
site improvements on a lot other than the regulations for the principal
building. This includes site design standards, accessory structures and uses,
and permitted encroachments.
12.2.   USE OF LAND AND BUILDINGS
      A.   Number of Buildings on a Lot
         Except in the case of a planned unit development, there shall be no
more than one (1) principal detached residential building per lot in any
residential district, except the R-5 District. In all other districts and the
R-5 District, more than one (1) building may be erected on a single lot,
provided that each building shall comply with all yard and bulk requirements of
a district as though it were a principal building on an individual lot.
      B.   All Activities within an Enclosed Structure
         Within all districts, all activities shall be conducted entirely
within an enclosed structure, with the exception of the following activities
and uses:
         1.   Off-street parking and loading, in accordance with
Section 13 (Off-Street Parking and Loading).
         2.   Outdoor businesses, and those businesses with a required outdoor
component, including, but not limited to, outdoor entertainment, outdoor
recreation, restaurants with outdoor dining, car washes, kennels/dog “day care”
services and similar businesses. However, these businesses may be limited or
the outdoor components prohibited as a condition of a special use where
applicable.
         3.   Outdoor storage, and outdoor sales and display areas, in
accordance with
Section 12.4.H. Outdoor Sales and Display and Outdoor Storage).
         4.   Temporary uses, in accordance with
Section 12.6 (Temporary Uses and Structures).
      C.   Frontage on a Public or Private Street
         All lots shall front on a public or private street, unless a permanent
easement of access to a public street was of record prior to the adoption of
this Ordinance.
      D.   Required Yards
         1.   No lot shall be reduced in area so that the yards are less than
required by this Ordinance. Required yards for existing buildings that are
below minimum standards shall not be further reduced, unless zoning relief is
granted by the Village President and the Village Board.
         2.   The required yards for a zoning lot shall not be considered a
yard for any other zoning lot.
         3.   All yards allocated to a building shall be located on the same
zoning lot as such building.
         4.   With respect to the resubdivision of improved zoning lots in the
R-3, R-4 and R-5 Districts, side yard requirements shall not apply between
attached townhouse units.
      E.   Applicability of Bulk Requirements
         All structures erected after the effective date of this Ordinance
shall meet the requirements for the zoning district in which the structure is
located. No existing structure shall be enlarged, altered, reconstructed or
relocated in such a manner that conflicts with the requirements of the zoning
district in which the structure shall be located.
      F.   Applicability of Use Restrictions
         No structure or land shall be used for any use other than one allowed
as either a permitted or special use in the zoning district in which such
structure or land is located. Structures or land may also be used for a
temporary use or accessory use, in accordance with the requirements of
Section 12.6 (Temporary Uses and Structures) and
Section 12.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses).
      G.   View Obstruction
         The site clearance area at the intersection of two (2) streets shall
be defined as a triangular area of a corner lot measured twelve (12) feet from
the point of intersection of the two (2) streets along each street, shall not
be obstructed by any sign, wall, fence, hedge, shrub or other object which
exceeds three (3) feet above street grade in height. Trees may be maintained
within this area as long as there is no foliage within thirty-six (36) inches
as measured from the ground to the lowest foliage. In the event that the grade
of a lot is higher than the street grade, the height of the wall, fence, hedge,
or shrub shall be reduced so that the site clearance is not obstructed twenty-
four (24) inches over the grade of the street.
12.3.   EXTERIOR LIGHTING
      A.   Light Trespass and Distraction
         1.   No exterior lighting shall glare into, or upon, the surrounding
area or any residential premises. In addition, no exterior lighting may be used
in any manner that could interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on
public streets. The light level shall be no greater than one-half (0.5)
footcandle at a residential property line and one (1) footcandle at any non-
residential property line or public right-of-way line.
         2.   Specifically, the following types of light trespass are
prohibited:
            a.   Any light not designed for roadway illumination that produces
direct or reflected glare that could disturb the operator of a motor vehicle.
            b.   Any light that may be confused with, or construed as, a
traffic control device, except as authorized by state, federal or local
government.
            c.   In addition, gas station lighting shall comply with the
requirements of
Section 11.3.L. and screening lighting for drive-through facilities shall
comply with
Section 11.3.F.
      B.   Unshielded Lighting
         The use of unshielded lighting, including incandescent light bulbs
hung or strung on poles, wires, or any other type of support, are prohibited,
except on a temporary basis in areas where approved carnivals, fairs or other
similar activities are held and only when such activities are taking place.
      C.   Light Pole and Building-Mounted Lighting Heights
         The maximum height of light poles on private property, as measured
from grade at the base to the bottom of the luminaire, shall be as specified
below. These standards do not apply to public right-of-way lighting. Permitted
light pole heights shall be as follows:
         1.   Non-Residential Districts
            a.   Lights poles and building-mounted fixtures shall be designed
with fully shielded luminaires. Such poles or mounts shall not exceed sixteen
(16) feet in height.
            b.   Light poles for educational facilities or that light public
outdoor recreational facilities shall not exceed sixty (60) feet in height.
Exterior lighting for all outdoor recreation areas is subject to site plan
review.
         2.   Residential Districts
            Light poles for single- and two-family dwellings shall not exceed
eight (8) feet in height. Light poles for non-residential uses, multi-family
and townhouse uses shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. Lighting,
including under-soffit lighting mounted upon a single-family, two-family or
townhouse residential dwelling shall not be mounted higher than fifteen (15)
feet above grade.
      D.   Automatic Teller Machine Lighting
         All exterior lighting for automatic teller machines (ATMs) shall
comply with the Automated Teller Machine Security Act (205 ILCS 695/1 et seq).
All exterior lighting for ATMs in drive-through facilities shall be designed
with luminaires recessed under the canopy to minimize light pollution.
12.4.   ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES
      All accessory structures and uses shall be subject to the requirements of
this Section and the requirements of
Section 12.5 (Permitted Encroachments) below. Additional accessory structures
not regulated in this section may be regulated in
Section 12.5 (Permitted Encroachments) below.
      A.   Accessory Structures - General Regulations
         All accessory structures shall be subject to the following
regulations, in addition to any other regulations within this Section and this
Ordinance.
         1.   No accessory structure shall be constructed prior to construction
of the principal building to which it is accessory.
         2.   Only those accessory structures permitted by this Section or
Section 12.5 (Permitted Encroachments) are permitted in a required yard.
Certain accessory structures may also be prohibited in certain yards.
         3.   The maximum height of any detached accessory structure shall be
measured from the floor of the structure to the peak of the roof. No detached
accessory structure shall exceed thirteen (13) feet, unless otherwise permitted
or limited by this Ordinance.
         4.   All accessory structures must be located a minimum of three (3)
feet from any side lot line.
         5.   When a rear yard is required, all parts of an accessory structure
must be located a minimum of three (3) feet of the rear lot line, unless
otherwise authorized in this Ordinance.
         6.   In a residential district, no accessory building shall be within
five (5) feet of a side lot line or within ten (10) feet of any principal
building, unless attached.
         7.   The combined square footage of all detached accessory buildings
located in the rear yard shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the
required rear yard.
         8.   On a reversed corner lot in a residential district and within
fifteen (15) feet of an adjacent property to the rear in a residential
district:
            a.   No accessory structure located in a required rear yard shall
be closer to the side lot line abutting the street than a distance equal to
sixty percent (60%) of the minimum front yard required for the adjacent
property to the rear.
            b.   No accessory structure shall be located within five (5) feet
of any part of a rear lot line which coincides with a side lot line of property
in a residential district.
      B.   Amateur (HAM) Radio Equipment
         1.   Towers that solely support amateur (HAM) radio equipment and
conform to all applicable performance criteria as set forth in
Section 12.7 (Environmental Performance Standards) shall be permitted only in
the rear yard. Such towers shall be located ten (10) feet from any lot line.
Towers shall not exceed the maximum building height of the applicable district
by more than ten (10) feet, unless a taller tower is technically necessary to
engage successfully in amateur radio communications in accordance with
Paragraph 3. below.
         2.   Antennas may be ground-, building- or roof-mounted, provided they
do not exceed the maximum building height by more than ten (10) feet unless a
taller antenna is technically necessary to engage successfully in amateur radio
communications in accordance with Paragraph 3. below. Every effort shall be
made to install radio antennas in locations that are not readily visible from
neighboring properties or from the public right-of-way, excluding alleys.
         3.   An antenna or tower that is proposed to exceed the height
limitations shall be considered a special use. The operator must provide
evidence that a taller tower and/or antenna is necessary to engage successfully
in amateur radio communications. In addition, the applicant must provide
evidence that the tower and/or antenna shall not prove a hazard to birds (i.e.,
minimal chance of bird strikes) or aircraft. Such tower and/or antenna must
conform to all applicable performance criteria as set forth in
Section 12.7 (Environmental Performance Standards). As part of the application,
the applicant must submit a site plan showing the proposed location of the
tower and/or antenna, as well as its relation to the principal building and any
additional accessory structures.
         4.   Antennas and/or towers owned and operated by the Village are
exempt from these requirements. This section does not apply to wireless
communication towers and antennas, which are regulated by
Chapter 120 of the Village Code.
      C.   Fences
         1.   General Requirements
            a.   No fence shall be erected or replaced within the Village
without first obtaining a permit from the Zoning Administrator. The permit fee
shall be as set forth in the Village Code.
            b.   All fences shall be measured from existing grade, unless
otherwise specified.
            c.   Fences for utility uses in any district shall be subject to
the regulations of Paragraph 4. below.
         2.   Fences in Residential Districts
            a.   Fences are permitted within the interior side, corner side and
rear yards. (See
Figure 12-1: Fence Location). Except where authorized by Subsection 5. below,
fences are prohibited between the front lot line and the front of the principal
building. (Amended 06/04/2024: CO- 2024-24)
FIGURE 12-1: FENCE LOCATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3112.jpg]
            b.    Fences may be erected to a maximum height of six (6) feet.
Where fencing is required for an animal enclosure, as required by
Chapter 93 of the Village Code, such fencing requirements shall control.
         3.    Fences in Non-Residential Districts
            a.    Fences are permitted within the interior side and rear yards.
Except where authorized by Subsection 5. below, fences are prohibited between
the front lot line and the front of the principal building, and between the
corner side lot line and the side of the principal building. (Amended 06/04/
2024: CO- 2024-24)
            b.    Fences may be erected to a height of six (6) feet.
         4.    Fences for Utility Uses
            a.   Whenever the lot line of a utility or public recreational use
abuts a residential district, or whenever a utility use fronts on a public
right-of-way, the use shall be fenced. In addition to the fencing, shrubs a
minimum of five (5) feet in height shall be planted along the fence.
            b.   Utility uses shall be fenced. Barbed wire, razor wire or
fences of similar material shall be permitted only on a lot used for a utility
facility. All barbed wire, razor wire or similar material shall be placed no
less than seven (7) feet above finished grade and shall extend inward toward
the interior of the lot. Such fences shall be a maximum height of eight (8)
feet. Such fences may be located in any yard.
            c.   Public recreation areas may be enclosed along their boundaries
(i.e., all yards) with an open type fence to a height not to exceed eight (8)
feet. Tennis courts and other similar uses may be fenced in accordance with
national standards for such uses.
         5.   Fences in Front Yards (Amended 06/04/2024: CO-2024-24)
            a.   Fences may be erected between the front lot line and the front
of the principal building in the following limited circumstances:
               i.   On properties designated as historic landmarks under State
or federal law, or designated as local landmarks pursuant to
Chapter 158 (Historic Preservation Commission and Designation of Landmarks and
Historic Districts) of this Code where such front yard fencing is reviewed and
approved by the Village of Maywood Historic Preservation Commission.
               ii.   On governmental properties in the GL Governmental Lands
Zoning District.
               iii.   On institutional properties in the I Institutional Zoning
District.
               iv.   On residential properties located on a reversed corner lot
so long as the fence is not in either the front yard setback or further forward
than the front façade of the adjacent neighbor, whichever is most restrictive.
               v.   On interior residential lots where the residence is located
wholly on the rear fifty percent (50%) of the lot so long as the fence is not
in either the front yard setback or further forward than the front façade of
the adjacent residence that is furthest towards the street, whichever is most
restrictive.
            b.   All front yard fences shall be constructed only of the
materials listed in Subsection 6.d. below, with no chain link or similar
materials, and in compliance with the following restrictions:
               i.   Front yard fences on residential properties located on a
reversed corner lot pursuant to Subsection 5.a.iv. above may be privacy fences,
and shall not exceed a height of six (6) feet.
               ii.   Front yard fences on residential properties located on an
interior residential lot pursuant to Subsection 5.a.v. above may be up to six
(6) feet in height if they are a minimum of fifty percent (50%) open, but may
not otherwise exceed a height of four (4) feet.
               iii.   All other front yard fences shall be a minimum of fifty
percent (50%) open type construction and shall not exceed a height of five (5)
feet.
         6.   Fence Construction and Design Requirements (Amended 06/04/2024:
CO-2024-24)
            a.   The finished side of all fences shall face away from the lot
on which it located. Both sides of all fences shall be similar in design,
construction and appearance.
            b.   Every fence shall be constructed with supporting posts or
structural parts located on the interior side of the fence.
            c.   A fence, including all posts, bases, and other structural
parts shall be located completely within the boundaries of the lot on which it
is located.
            d.   Fences shall only be constructed of the following materials:
               i.   Treated wood, cedar or redwood
               ii.   Simulated wood
               iii.   Wrought-iron or simulated wrought-iron
            e.   Fences where required by
Section 14.13 for screening purposes may consist of an opaque masonry wall
(stone, stucco or brick). (Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
      D.   Garages, Attached and Detached
         The following design standards apply to all residential garages.
Attached garages shall not be considered an accessory structure but shall be
subject to the regulations of this section for attached garages.
         1.   Attached Garages
            a.   Front-loaded attached garages shall not occupy more than fifty
percent (50%) of the width of the front façade of the house, as measured along
the building line that faces the street.
            b.   Attached front-loaded garages shall be located a minimum of
five (5) feet behind the main front façade of the house. This measurement will
be taken from the part of the front façade that is immediately adjacent to the
garage, except that the measurement may be taken from the part of the house
closest to the street if all of the following conditions are met:
               i.   The front façade of the house is irregular, i.e., the front
foundation is not a straight line.
               ii.   The portion closest to the street is actual living space.
               iii.   No such measurement may be taken from a porch, bay
window, turret or similar architectural feature that protrudes from the façade.
            c.   Windows, doors and roof treatments of that part of the garage
facing the street shall incorporate architectural detail similar or
complimentary to the residence.
            d.   Upper level dormers and pitched roof elements shall be used to
de-emphasize the garage. Garage openings, windows, columns, trims, decorative
paneling and color shall de-emphasize the visual impact of the garage in
relation to the building as a whole.
         2.   Detached Garages
            a.   A detached garage shall not exceed a maximum of sixteen (16)
feet in height as measured from the garage floor to the peak of a pitched roof.
(Amended 09/16/2015: CO-2015-24)
            b.   The area above the vehicle parking spaces in a detached garage
may be utilized for storage, but not living space and may not contain a
kitchen, bathroom or sleeping area.
            c.   Detached garages shall not exceed six hundred sixty (660)
square feet.
            d.   Detached garages are permitted in the rear and interior side
yards. Detached garages shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet from any
rear lot line and three (3) feet from an interior side lot line. Detached
garages are permitted a maximum eave encroachment of one (1) foot into a
required interior side yard.
            e.   Detached garages located on a lot that has been expanded due
to an alley vacation must leave the area occupied by the vacated alley free
from structures. A detached garage may be located up to the original property
line as it existed prior to the alley vacation but must still meet all required
yard setbacks of the expanded lot. (Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
            f.   Detached garages shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet
from the principal structure on a lot. The distance shall be measured from the
foundation or walls of the structure. (Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
            g.   Administrative Approval of Minor Variances: If a detached
residential garage is being removed and replaced due to damage or
deterioration, and rebuilding a new garage exceeds the building coverage and/or
the impervious surfacing requirements, said replacement can be accomplished in
accordance with the following. It is generally expected that the replacement
will be the same size (square feet) as the existing garage, Recognizing
industry standards on dimensions, the Zoning Administrator (Director of
Community Development) has the authority to grant a minor variance on building
2025 S-49
192   Maywood - Land Usage
               footprint square footage, total building coverage and impervious
surface requirements to accommodate the replacement of an existing garage
through an administrative approval process. Administrative approval may be
granted, upon a written request submitted by the petitioner (the property owner
or his/her/its authorized agent), provided the proposed garage does not exceed
five percent (5%) of the existing square footage of the existing detached
residential garage, irrespective of maximum building coverage and impervious
surface requirements for the lot, and further provided that all other setback
and bulk requirements are met. The petitioner shall submit to the Zoning
Administrator a written explanation of the relief requested and a detailed site
plan showing all proposed and existing lot improvements and the proposed and
required set back and bulk regulations with all relevant distances and building
dimensions identified in feet and inches and such other reasonable information
that is necessary to decide the petition. The decision of the Zoning
Administrator may be appealed in writing within thirty (30) days of the date of
the decision to the Village Board, who shall have final decision-making
jurisdiction in regard to the requested relief. The Village Board may uphold or
overturn the decision of the Zoning Administrator (Director of Community
Development) or may grant other relief but only in accordance with the
limitations set forth in this subsection. (Amended 8/21/2012: CO-2012-32)
      E.   Gazebo, Detached
         Detached gazebos are permitted in the rear yard, provided they comply
with the following requirements.
         1.   Each surface of the gazebo shall be at least twenty-five percent
(25%) open.
         2.   Gazebos shall be limited to twelve (12) feet in height as
measured from grade to the peak of the roof. The gazebo platform shall be no
higher than four (4) feet above grade. Gazebos shall be limited to one hundred
twenty (120) square feet in area.
         3.   The gazebo shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from any
lot line and ten (10) feet from any principal structure.
      F.   Home Occupations
         Home occupations are required to register with the Village. The
following standards are intended to ensure that home occupations, conducted in
a dwelling, are compatible with the neighborhoods in which they are located and
do not interfere with the rights of the surrounding property owners to enjoy
the established character of the neighborhood.
         1.   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the
dwelling and shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the
dwelling for residential purposes.
         2.   The home occupation shall be licensed or registered in accordance
with applicable state and local requirements.
         3.   No more than two (2) persons other than members of the occupant’s
immediate family shall be employed as part of a home occupation.
         4.   No article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises,
except items produced by the occupation on the premises. The home occupation
shall not maintain or operate a retail showroom open to the public. Internet
sales are exempt from this regulation.
         5.   The number of clients or visitors for personal service home
occupations who may be present at any given time shall be limited to the
current and next appointment.
         6.   No mechanical or electrical equipment shall be installed or
maintained other than such as is customarily incidental to domestic use.
         7.   A home occupation shall not generate noise, solid waste,
vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference beyond what normally
occurs in a residential use.
         8.   No outside storage or display of materials, merchandise,
inventory or heavy equipment shall be permitted.
         9.   No exterior alteration that changes the residential character of
the principal building shall be permitted.
         10.   No exterior building signs are permitted.
         11.   A home occupation shall not be established prior to the member
(s) of the family conducting the home occupation taking possession of, and
residing in, the dwelling.
         12.   Vehicular traffic and on-street parking shall not be increased
by the home occupation.
         13.   The receipt, sale or shipment of deliveries shall not be
permitted on or from the premises, with the exception of regular U.S. Mail and/
or an express shipping service that is characteristic of service to residential
neighborhoods.
         14.   Any type of motor vehicle service and repair is a prohibited
home occupation. Day care homes are not considered a home occupation.
      G.   Mechanical Equipment
         Mechanical equipment shall include heating, ventilation, air
conditioning, swimming pool equipment, and electrical generator sets, and is
subject to the following:
         1.   After the effective date hereof, no new heating and ventilation
equipment, swimming pool pumping and filtering equipment and air conditioning
equipment, other than an individual window unit, shall be located in a required
front, interior side or corner side yard. Existing condenser units currently
located in required yards may be replaced in the same location. At the time of
replacement, such replacement units located in required yards must comply with
the screening requirements of this section.
         2.   On residential lots, electrical generators, if not located within
the principal structure, shall be located in the rear yard only. Said
generators sets shall also be anchored to a concrete pad located within five
(5) feet of the principal structure and at least ten (10) feet from any side
yard property line.
         3.   Electrical generators shall be equipped with critical grade
silencers (exhaust systems) and enclosed in a sound attenuating enclosure.
Additional sound attenuation devices may be appropriate in order to comply with
IEPA noise pollution requirements.
         4.   All approved ground-based mechanical equipment shall be
completely screened if visible from the adjoining lot or public right-of-way,
excluding alleys. Screening materials may be masonry, wood, hedges or other
opaque material, and shall effectively screen mechanical equipment so no
portion is visible from a street or adjoining lot. Color and texture of a
masonry screen wall shall be compatible with the color and texture of the
principal building on the site.
         5.   Roof-mounted mechanical equipment in any zoning district shall be
screened either by an architectural element of the roof and at least six (6)
feet from any supporting wall of the building to permit safe access to the
roof.
      H.   Outdoor Sales and Display, and Outdoor Storage
         1.   Outdoor Sales and Display
            Retail goods establishments are permitted outdoor sales and display
of merchandise, by either a storeowner or occupant, outside the store and
within the same zoning lot. Any lawfully existing retail goods establishment
shall be permitted to display and sell its merchandise outdoors under the
following conditions:
            a.   No sales and display area shall be permitted in any public
right-of-way or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No sales and display
area is permitted in any required yard.
            b.   Outdoor storage is prohibited for retail goods establishments.
            c.   A portion of the parking area may be used for outdoor sales
and display on a temporary basis only, in terms of both display structure and
goods displayed or sold (no permanent display structures permitted in parking
areas). No more than ten percent (10%) of the required parking area for the
existing commercial use may be used for the temporary outdoor sales and
display, unless a special sales event permit or authorization is obtained from
the Zoning Administrator.
            d.   All outdoor sales and display areas must comply with any
screening requirements of
Section 14.13 (Screening Requirements).
         2.   Outdoor Storage
            The following uses are permitted outdoor storage: greenhouse/
nursery, including the growing of plants in the open; motor vehicle dealership
and rental establishment; motor vehicle service and repair; general
manufacturing; and contractor storage yards. Additional outdoor storage may be
approved as a special use. These uses are permitted outdoor storage in
accordance with the following provisions:
            a.   All manufacturing, assembly, repair or work activity shall
take place inside an enclosed building. No work shall take place outdoors.
            b.   No required parking area shall be used as an outdoor storage.
            c.   All outdoor storage must meet yard requirements.
            d.   No materials stored or displayed outdoors shall be of a
greater height than that of the required screening.
            e.   All outdoor storage must comply with the screening
requirements of
Section 14.13 (Screening Requirements).
            f.   All materials stored must be related to the business conducted
on the property.
      I.   Porches
         1.   Unenclosed porches may encroach five (5) feet into any required
yard.
         2.   Enclosed porches must meet all yard requirements.
         3.   Stoops are not considered porches.
      J.   Satellite Dish Antennas
         1.   General Requirements
            a.   Satellite dish antennas shall be permanently installed on a
building, in the ground or on a foundation, and shall not be mounted on a
portable or movable structure.
            b.   Subject to operational requirements, the dish color shall be
of a neutral color, such as white or grey, and shall blend with the
surroundings as best as possible. No additional signs or advertising shall be
permitted on satellite dish itself, aside from the logos of the satellite dish
service provider or dish manufacturer.
            c.   Cables and lines serving ground-mounted satellite dish
antennas shall be located underground.
            d.   Compliance with all federal, state and local regulations shall
be required in the construction, installation and operation of satellite dish
antennas.
            e.   All exposed surfaces of the antenna shall be kept clean and
all supports shall be painted to maintain a well-kept appearance. Antennas no
longer in use must be removed.
            f.   This section does not apply to wireless communication towers
and antennas, which are regulated by
Chapter 120 of the Village Code.
         2.   Small Satellite Dish Antennas (One Meter or Less in Diameter)
            Small satellite dish antennas, which are one (1) meter or less in
diameter, shall be subject to the general requirements of Paragraph 1. above.
Every effort shall be made to install small satellite dish antennas in
locations that are not readily visible from neighboring properties or from the
public right-of-way.
         3.   Large Satellite Dish Antennas (One Meter or More in Diameter)
            a.   Residential Districts
               i.   Large satellite dish antennas are permitted only in the
rear yard, and shall be located a distance from all lot lines that is at least
equal to the height of the dish, but in no case less than five (5) feet from
any lot line.
               ii.   The overall height of a large satellite dish antenna shall
not exceed twelve (12) feet.
               iii.   A large satellite dish antenna shall be located and
screened so that it cannot be readily seen from public streets or adjacent
properties. Screening shall include fences, plant materials and/or earth berms
located to conceal the sides and rear of the antenna and its support structure.
Plants shall be, at minimum, five (5) feet tall at the time of installation.
            b.   Non-Residential Districts
               i.   A large satellite dish antenna are permitted only in the
rear or interior side yard, and shall be located a distance from all lot lines
that is at least equal to the height of the dish, but in no case less than five
(5) feet from any lot line.
               ii.   Roof-mounting shall be permitted only if the satellite
dish antenna is in scale with the overall building mass and location, and shall
be screened by an architectural feature. The visible portion of the dish should
not comprise more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the corresponding height or
width of the screen.
               iii.   Ground-mounted satellite dish antenna shall provide
screening, which includes fencing, berming or landscaping to accomplish the
following:
                  (a)   All ground-mounted accessory equipment and the lower
part of the support structure shall be completely screened.
                  (b)   Where feasible, trees shall be installed to the side
and rear of the antenna and at a height/elevation equal to the tallest portion
of the dish.
      K.   Sheds and Private Greenhouses
         1.   Sheds and private greenhouses are permitted only in the rear
yard. Sheds and private greenhouses shall be located a minimum of five (5) feet
from any rear lot line and three (3) feet from a side lot line.
            a.   The maximum height of any shed or private greenhouse shall be
ten (10) feet.
            b.   No shed or private greenhouse shall exceed one hundred twenty
(120) square feet.
            c.   Sheds and private greenhouses shall be located a minimum of
ten (10) feet from the principal structure on a lot. The distance shall be
measured from the walls of the structure.
         2.   Sheds and private greenhouses located on a lot that has been
expanded due to an alley vacation must leave the area occupied by the vacated
alley free from structures. A shed or private greenhouse may be located up to
the original property line as it existed prior to the alley vacation but must
meet all required yard setbacks of the expanded lot.
            (Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
      L.   Solar Panels (Amended 11/16/2010: CO-2010-20)
         1.   Roof mounted solar panels are permitted in all zoning districts.
All roof mounted solar panels shall be positioned within the field of the roof
plane, and shall not protrude over any edges or overhang of the roof.
         2.   Roof mounted solar panels installed on a sloped roof shall only
be allowed to be visible from the public right-of-way other than a public alley
under the following conditions:
            a.   The panels are mounted at the same pitch/angle a the roof on
which the installation is mounted;
            b.   The area of the solar panel installation is not greater than
the roof section where the installation shall be mounted;
            c.   Solar panels shall not be installed more than twelve (12)
inches above the roof plane; and
            d.   Solar panels shall not extend vertically above the ridge of
any sloped roof where installed.
         3.   Where any solar panel installation on a sloped roof exceeds
twelve (12) inches above the roof surface but no more than five (5) feet above
the roof surface, or varies from the pitch/angle of the roof on which the
installation is mounted, the installation shall not be visible from the public
right-of-way, excluding public alleys.
         4.   Solar panels may be installed on a flat roof provided they do not
project more than five (5) feet above the flat roof on which they are
installed. Solar panels on a flat roof shall not project higher than the
permitted building height without a zoning variance.
         5.   Freestanding solar panels shall be permitted in all zoning
districts subject to the following:
            a.   Freestanding solar panels are permitted only in the rear and
interior side yards;
            b.   Freestanding solar panels shall be fully enclosed and screened
by a surrounding yard fence in order to provide for the security and safety of
the solar energy system and the public;
            c.   Freestanding solar panels shall not exceed a height of six (6)
feet above the ground; and
            d.   Freestanding solar panels related to governmental, traffic and
service uses, such as solar-powered traffic speed display devices or solar-
powered parking meters, are exempt from the requirements of this subsection.
         6.   The following design requirements are applicable to both rooftop
solar panels and freestanding solar panels:
            a.   Any glare from a solar panel shall be minimized and directed
away from an adjoining property or by the use of non-glare glazing.
            b.   Solar panels and their related systems shall not be used for
displaying any advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the system. In no case shall any identification be
visible from a property line.
            c.   The design of solar panels and their related systems shall, to
the extent reasonably possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and
landscaping that will blend the system into the natural setting and existing
environment.
            d.   Dismantling of a solar energy system is required if it has not
been in operation for a year.
         7.   Permit fees shall be waived for all solar panel installations
that are not visible from the public right-of-way.
      M.   Swimming Pools
         1.   Public swimming pools shall comply with the applicable state
regulations for public swimming pools, including those set forth in the
Illinois Swimming Facilities Act, as amended (210 ILCS 125/1 et seq. and 77
Ill. Adm. Code 820.200). All public pools shall be completely enclosed by a
fence or other security structure that shall not be less than six (6) nor more
than eight (8) feet in height.
         2.   All private swimming pools shall comply with these standards and
the requirements of
Chapter 96 of the Village Code.
            a.   Location
               i.   Private residential swimming pools shall be permitted in
any residential district.
               ii.   No portion of a permanent, private residential swimming
pool shall be located less than eight (8) feet from any side or rear lot line
or building line.
               iii.   No portion of a temporary pool shall be located less than
three (3) feet from any side or rear lot line or building line.
               iv.   Pumps, filters and pool water disinfection equipment
installations shall be located not less than eight (8) feet from any side lot
line.
               v.   Pools and appurtenant equipment shall not be permitted in
the side yard between dwellings.
            b.   Walkways
               Unobstructed walk areas not less than thirty-six (36) inches
wide shall be provided to extend entirely around the pool.
            c.   Fences
               i.   All private residential swimming pools shall be completely
enclosed by a fence or other structure on the same zoning lot on which the pool
is located. Such fence or other structure shall not be less than four (4) feet
nor more than six (6) feet in height.
               ii.   Above ground type pools, whether temporary or permanent,
which have an above ground fence designed and constructed as an integral part
of the pool, that encloses the periphery of the pool to a height of four (4) to
five (5) feet above the top edge of the pool shall be deemed to meet the
enclosure requirements of Paragraph a. above.
      N.   Wind Turbines
         Wind turbines are subject to the following requirements.
         1.   Wind turbines are subject to the following height restrictions:
            a.   The maximum height of any ground-mounted wind turbine (a
tower) is the height limit of the applicable zoning district.
            b.   The maximum height of any wind turbine mounted upon a detached
accessory structure is fifteen (15) feet above the maximum permitted height for
such structure. The maximum height of any wind turbine mounted upon a principal
structure is the height limit of the applicable zoning district.
            c.   For purposes of this particular zoning item, maximum height is
the total height of the turbine system including the tower, and the maximum
vertical height of the turbines blades. Maximum height therefore is calculated
measuring the length of a prop at maximum vertical rotation to the base of the
tower. The maximum height of any ground-mounted wind energy system is measured
from the length of a prop at maximum vertical rotation to grade.
            d.   No portion of the turbine blades of a horizontal-axis wind
turbine may be within ten (10) feet of the ground.
         2.   Ground-mounted wind turbines may be located in the rear yard
only. A ground-mounted tower must be setback from all lot lines equal to the
height of the tower. Additional parts of the wind turbine structure outside of
the tower, including guy wire anchors, must be ten (10) feet to any lot line.
         3.   All wind turbines must be equipped with manual (electronic or
mechanical) and automatic over speed controls to limit the blade rotation speed
to within the design limits of the system.
         4.   Wind turbines may not exceed sixty (60) dBA, as measured at the
closest neighboring dwelling. The level, however, may be exceeded during short-
term events such as utility outages and/or severe windstorms.
         5.   Wind turbines must be approved by a small wind certification
program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) or the U.S.
Department of Energy. Non-certified residential wind turbines must submit a
description of the safety features of the turbine prepared by a registered
mechanical engineer.
         6.   Wind turbines must comply with applicable FAA regulations,
including any necessary approvals for installations close to airports.
         7.   Building permit applications for wind turbines must be
accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail
to allow for a determination that the manner of the installation conforms to
all electrical codes.
         8.   Wind turbines are limited to one (1) per property. (Amended 01/
18/2011: CO-2011-01)
      O.   Window Wells
         1.   The maximum amount of all window wells located along any wall may
not exceed forty percent (40%) of the length of that wall.
         2.   Window wells may encroach up to three (3) feet into the required
rear yard and may encroach up to a maximum of two (2) feet into a required
interior or corner side yard. Window wells are prohibited in the front yard.
         3.   When more than one (1) window well is installed along a wall,
each shall be separated at least three (3) feet from one another.
         4.   Window wells used for egress shall comply with the provisions of
the building code for an emergency escape window.
12.5.   PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS
      An encroachment is the extension or placement of any structure or
building, or component of such, into a required yard. Additional restrictions
on permitted encroachments, including additional yard requirements and bulk
regulations, can be found in
Section 12.4 (Accessory Structures and Uses) above and are referenced within
the following table. Permitted encroachments are found in
Table 12-1: Permitted Encroachments.
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 12-1: PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS
Y= Permitted // N= Not Permitted
(Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
Type of Encroachment Yard Where Permitted
                     Front Yard, Corner Side Yard Interior Side Yard Rear Yard
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 12-1: PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS
Y= Permitted // N= Not Permitted
(Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
                      Yard Where Permitted
Type of Encroachment  Front Yard, Corner Interior Side Yard Rear Yard
                      Side Yard
Accessibility Ramp
- Shall be at least   Y                  Y                  Y
3' from any lot line
Air Conditioner
Window Unit
- No more than 18"    Y                  Y                  Y
into any required
yard
Amateur (HAM) Radio
Equipment             N                  N                  --
- Subject to
Section 12.4.B
Arbor or Trellis      Y                  Y                  Y
Awning & Canopy
(Residential Use)
- Minimum clearance   Y                  Y                  Y
of 7' 6"
- No more than 2'
into required yard
Balcony
- May encroach by up
to 6' on upper-floor
residential uses in   Y                  Y                  Y
the C-2 District only
but shall not extend
within a public
right-of- way
Bay Window
- One-story           Y                  N                  Y
- No more than 3'
into required yard
Breezeway             N                  N                  Y
Chimney
- No more than 18"    Y                  Y                  Y
into a required yard
Compost Pile                                                Y, but 5' from any
- Shall be located    N                  N                  lot line
only in rear yard
Deck or Open Terrace
- Not more than 4'
above the average     Y                  Y                  Y
level of the
adjoining ground
Dog House
- Subject to general
requirements of       N                  N                  Y, but 5' from any
Section 12.4.A.                                             lot line
- Shall be located
only in rear yard
Driveway              Y                  Y                  Y
Eaves and Gutters
(Principal Structure)
- No more than 3'
into a required front
or rear yard          Y                  Y                  Y
- Not more than 40%
of the required side
yard width, not to
exceed 30
Eaves (Accessory
Structure)            N                  Y                  Y
- No more than 1'
into a required yard
Exterior Stairwells
- No more than 4'
into a required yard
- In the R-1, R-2 and N                  N                  Y
R-3 Districts,
exterior stairwells
shall be located in
the rear yard only
Fence
- Subject to          N                  Y                  Y
Section 12.4.C.
Fire Escape           Y                  Y                  Y
Flagpole              Y                  Y                  Y
Garages, Detached
- Subject to          N                  Y                  Y
Section 12.4.D.
 
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 12-1: PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS
Y= Permitted // N= Not Permitted
(Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
Type of Encroachment Yard Where Permitted
                     Front Yard, Corner Side Yard Interior Side Yard Rear Yard
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 12-1: PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS
Y= Permitted // N= Not Permitted
(Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
                     Yard Where Permitted
Type of Encroachment Front Yard, Corner  Interior Side Yard Rear Yard
                     Side Yard
Gazebo
- Subject to         N                   N                  Y
Section 12.4.E.
Hedges               Y, but to a maximum Y                  Y
                     height of 3'
Mechanical
Equipment, Ground-
Mounted (Central air
conditioning,
heating,             N                   N                  Y
ventilating,
compressors, etc.)
- Subject to
Section 12.4.G.
Ornamental Lighting,
Lamp Posts, & Lawn
Decorations
(Benches, statues,
birdbaths,           Y                   Y                  Y
sculptures, etc.)
- Subject to view
obstruction and
exterior lighting
regulations
Outdoor Fireplaces
- Shall be located   N                   N                  Y, but 10' from any
in the rear yard                                            lot line
only
Parking Pad
- Subject to         N                   N                  Y
Section 13.7
Patio
- No more than 5'    N                   N                  Y
into any required
yard
Porch, Unenclosed
- Subject to         Y                   Y                  Y
Section 12.4.I.
Porch, Enclosed      N                   N                  N
Recreational and
Laundry-Drying
Equipment
- Does not include   Y                   Y                  Y
equipment located on
park/playground,
school or day care
center site
Satellite Dish
Antenna (1 meter or
less in diameter)    Y                   Y                  Y
- Subject to
Section 12.4.J.
Satellite Dish                           N Residential
Antenna (More than 1                     Districts
meter in diameter)   N                   Y Non-Residential  Y
- Subject to                             Districts
Section 12.4.J.
Sidewalk & Private   Y                   Y                  Y
Walkway
Sills, belt course,
cornices &
ornamental features
of the principal     Y                   Y                  Y
structure
- No more than 1'
into a required yard
Sheds & Private
Greenhouses          N                   N                  Y
- Subject to
Section 12.4.K.
Steps and stoops
- 4 feet or less
above grade
- 10 feet or less
into required yard   Y                   Y                  Y
for access to an
unenclosed porch;
otherwise 5 feet or
less
Swimming Pool                            Y, but 8' from any Y, but 8' from any
- Subject to         N                   lot line           lot line
Section 12.4.M.
Tennis Court
- Shall be located   N                   N                  Y
in the rear yard
only
Wind Turbines
(Ground-Mounted)     N                   N                  Y
- Subject to
Section 12.4.N.
Window Well          N Front yard
- Subject to         Y Corner side yard  Y                  Y
Section 12.4.O.
 
12.6.   TEMPORARY USES AND STRUCTURES
      A.   Temporary Use Permit Application
         1.   Any person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain a temporary
use permit, as required by this Ordinance, shall file a written application
with the Zoning Administrator on a form provided by the Village.
         2.   The Zoning Administrator shall grant, when required, temporary
use permits for those uses listed below so long as he/she determines that the
proposed use, complies with the requirements of this Section and this
Ordinance. Unless expressly provided in this Section, every temporary use or
structure shall comply with the bulk requirements applicable in the district in
which it is located.
         3.   Temporary uses not specifically listed here shall require the
specific approval of the Village Board. Unless otherwise limited, temporary
uses may be allowed in any zoning district, provided that it is consistent with
the purpose and intent of this Ordinance and the zoning district in which it is
located.
         4.   Every temporary use shall comply with this Ordinance and all
local regulations. The Zoning Administrator or Village Board may impose other
conditions, as part of the temporary use permit approval, as necessary to
achieve the purposes of this Ordinance, and to protect the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. No temporary use shall be
permitted in any district if it would have a significant negative impact on any
adjacent property or on the area as a whole.
      B.   General Provisions
         Every temporary use shall comply with all the requirements listed
below.
         1.   No temporary use shall be permitted that causes, or threatens to
cause, an on-site or off-site threat to the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare.
         2.   Every temporary use shall be operated in accordance with such
restrictions and conditions as the Fire Department may require. If required by
the Village, the operator of the temporary use shall employ appropriate
security personnel.
         3.   No temporary use shall be permitted if the additional vehicular
traffic reasonably expected to be generated by such use would have undue
detrimental effects on surrounding streets and uses. No temporary use shall
block handicapped or fire lanes.
         4.   No temporary use shall be authorized that would reduce the number
of required parking spaces available for use in connection with permanent uses
located on the lot in question below the number adequate to meet parking needs
under normal business or usage conditions. The Zoning Administrator may make an
assessment of the total number of parking spaces that will be reasonably
required in connection with a proposed temporary use, on the basis of the
particular use, its intensity and the availability of other parking facilities
in the area. The Zoning Administrator shall approve the temporary use only if
such parking spaces are provided.
         5.   No temporary use shall be permitted if it conflicts with another
previously authorized temporary use.
         6.   Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with the
Section 15 (Signs).
      C.   Permitted Temporary Uses
         The following uses require a temporary use permit unless specifically
exempted by other provisions of this Ordinance or Village Code.
         1.   Carnival/Circus
            Carnivals/circuses shall be evaluated on the basis of the adequacy
of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access, and the absence of
undue adverse impact, including noise, on other properties. These uses need not
comply with the yard requirements and the maximum height requirements of this
Ordinance. The concessionaire responsible for the operation of any such use
shall:
            a.   Submit, in advance of the event, a site layout displaying
adequate ingress and egress routes for emergency vehicles with no dead-end
aisles.
            b.   Comply with all local regulations and the State Carnival
Regulation Act (225 ILCS 205/0.01 et seq.), as amended.
            c.   Provide refuse containers in the number and locations required
by the Village. All containers shall be properly serviced.
            d.   Provide for thorough clean-up of the site at the completion of
the event.
            e.   Provide proof that all amusement devices have been State
inspected.
            f.   Upon written notice from the Village, immediately stop the use
of any amusement device or structure found by the Village to pose a threat to
the public safety.
         2.   Christmas Tree, Pumpkin and Other Seasonal Holiday Sales Lots
            Seasonal or holiday sales lots such as Christmas tree sales and
pumpkin sales patches shall be evaluated based on the adequacy of the parcel
size, parking provisions, traffic access, and the absence of undue adverse
impact on other properties. These uses shall be limited to a period not to
exceed forty-five (45) days prior to the holiday or event date.
         3.   Farmers Markets
            No product may be exhibited or offered for sale by any person
except after securing a Village business license (transient merchant
regulations) to sell the following: fresh dairy goods, fruits, vegetables,
juices, flowers, plants, herbs, spices produced or grown by the vendor, baked
goods made by the vendor(s), jarred or canned goods and arts and crafts made by
the vendor.
         4.   House, Apartment, Garage and Yard Sales
            House, apartment, garage and yard sales are allowed in any
district, in accordance with the regulations contained in
Chapter 121 of the Village Code.
         5.   Arts and Crafts Shows, and Plant Shows (Indoor or Outdoor)
            Arts and crafts shows, and plant shows shall be evaluated based on
the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic access, and
adverse impact on other properties. In residential districts, these uses shall
be limited to a period not to exceed three (3) days and no more than three (3)
sales shall be permitted in any twelve (12) month period.
         6.   Sidewalk Sales
            Sidewalk sales are permitted in the commercial districts only. They
shall be in conjunction with, and clearly incidental to, an existing permanent
on-site use. Sidewalk sales are permitted to display and sell only merchandise
that is found in stores participating in the sidewalk sale. No sidewalk sale
shall be permitted for a period of more than five (5) successive days and no
more than two (2) sales shall be permitted in any twelve (12) month period.
         7.   Temporary Contractor Trailers and Real Estate Model Units
            Contractor trailers and real estate model units, including
temporary real estate offices accessory to a new development, are allowed in
any zoning district when accessory to a construction project or a new
development. Contractor trailers shall be limited to a period not to exceed the
duration of the active construction phase of such project. Real estate model
units, including temporary real estate offices, shall be limited to the active
selling and leasing of space in such development or six (6) months after
issuance of the final occupancy permit, whichever is less. These structures
shall not contain any sleeping or cooking accommodations, except those located
in a model unit used for demonstration purposes only. No trailer, unit or
office shall be used as the general office or headquarters of any firm.
         8.   Community Garden
            Community gardens are permitted in the residential districts and in
the OS and I Districts, subject to the following regulations.
            a.   Community gardens are limited to the cultivation of herbs,
fruits, flowers, or vegetables, including the cultivation and tillage of soil
and the production, cultivation, growing, and harvesting of any agricultural,
floricultural, or horticultural commodity.
            b.   Prior to the establishment of the community garden, soil
testing is required to measure nutrients, heavy metals and any other harmful
contaminants that may be present. The applicant must present, as part of the
temporary use application, the soil testing results and proposed remediation
methodology, if needed. Alternatively, the applicant may use raised planter
boxes for all plants, in which case soil testing is not required.
            c.   Keeping of livestock and apiaries are prohibited.
            d.   Permanent structures are prohibited. However, temporary
greenhouses, including high tunnels/hoop-houses, cold-frames and similar
structures, are permitted.
            e.   Seasonal farmstands are permitted and are limited to sales of
items grown at the site. Seasonal farmstands must be removed from the premises
during that time of the year when the garden is not open for public use.
            f.   The applicant for the temporary use permit must submit a
notarized letter to the Zoning Administrator that states the Village is not
liable or responsible for the community garden, including maintenance of the
garden, any activities on site, or the health of plants grown on site including
consumption of such plants.
         9.   Tents
            a.   Non-Residential Districts
               Tents within non-residential districts shall be permitted for no
longer than fourteen (14) days and must be in conjunction with a special event
of a use located on the same lot. Tents must be removed within two (2) days of
the end of the event for which it was erected, but in no case may a tent be in
place for longer than fourteen (14) days. Unless waived in writing by the
Zoning Administrator, every tent shall comply with the bulk requirements
applicable to accessory structures. Additionally, the size and location of
tents may be restricted where it is determined that it creates parking and/or
access problems on the site.
            b.   Residential Districts
               Tents within residential districts shall be limited to no more
than five (5) days in one (1) calendar year no more than two (2) consecutive
days and must be located within the rear yard. These structures shall include
tents used for entertainment or assembly purposes that are not intended for
living purposes, such as camping and sleeping. Such uses do not require a
temporary use permit.
         10.   Temporary Storage Containers
            a.   Temporary storage containers (also known as “PODS”) are
permitted in any zoning district when used for loading or unloading. Containers
are permitted on site for a period not to exceed seventy-two (72) hours. Such
uses do not require a temporary use permit.
            b.   Temporary storage containers shall not be used for permanent
storage. They shall not serve as a substitute for permanent storage needs on
the site on which they are located. Containers shall not be permanently
attached to the ground, serviced with permanent utilities or stacked on the
site.
12.7.   ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
      All uses shall comply with the performance standards established in this
section unless any federal, state, county or local law, ordinance or regulation
establishes a more restrictive standard, in which case, the more restrictive
standard shall apply.
      A.   Noise
         No activity or use shall be conducted in a manner that generates a
level of sound as measured on another property greater than that allowed by
federal, state and local regulations, as amended from time to time, including
regulations set forth in Sections 92.30 and 130.21 of the Village Code. These
limits shall not apply to construction noises (other than applicable time and
day restrictions), noises emanating from safety signals or warning devices,
noises not directly under the control of the owner or occupant of the property,
and transient noises from moving sources, such as motor vehicles, railroads and
aircraft.
      B.   Glare and Heat
         Any activity or the operation of any use that produces glare or heat
shall be conducted so that no glare or heat from the activity or operation
shall be detectable at any point off the lot on which the use is located.
Flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled or shielded so as
not to cause a nuisance across lot lines.
      C.   Vibration
         No earthborne vibration from the operation of any use shall be
detectable at any point off the lot on which the use is located.
      D.   Dust and Air Pollution
         Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from sources,
such as storage areas, yards, roads, conveying equipment and the like, within
lot boundaries, shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping,
screening, sheltering, paving, fencing, wetting, collecting or other acceptable
means.
      E.   Hazardous, Radioactive and Toxic Materials
         No operation that produces radioactive, toxic or hazardous waste
material shall commence without prior notice to the Village. Notice shall be
given at least three (3) weeks before the operation is commenced. The
transport, handling, or storage of all radioactive, toxic or hazardous
materials, including waste, shall comply with applicable federal, state, county
and local regulations. The discharge, clean-up and disposal of fluid or solid
radioactive, toxic or hazardous waste shall comply with applicable federal,
state, county and local laws and regulations governing such materials or waste.
      F.   Electromagnetic Interference
         Electromagnetic interference from any operation of any use in any
district shall not adversely affect the operation of any equipment located off
the lot on which such interference originates.
      G.   Odors
         Any condition or operation which results in the creation of odors of
such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and welfare of
the public, or which interferes unreasonably with the comfort of the public,
shall be removed, stopped or modified so as to remove the odor.
      H.   Water Pollution
         All uses shall comply with federal, state, county and local
regulations.
      I.   Fire and Explosion Hazards
         Materials that present potential fire and explosion hazards shall be
transported, stored and used only in conformance with all applicable federal,
state, county and local regulations.
SECTION 13. OFF-STREET PARKING & LOADING
13.1.   Purpose
13.2.   General provisions
13.3.   Computation
13.4.   Construction of parking and loading facilities
13.5.   Collective provisions
13.6.   Location of off-street parking spaces
13.7.   Design standards
13.8.   Accessible parking
13.9.   Stacking spaces for drive-through facilities
13.10.   Commercial vehicles
13.11.   Recreational vehicles and equipment in residential districts
13.12.   Required off-street parking spaces
13.13.   Required off-street loading spaces
13.14.   Design of off-street loading spaces
13.1.   PURPOSE
      The off-street parking and loading regulations of this Section are
intended to provide accessible, attractive, secure and well-maintained off-
street parking and loading areas with the appropriate number of spaces in
proportion to the needs of the proposed use, increase public safety by reducing
congestion of public streets, and encourage the use of alternative modes of
transportation where appropriate.
13.2.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      The provisions of this Section shall apply as follows:
      A.   Existing Facilities
         1.   The existing number of off-street parking and loading spaces
shall not be reduced below the requirements of this Section. If the number of
such existing spaces is already less than the requirements of this Section, it
shall not be further reduced.
         2.   Existing off-street parking and loading areas which do not
conform to the requirements of this Section, but were in conformance with the
requirements of this Ordinance at the time the parking or loading facilities
were established, are permitted to continue as a legal nonconforming structure.
         3.   If a building permit for a building or structure was lawfully
issued prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and if construction has
begun within one (1) year of the issuance of a permit, the number of off-street
parking and loading spaces shall be provided in the amount required for the
issuance of said building permit, regardless of what may be required by this
Section.
      B.   Damage or Destruction
         When a building is reconstructed or repaired after being damaged or
destroyed, off-street parking and loading facilities shall be restored or
maintained in an amount equivalent to that at the time of such damage or
destruction, unless additional property has been acquired by the owner or
occupant that allows for the installation of additional parking. However, it
shall not be necessary to restore or maintain parking and loading facilities in
excess of the applicable requirements of this Section.
      C.   Change in Land Use
         When the existing use of a structure or land is changed to a new use,
parking and loading spaces shall be provided as required for the new use.
Additional parking or loading spaces shall be required in the amount by which
the requirements for the new use exceed the requirements for the existing use.
      D.   Change in Intensity of Use
         1.   When the intensity of use of any structure or land is permanently
increased, additional parking and loading spaces shall be provided. The number
of additional parking and loading spaces shall be based on the increase in the
number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating capacity, or other unit of
measurement used to calculate the number of required number of parking or
loading spaces.
         2.   When the intensity of use of any structure or land is decreased,
the number of parking and loading spaces may be reduced so long as the parking
requirements of this Section are met for the entire structure or land as
modified.
      E.   Provision of Additional Spaces
         Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary
establishment of additional off-street parking or loading facilities, provided
that all regulations governing the location, design and control of such
facilities are in accordance with this Section.
      F.   Relation of Required Parking and Loading
         Space allocated to any required off-street loading shall not be used
to satisfy off-street parking requirements and vice versa.
13.3.   COMPUTATION
      The total number of required parking and loading spaces shall be based
upon the requirements for the principal use of the lot. However, when more than
one (1) use occupies the same lot, the number of required spaces shall be the
sum of the separate requirements for each use. In computing the number of off-
street parking or loading spaces required by this Section, the following
standards for computation shall apply:
      A.   Space allocated to any off-street loading space shall not be used to
satisfy the requirement for any off-street parking space or access aisle, or
portion thereof. Conversely, the area allocated to any off-street parking space
shall not be used to satisfy the replacement for any off-street loading space
or portion thereof.
      B.   A fraction of less than one-half (½) may be disregarded, and a
fraction of one-half (½) or more shall be counted as one (1) parking or loading
space.
      C.   In places of assembly in which patrons or spectators occupy benches,
pews, temporary seating such as folding chairs, or similar seating facilities,
each twenty-four (24) inches of such seating facility shall be counted as one
(1) seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for off-street parking
facilities.
      D.   Except as otherwise specified, parking or loading spaces required on
an employee basis shall be based on the maximum number of employees normally
present on the premises at any one (1) time. When the determination of the
number of parking spaces is based on the number of employees, the owner and/or
manager shall be counted as an employee(s).
      E.   When two (2) or more uses are located on the same zoning lot, only
one (1) exemption in terms of floor area may be taken as provided in Paragraph
A. of
Section 13.12 (Required Off-Street Parking Spaces).
13.4.   CONSTRUCTION OF PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES
      A.   Site Plan Review Required
         Site plan review, in accordance with
Section 4.6 (Site Plan Review), is required prior to any construction,
alteration or addition of any parking facility and for the construction of any
new loading berth. For purposes of this Section, construction, alteration or
addition shall include all paving of previously unpaved surfaces, replacement
of pavement with new binder and surface courses, construction of curbing,
installation of new parking lot landscaping, and similar activities.
Construction, alteration or addition shall not include maintenance activities
such as replacement of existing landscaping, repair of existing curbing,
repairs, sealing, re-striping, or placement of surface course pavement over
previously paved areas. No permit shall be required for maintenance activities.
      B.   Time of Completion
         Off-street parking and loading facilities required by this Section
shall be completed prior to the issuance of the occupancy permit for the use
they serve.
13.5.   COLLECTIVE PROVISIONS 
(Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      A.   Intent and Purpose
         Shared parking allowed in this subsection is encouraged as means of
conserving land resources, reducing stormwater runoff, reducing the heat island
effect caused by large, paved areas, and improving community appearance.
      B.   Location
         All shared parking allowed under this Section shall be located within
five hundred (500) feet of each individual use to be served unless otherwise
approved by the Planning Commission.
      C.   Standards
         Up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the quantity of off-street parking
required in
Section 13.12. may be shared between a daytime use and an evening or weekend
use which have different peak hours of parking demand. For the purposes of this
Section, daytime and evening or weekend uses shall be as determined in
Table 13-3. An applicant may also request a reduction for any two (2) daytime
or any two (2) evening or weekend uses when the hours of operation do not
overlap as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
Table 13-3 Shared Parking Uses
Daytime Uses Evening or Weekend Uses
Table 13-3 Shared Parking Uses
Daytime Uses                            Evening or Weekend Uses
Animal Hospital                         Bed and Breakfast
Art Gallery                             Hotel/Motel
Commercial Service Establishment        Indoor Entertainment
Cultural Facilities                     Indoor Recreation
Financial Institution                   Live Entertainment
Governmental Facilities                 Live-Work Unit
Kennel/Pet “Day Care” Service       Outdoor Entertainment
Medical/Dental Clinic                   Restaurant
Office Business                         Special Event Space
Personal Care Establishment             Video Gaming Within Full-Service
                                        Restaurant
                                        Other uses as demonstrated by the
Retail Goods Establishment              applicant and deemed appropriate by the
                                        Zoning Administrator
Other uses as demonstrated by the
applicant and deemed appropriate by the ---
Zoning Administrator
 
      D.   Agreement Required
         The users of the shared parking facility shall record an agreement to
share parking facilities, subject to approval by the Village Attorney. A copy
of the recorded agreement shall be given to the Village.
      E.   Change in Ownership or Use
         Any subsequent change in ownership or use, or termination of the
shared parking agreement, shall require proof that the minimum parking
requirements, per this Section, have been met for each use. The owner of an
existing building or use shall have one hundred eighty (180) days within which
to accommodate all required off-street parking or to apply for a variation. If
the owner is unable to accommodate the parking or fails to apply for a
variation, then the occupancy permit shall be revoked with respect to the use
for which the separate parking was required. The occupancy permit shall be
reinstated when all applicable provisions of this Section are complied with. As
an alternative to a variation, a new shared parking agreement may be arranged
in accordance with this Section.
13.6.   LOCATION OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
      A.   Residential Uses
         1.   Required parking spaces for residential uses shall be located on
the same lot as the building or use served. A special use permit may be applied
for to permit required parking for residential uses within three hundred (300)
feet of the residential use, as measured from the nearest property line of the
residential use.
         2.   For single-family, two-family and townhouse dwellings, parking
shall be permitted in private driveways, but no such parking may encroach onto
the public right-of-way. However, such driveway parking shall not be considered
as satisfying the off-street parking requirements for such single-family, two-
family and townhouse dwellings.
         3.   Parking shall not be located in the front yard of a residential
district. However, if there is no rear access to the lot, a special use permit
may be applied for to construct a parking pad within the front yard. Lots with
rear access are prohibited from constructing front yard parking pads.
         4.   Tandem parking is permitted for townhouse or multi-family
dwellings but both spaces must be allotted to the same dwelling unit and
located on the same lot as the dwelling.
      B.   Non-Residential Uses (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         1.   All required off-street parking areas for non-residential uses
located within residential districts, including any provided through collective
provisions, shall be located on the same lot as, or within three hundred (300)
feet of, the building or use served, as measured from the nearest property line
of the building or use served.
         2.   All required off-street parking areas for non-residential uses
located within non-residential zoning districts, including any provided through
collective provisions, shall be located on the same lot as or within one
thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet of the building or use served, as
measured from the nearest property line of the building or use served.
         3.   Off-street parking spaces are permitted within any yard, subject
to buffer yard standards of
Section 14.11 (Buffer Yards) in all non-residential districts.
13.7.   DESIGN STANDARDS
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
      All off-street parking facilities shall comply with the following
standards:
      A.   Dimensions
         1.   Off-street parking spaces shall be shall be designed in
accordance with
Figure 13-1: Off-Street Parking Dimensions.
         2.   All parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of
seven (7) feet.
      B.   Access
         1.   Each off-street space shall open directly upon an aisle or
driveway of such width as will provide adequate means of vehicular access to
such parking space. All off-street parking facilities shall be provided with
appropriate means of vehicular access in a manner that least interferes with
traffic movement and allows the driver of the vehicle to proceed forward into
traffic rather than back out.
         2.   All required off-street parking facilities shall have vehicular
access from a street, alley, driveway or cross-access connection.
         3.   Within off-street parking facilities one-way traffic aisles shall
be at least twelve (12) feet in width and two-way traffic aisles shall be at
least twenty-four (24) feet in width. Furthermore, all aisles shall be designed
in accordance with
Figure 13-1: Off-Street Parking Dimensions.
FIGURE 13-1: OFF-STREET PARKING DIMENSIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3114.jpg]
 
                                                Single Loaded Double Loaded
Parking Stall Width  Stall Length  Aisle Width                Module2 Width
Angle   (W)          (L)           (A)          Module 2      (DL)
                                                Width (SL)
0°     8.5’       21’         12’/24’ 120.5’/32.5�29’/41’ 1
45°    8.5’       18’         13’        32’         51’
60°    8.5’       18’         18’        38’         58’
75°    8.5’       19’         20’        40.8’       61.6’
90°    8.5’       18’         24’ 1      42’ 1       60’ 1
1 Two-way traffic permitted
2 A module is defined as a drive aisle with automobiles parked on each side of
the drive aisle.
      C.   Driveways
         1.   Residential Driveways, Excluding Multi-Family and Townhouse
Dwellings
            a.   A residential driveway that provides access to a detached
garage shall be no more than twelve (12) feet in width. A driveway apron, the
width of the garage as measured from the garage walls, is permitted to extend
for a distance (depth) of twenty (20) feet from the garage doors before
tapering back to the required driveway width to allow access to the additional
spaces. (See
Figure 13-2 : Residential Driveway Width)
            b.   A lot abutting an alley may have a vehicular entrance from the
alley only if the vehicular entrance does not connect to a driveway accessed
from the public street right-of-way/frontage. Where a detached garage is
located no more than ten (10) feet from public alley lot line, the driveway
shall not exceed the width of the detached garage. The width of the driveway
approach measured at the curb shall in no case be greater than five (5) feet
more than the width measured at the property line.
            c.   A residential driveway that provides access to an attached
garage shall be no wider than the width of the garage. (See
Figure 13-2)
            d.   Driveways shall be located a minimum of one (1) foot from the
side lot line. However, a residential driveway may be located on the lot line
if it physically abuts a driveway on the adjacent lot. This location shall only
be allowed if agreed to by the owners of each lot, and such approval is
recorded as a shared driveway easement on each plat of survey.
            e.   Where no rear access to the lot exists, single-family and two-
family dwellings are permitted an additional paved parking pad by special use
permit. Such parking pads shall not be located in the required front, corner
side or interior side yard. Any driveways must comply with the requirements of
Paragraph i. above. The minimum impervious surface requirement for the lot may
not be exceeded to accommodate a parking pad.
Figure 13-3: Parking Pad Location illustrates where a parking pad may be
located. (Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
            f.   An existing residential driveway with no alley that provides
access to a detached garage shall be allowed to replace the existing driveway
even if over the impervious surface requirement for the lot. If an additional
parking area exists and is over the allowable impervious surface requirement it
shall not be allowed to be replaced (See
Figure 13-4). (Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
            g.   Existing residential interior lot sidewalks shall be allowed
to be replaced even if over the impervious surface requirement for the lot.
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
         2.   Multi-Family and Townhouse Dwellings, and Non-Residential
Driveways
            a.   Except for access to loading berths, no driveway shall have a
width exceeding twenty-four (24) feet. Driveways shall be a minimum of twelve
(12) feet for one-way drives, and a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet for two-
way drives.
            b.   Driveways, off-street parking areas and access aisles for
multi-family residential and non-residential parking lots shall be designed in
accordance with
Figure 13-1.
FIGURE 13-2: RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY WIDTH
 
DETACHED GARAGE DRIVE WAY WIDTH           ATTACHED GARAGE DRIVEWAY WIDTH
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/ b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3116.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3118.jpg]
FIGURE 13-3: PARKING PAD LOCATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3120.jpg]
FIGURE 13-4: DRIVE WAY REPLACEMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3122.jpg]
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
         3.    Single-Family and Two-Family Dwelling Driveway Curb Cuts 
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
            a.   Only one (1) driveway curb cut shall be permitted on a zoning
lot for a new single-family or two-family dwelling.
            b.   Existing lots with more than one (1) curb cut and/or a
circular driveway that exists at the time of adoption of this Ordinance may
replace and repair the existing driveway, provided that the driveway is not
enlarged and that the minimum impervious surface requirement for the lot is not
exceeded at the time of replacement or repair.
      D.   Surfacing
         1.   All open off-street parking areas shall be improved with a hard
surfaced, all-weather dustless material as approved by the Village. Semi-
pervious materials such as grass-crete and pervious pavers may also be used,
subject to the approval of the Village.
         2.   All persons owning or operating open off-street non-residential
use parking areas shall take the necessary steps to bring said parking areas
into compliance with all surfacing requirements by April 15, 2016. (Amended 01/
18/2011: CO-2011-01)
         3.   All persons owning or operating open off-street parking areas for
residential uses shall take the necessary steps to bring said parking areas
into compliance with all surfacing requirements by April 15, 2021. (Amended 01/
18/2011: CO-2011-01)
      E.   Striping
         Off-street parking areas of four (4) or more spaces shall delineate
parking spaces with paint or other permanent materials, which shall be
maintained in clearly visible condition. Parking spaces for handicapped persons
shall be identified with the appropriate sign and shall be visible at all times
of the year, regardless of snow cover, plant growth or similar conditions.
      F.   Curbing and Bumper Stops
         Bumper stops, wheel stops or curbing shall be provided to prevent
vehicles from damaging or encroaching upon any adjacent parking or loading
space, sidewalk, landscaped area or parking lot island, fence, wall or
building. Curbing shall be at least six (6) inches in height. The length of the
parking stall shall be as indicated in
Figure 13-1: Off-Street Parking Dimensions.
      G.   Drainage and Grading
         1.   The pavement on open off-street parking areas, except driveways,
shall be graded to prevent surface stormwater from running off onto adjacent
property. Said stormwater shall be removed from the lots by surface or sheet
drainage unless otherwise specified by the Village.
         2.   In the instance of surfaced open off-street parking areas, other
than driveways, with an area of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet, said
areas shall be properly drained using storm sewer connections, retention ponds
or any alternate method approved by the Village Engineer.
      H.   Lighting
         Parking lot lighting shall be in accordance with
Section 12.3 (Exterior Lighting). Illumination of an off-street parking area
shall be arranged so as to deflect light away from adjacent properties and
streets.
      I.   Landscaping and Screening
         All parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with
Section 14 (Landscaping and Screening).
      J.   Signs
         Accessory signs are permitted in accordance with
Section 15 (Signs).
13.8.   ACCESSIBLE PARKING
      A.   Required Spaces
         With the exception of single-family, two-family and townhouse
dwellings, in all off-street parking facilities where parking is provided for
residents, employees and/or visitors, parking spaces for disabled persons shall
be provided. The number of accessible parking spaces shall be included in the
total number of required parking spaces and shall be in accordance with the
applicable requirements of the Illinois Accessibility Code (71 Ill. Adm. Code
400), as amended, and all additional governing codes and applicable laws.
      B.   Dimensions and Design
         Such spaces shall comply with the design standards presented in the
State of Illinois Accessibility Code (71 Ill. Adm. Code 400), as amended,
provided that in no instance shall the width of any one (1) space be less than
sixteen (16) feet. Such spaces shall be identified by a sign and pavement
markings indicating parking for the disabled only. Such spaces shall be the
spaces closest to the entrance of the building or structure, and shall be
connected by a paved surface designed to provide safe and easy access.
13.9.   STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES
      A.   Design
         Every drive-through facility shall provide a minimum of two (2)
stacking spaces per drive-through lane, unless otherwise required by
Table 13-1: Required Off-Street Parking or this Ordinance. Stacking spaces
provided for drive-through uses shall be:
         1.   A minimum of nine (9) feet in width, as measured from the
outermost point of any service window to the edge of the driveway, and eighteen
(18) feet in length. (See
Figure 13-5: Measurement of Drive-Through and
Figure 13-6: Stacking Spaces)
         2.   Placed in a line within the drive-through lane.
         3.   Located so that, when in use, they do not obstruct ingress or
egress to the site and do not obstruct access to required parking or loading
spaces.
         4.   Stacking spaces shall begin behind the vehicle parked at a last
point of service, such as a window or car wash bay.
FIGURE 13-5: MEASUREMENT OF DRIVE-THROUGH
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3124.jpg]
FIGURE 13-6: STACKING SPACES
[[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3126.jpg]
13.10.   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
      The following restrictions shall apply to the parking or storage of
commercial vehicles.
      A.   No commercial vehicle shall be parked on any public right-of-way,
except for vehicles engaged in loading or unloading, or vehicles in connection
with current work being done to the adjacent premises.
      B.   No stored or parked commercial vehicle shall be occupied or used for
human habitation.
      C.   Only standard-sized, passenger commercial vehicles including, but
not limited to, automobiles, vans without ladder racks, sports utility vehicles
(SUVs), pick-up trucks and trucks required to register for a “B-plate” are
permitted to be stored or parked outdoors overnight on private property. This
shall include regular passenger-sized vehicles that are required to register
for a livery plate.
      D.   Permitted commercial vehicles, as described in Paragraph C. above,
shall include such vehicles that are owned and used for commercial purposes by
the occupant of a dwelling or guest of residentially-zoned property. Such
permitted commercial vehicles may include the logo of the commercial business
painted on or applied to the vehicle.
      E.   All other commercial vehicles including, but not limited to, semi-
truck tractor units, with or without attached trailers, vans with ladder racks,
commercial trailers, buses, limousines, trucks, tow trucks, construction
vehicles or other large commercial or non-standard passenger size livery
vehicles are not permitted to be stored or parked outside overnight except
where permitted as part of the function of the principal use, such as
contractor storage yards and outdoor storage yards.
13.11.   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
      For the purposes of this Section, recreational vehicles shall include all
trailers, campers, motor homes, boats, pop-up campers, and trailers that
transport snowmobiles, wave-runners, ATVs, etc. The following provisions are
applicable to all residential districts.
      A.   State license plates and Village vehicle sticker, where required,
shall be current and properly displayed.
      B.   Storage of a recreational vehicle or a boat trailer shall not
constitute or be a part of any business.
      C.   No recreational vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping, or
housekeeping purposes in any zoning district and shall not be connected to
sewer, water or electrical service.
      D.   No recreational vehicle or boat trailer shall be parked or stored
with flammable liquids aboard the trailer or boat in portable containers.
Exterior propane gas bottles or tanks on recreational vehicles or boat trailers
shall have the valve handles or controls locked or removed during storage
periods.
      E.   No recreational vehicle or boat trailer shall be parked or stored in
an unsanitary, unsafe or dangerous condition.
      F.   Recreational vehicles and boat trailers shall be locked and secured
from entry while parked or stored.
      G.   All recreational vehicles shall be maintained in mobile condition.
No recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored in such manner as to create a
dangerous or unsafe condition on the lot where parked or stored. Parking or
storage in such fashion that the recreational vehicle, whether loaded or not,
may tip or roll shall be considered a dangerous and unsafe condition.
      H.   Camping trailers and other foldable or collapsible recreational
vehicles shall be parked or stored in the same condition as when towed.
      I.   No recreational vehicle or boat trailer shall be stored in or block
access to any off-street parking space required by this Ordinance.
      J.   Recreational vehicles and boat trailers parked or stored on corner
lots shall be screened from public view.
      K.   No more than one (1) recreational vehicle or boat trailer shall be
parked or stored on premises used as a single-family residence or used for
residential purposes.
      L.   No recreational vehicle or boat trailer parked or stored at a
single-family residence shall exceed:
         1.   Eleven (11) feet in height, as parked, including trailer cradle
or mount, but excluding mast.
         2.   Thirty-two (32) feet in length, including trailer hitch, tongue
and bumpers.
      M.   No recreational vehicle or boat trailer parked or stored at a
single-family residence shall be located:
         1.   Less than three (3) feet from any structure.
         2.   Less than three (3) feet from any lot line.
         3.   Within any required front yard.
      N.   No recreational vehicle or boat trailer that is in an inoperable
condition, or that is not licensed, shall be permitted on any residential
property for more than forty-eight (48) hours, unless it is an enclosed garage.
      O.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this Ordinance, recreational
vehicles and boat trailers may be parked in side yards or driveways for loading
and unloading purposes for a period of not more than twenty-four (24) hours.
13.12.   REQUIRED OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES
      A.   Off-Street Parking Requirement Exemptions in the C-1 and C-
2 Districts (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         This exemption is intended to minimize the impact of parking lots in
neighborhood and pedestrian-oriented business districts and the number of
existing buildings that are nonconforming with respect to parking.
         1.   C-1 District
            In the C-1 District, all commercial uses are exempt from the
parking requirements of
Table 13-1.
         2.   C-2 District
            In the C-2 District, the following exemptions shall apply:
            a.   First Floor Nonresidential Exemption
               Nonresidential uses located on the first floor of a building
shall be exempt from the parking requirements of
Table 13-1.
            b.   On Right-of-Way Exemption
               i.   In the C-2 District, on-right-of-way parking spaces that
are located along the front or side property line may be counted toward
required off-street parking spaces.
               ii.   New on-right-of-way parking spaces may be created to count
toward required off-street parking but must be located along the side or front
property line, and must be accessible twenty-four (24) hours a day subject to
any Village overnight or other parking restrictions.
               iii.   At least fifty percent (50%) of the width of an on-right-
of-way space must be located along the property line of the property under
consideration in order to count toward off-street parking requirements. (See
Figures 13-7: On-Right-of-Way Parking and
13-8: On-Right-of-Way Parking Consideration Standard) These spaces are not
reserved for the establishments that utilize this exemption.
FIGURE 13-7: ON-RIGHT-OF-WA Y PARKING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3128.jpg]
            c.   Other Reductions
               The Zoning Administrator may approve a reduction of up to one
hundred percent (100%) the parking required in
Table 13-1 in the following situations.
               i.   Proximity to Transit
                  (a)   The subject site is located within one thousand three
hundred twenty (1,320) feet of the Maywood Metra Station when measured from the
nearest portion of the subject lot line to the Metra Station's lot line along a
direct route traversable by pedestrians.
                  (b)   Upon determining that the utilization of existing off-
street parking within one thousand three hundred twenty (1,320) feet of the
Maywood Metra Station exceeds eighty-five percent (85%) at peak daily use, the
Zoning Administrator may deny a request to reduce the off-street parking
quantity as allowed in Subsection A.2.c.i.(a).
               ii.   Landbanking Required
                  (a)   To qualify for an off-street parking reduction subject
to this Section, the applicant shall demonstrate that the full quantity of off-
street parking spaces could be constructed on the subject site at a future
time. These areas shall be shown on the site plan and marked as “land banked
future parking.”
                  (b)   Following recommendation from the Zoning Administrator,
the Planning Commission may rescind a parking reduction approved under this
section upon determining that increased demand for off-street parking in the
vicinity of the site has necessitated its construction.
                  (c)   In this instance, the Planning Commission may require
that any quantity of off-street parking up to the full amount that would have
been originally required subject to
Section 13.12. to be constructed as if no exemption allowed in this section had
been granted.
FIGURE 13-8: ON-RIGHT-OF-WAY PARKING SPACE CONSIDERATION STANDARD
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3130.jpg]
         3.   Fee-In-Lieu Option
            A reduction in the required number of off-street parking spaces for
non-residential uses in the C-2 District may be granted by the Village Board
upon the recommendation of the Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals. The
Village Board may authorize the requested parking reduction conditioned upon
payment, by the owner, of a fee-in-lieu of providing the required parking
spaces, such fee established from time to time by resolution of the Village
Board.
            a.   Such payment shall be placed into a Village fund to be used by
the Village for the acquisition, construction and maintenance of public off-
street parking facilities to serve the district. Upon payment, the property
granted the modification in the number of required off-street spaces shall be
credited permanently by ordinance with the number of spaces for which payment
was received by the Village.
            b.   The parking fee-in-lieu of provision shall only be applicable
for new construction or where additional floor area in excess of four hundred
(400) square feet is added to an existing building. Changes in use within
existing buildings shall not require payment of a fee-in-lieu.
         4.   Maximum Off-Street Parking Established
            No use shall exceed the minimum number of off-street parking spaces
required by more than twenty-five percent (25%) unless otherwise approved by
the Zoning Administrator.
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 13-1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
(Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35; Amended 01/
07/2025: CO-2025-03)
USE PROPOSED PARKING REQUIREMENT
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 13-1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
(Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35; Amended 01/07/
2025: CO-2025-03)
USE                                     PROPOSED PARKING REQUIREMENT
RESIDENTIAL USES
Assisted Living Facility                .25 per bed + 1 per 2 employees
Bed and Breakfast                       2 spaces + 1 space per guestroom
Community Residence                     .25 per bed + 1 per 2 employees
                                        1-bedroom unit: 1 per dwelling unit
Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor        2-bedroom or more unit: 1.5 per
                                        dwelling unit
Dwelling, Live-Work                     1 per unit
Dwelling, Multi-Family                  1 per dwelling unit
Dwelling, Single-Family                 2 per dwelling unit
Dwelling, Townhouse                     1.5 per dwelling unit
Dwelling, Two-Family                    1.5 per dwelling unit
Independent Living Facility             1 per dwelling unit + 1 per 2 employees
                                        1 for each 4 beds + 1 per 2 employees
Nursing Home                            (excluding staff doctors) + 1 per staff
                                        doctor
GOVERNMENT AND EDUCATIONAL USES
                                        1 per 3 employees + 1 per 4 students
Educational Facility, College/          based on maximum number of students
University                              attending classes on premises at any
                                        one time
Educational Facility, Primary           2 per classroom
Educational Facility, Secondary         1 per 10 students (based on maximum
                                        enrollment) + 2 per classroom
Educational Facility, Vocational School 1 per 3 employees + 1 per 4 students
or Training Academy (Amended 11/20/     based on maximum number of students
2014: CO-2014-41)                       attending classes on premises at any
                                        one time
Government Facility                     3 per 1,000sf GFA</CEC>
CULTURAL USES
Cultural Facility                       2 per 1,000sf GFA
                                        1 per 4 seats + 1 per 1,000sf of
                                        residential living area if convent or
                                        rectory attached + additional spaces as
Group Assembly                          required for accessory uses (day care
                                        center, auditorium, etc.) + adequate
                                        provision for buses and on-site
                                        passenger loading and unloading
 
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 13-1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
(Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35; Amended 01/
07/2025: CO-2025-03)
USE PROPOSED PARKING REQUIREMENT
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 13-1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
(Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35; Amended
01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
USE                                PROPOSED PARKING REQUIREMENT
COMMERCIAL USES
Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing      3 per 1,000sf GFA
Organization
Animal Hospital                    1 per full-time employee + 1 per 30sf of
                                   waiting room area
Art Gallery                        1 per 800sf GFA
Artisan Manufacturing              1 per 250sf GRA
Body Art Establishment             3 per 1,000sf GFA
Car Wash                           1 per bay
Commercial/Community Kitchen       1 per 500sf of office or sales area + 1
                                   per 1,000sf of other floor area
Commercial Services Establishment  3 per 1,000sf GFA
Coworking Space                    1 per 250sf
Day Care Center, Adult or Child    1 per 2 employees + 2 passenger loading
                                   space
Financial Institution              3 per 1,000sf GFA
Food Hall                          1 per 60sf of public seating area
                                   (excluding any outdoor dining area)
Funeral Home                       12 spaces per chapel + 1 per business
                                   vehicle
Gas Station                        2 per 1,000sf GFA of any accessory
                                   convenience retail and/or food service
Greenhouse/Nursery                 1 per 1,000sf GFA + 2 per 1,000sf of
                                   outdoor sales & display area
Heavy Retail, Rental and Service   4 per 1,000sf GFA, including outdoor
                                   sales & display area
                                   1 per 2 hospital beds + 1 per 2
Hospital                           employees (other than staff doctors) + 1
                                   for each staff doctor
                                   1 per room + required parking for
Hotel/Motel                        restaurants, meeting rooms and retail
                                   shops
Indoor Entertainment               4 per 1,000sf of public use area
   Microbrewery/Microwinery/    1 per 60sf public seating area
Microdistillery                    (excluding any outdoor dining area)
   Movie Theater                1 per 4 seats for first 400 seats + 1
                                   per 6 additional seats after first 400
Indoor Recreation                  4 per 1,000sf of public use area
                                   2 per lane + additional spaces as
   Bowling Alley                required for accessory uses (bars,
                                   restaurants, etc.)
                                   1 per 1,000sf of GFA + 1 per 4 pet
Kennel/Pet Day Care Service        owners if animal training classes are
                                   taught on-site (based on maximum class
                                   size)
Live Entertainment                 4 per 1,000sf of public use area
Medical Cannabis Dispensing        3 per 1,000sf GFA
Organization
Medical/Dental Clinic              1.5 per exam room
Methadone Clinic                   3 per 1,000sf of public use area
Motor Vehicle Dealership           1 per 1,000sf of public sales & display
                                   area (indoor + outdoor)
Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment 1 per 1,500sf of public sales & display
                                   area (indoor + outdoor)
Motor Vehicle Service and Repair   2 per service bay + 1 per 500sf of
                                   office & public waiting area
Music and Production Studios       3 per 1,000sf GFA
Office Business                    3 per 1,000sf GFA
Outdoor Entertainment              2 per 1,000sf of public use area
Outdoor Recreation                 2 per 1,000sf of public use area
Payday or Title Loan Agency        3 per 1,000sf GFA
Personal Care Establishment        3 per 1,000sf GFA
Restaurant                         1 per 60sf of public area (excluding any
                                   outdoor dining area)
   Restaurant, Carry-Out        3 per 1,000sf GFA
   Bakery                       3 per 1,000sf GFA
Restaurant with Drive-Through      1 per 60sf of public area (excluding any
                                   outdoor dining area)
Retail Goods Establishment (All    3 per 1,000sf GFA
Categories)
Smoke or Tobacco Shop              3 per 1,000sf GFA
Smoking Lounge                     3 per 1,000sf GFA
Special Event Space                1 per 60sf of public area
                                   All parking must be provided on-site
Video Gaming with Full-Service     1 per 60sf of public area
Restaurant
 
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 13-1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
(Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35; Amended 01/
07/2025: CO-2025-03)
USE PROPOSED PARKING REQUIREMENT
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 13-1: OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
(Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35; Amended 01/07/
2025: CO-2025-03)
USE                                     PROPOSED PARKING REQUIREMENT
MANUFACTURING, STORAGE AND RESEARCH USES
Brewery/Winery/Distillery               1 per 1,000sf of production area
Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower         3 per 1,000sf GFA
Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center   3 per 1,000sf GFA
Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization 3 per 1,000sf GFA
or Infuser
Adult-Use Cannabis Processing           3 per 1,000sf GFA
Organization or Processor
Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting         3 per 1,000sf GFA
Organization or Transporter
Contractor Storage Yard                 2 per 1,000sf of GFA
Manufacturing, General                  3 per 1,000sf of GFA
Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center     3 per 1,000sf GFA
Outdoor Storage Yard                    2 per 1,000sf of GFA
Recycling Center                        2 per 1,000sf of GFA
Self-Storage Facility                   1 per 50 storage units
Solid Waste Transfer Facility           2 per 1,000sf of GFA
Motor Vehicle Operations Facility       1 per 1,000sf GFA
Research and Development Facility       3 per 1,000sf GFA
Warehouse/Distribution                  1 per 20,000sf GFA of warehouse space +
                                        1 per 1,000sf of office space
OPEN SPACE USES
Cemetery                                1 per 250sf of office and/or chapel
                                        space
Driving Range (Principal Use)           1 per tee
Golf Course                             4 per hole
 
      B.   Bicycle Parking (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
         1.   Applicability
            This Section shall apply to all mixed-use and nonresidential
development in the C-1 and C-2 Districts.
         2.   Quantity
            a.   Unless otherwise specified herein, the number of required
bicycle parking spaces shall be one (1) space for every twenty (20) off-street
parking spaces required, up to a maximum fifteen (15) bicycle parking spaces.
            b.   When the required quantity of bicycle parking is two (2)
spaces or less, the use shall provide a minimum of two (2) spaces in a bicycle
parking area.
         3.   Location
            a.   Required bicycle parking shall be provided on the same lot as
the use for which it is intended to serve.
            b.   Bicycle parking spaces shall be adequately lit and located
such that they are highly visible from the street and/or building entrance(s)
from where bicyclists approach.
            c.   The location of bicycle parking shall not conflict with
pedestrian and/or vehicle circulation.
            d.   Bicycle parking shall be sited within fifty (50) feet of the
building's main entrance. If provided indoors, bicycle parking shall be located
within a common area designated for secure bicycle storage.
            e.   Bicycle parking adjacent to a pedestrian walkway shall be
sited to ensure that a minimum five (5) foot walkway clearance is maintained.
         4.   Design Criteria
            a.   Bicycle racks shall be securely anchored to the ground.
            b.   Bicycle racks shall support the bicycle in at least two (2)
places, preventing it from tipping over, and shall provide multiple points of
locking to secure both the frame and one (1) or both wheels.
            c.   Bicycle racks shall accommodate a variety of bicycle types and
sizes. The inverted-U or post and ring styles are preferred.
         5.   Dimensional Standards
            a.   All bicycle parking facilities shall be designed in accordance
with standards established by the National Association of City Transportation
Officials or the Association of Pedestrian and Bicycle Professionals.
            b.   Each bicycle parking space shall be a minimum of six (6) feet
in length.
            c.   Bicycle racks shall be located at least three (3) feet in all
directions from any obstruction, including but not limited to other bicycle
racks, walls, doors, posts, columns, or landscaping.
            d.   A minimum vertical clearance of seven (7) feet shall be
maintained above all bicycle parking facilities.
13.13.   REQUIRED OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES
      Off-street loading spaces shall be provided for a building, structure or
use which requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by
trucks or other vehicles in accordance with
Table 13-2:
      Off-Street Loading Requirements. In the case of multi-tenant buildings or
mixed-use developments, required loading spaces shall be calculated on the
basis of each individual tenant (for example, if only one (1) commercial tenant
of a multi-tenant building is over ten thousand (10,000) square feet, only one
(1) loading space is required; if all tenants are under ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, no loading is required).
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 13-2: OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Use Type Number Of Spaces Required
VILLAGE OF MAYWOOD, ILLINOIS
TABLE 13-2: OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
Use Type                                           Number Of Spaces Required
Commercial Use
 10,000 - 199,999sf of gross floor area            1 loading space
 Each additional 100,000sf of gross floor area
 (This applies only for each additional full       1 loading space
 100,000sf over the initial 100,000sf )
Manufacturing and Warehouse Uses
 5,000 - 10,000sf of gross floor area              1 loading space
 10,001 - 40,000sf of gross floor area             2 loading spaces
 40,001 - 100,000sf of gross floor area            3 loading spaces
 For each additional 100,000sf of gross floor area
 (This applies only for each additional full       1 loading space
 100,000sf over the initial 100,000sf )
 
13.14.   DESIGN OF OFF-STREET LOADING SPACES
      A.   Location
         1.   All off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as
the building or use served. No off-street loading spaces shall project into a
public right-of-way.
         2.   Off-street loading spaces shall be located at least twenty-five
(25) feet from the intersection of any two (2) streets.
         3.   No off-street loading space shall be located in a front yard or
setback.
         4.   All off-street loading spaces shall be located a minimum of fifty
(50) feet from the lot line of any lot in a residential district, unless
completely enclosed by building walls or a uniformly painted solid fence or
wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six (6) feet in height.
      B.   Dimensions
         All required off-street loading spaces shall be at least ten (10) feet
in width and at least twenty-five (25) feet in length, exclusive of aisle and
maneuvering space, and shall have a minimum vertical clearance of at least
fourteen (14) feet.
      C.   Surfacing
         All off-street loading spaces shall be improved with a compacted
macadam base, not less than seven (7) inches thick, surfaced with not less than
two (2) inches of asphaltic concrete or some comparable all weather dustless
material or in accordance with the requirements of the Village.
      D.   Access Control and Signage
         Each required off-street loading space shall be designed with adequate
means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner that will minimize
interference with traffic movement.
      E.   Lighting
         Loading facility lighting shall be in accordance with
Section 12.3 (Exterior Lighting). Illumination of an off-street loading
facility shall be arranged so as to deflect the direct rays of light away from
adjacent properties and streets.
      F.   Landscaping and Screening
         All loading facilities shall be landscaped and screened in accordance
with
Section 14 (Landscaping and Screening).
SECTION 14. LANDSCAPING & SCREENING
14.1.   Purpose
14.2.   Enforcement of landscape provisions
14.3.   Landscape plan
14.4.   Selection, installation and maintenance of plant materials
14.5.   Landscape design standards
14.6.   On-lot landscaping
14.7.   Building foundation landscaping
14.8.   Parking lot landscaping
14.9.   Parking lot perimeter landscape yard
14.10.   Interior parking lot landscaping
14.11.   Buffer yards
14.12.   Required landscaping illustration
14.13.   Screening requirements
14.1.   PURPOSE
      The landscaping and screening requirements established by this Section
are intended to preserve and enhance the appearance, public health, safety,
convenience, comfort and general welfare of the Village by fostering an
aesthetically pleasing development. Proper landscaping contributes to the
Village in many ways: enhancing its character and scenic beauty, providing
clean air, reducing noise, preventing erosion of topsoil, reducing the rate of
stormwater runoff, providing nesting areas for birds and habitat for other
wildlife, conserving energy, and providing shade and windbreaks. These
regulations are also intended to increase the compatibility of adjacent uses,
and minimize the adverse impact of noise, dust, motor vehicle headlight glare
or other artificial light intrusions, and other objectionable activities or
impacts conducted on, or created by, adjoining or neighboring uses.
14.2.   ENFORCEMENT OF LANDSCAPE PROVISIONS
      No building permit or occupancy permit shall be issued for any lot or use
subject to the requirements of this Section unless all the requirements of this
Section have been fulfilled. Failure to implement the landscape plan, or to
maintain the lot or use in substantial conformance with the landscape plan,
shall be cause for revocation of the occupancy permit and/or the application of
fines and penalties, as established in this Ordinance. In addition, all
landscaping is subject to periodic inspection.
14.3.   LANDSCAPE PLAN
      A.   Landscape Plan Required
         A detailed landscape plan shall be submitted to the Village as part of
any new development, and must be approved prior to the issuance of a building
permit. Existing single-family and two-family dwellings are exempt from
landscape plan requirements.
      B.   Content of Landscape Plan
         1.   The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
structures, property lines, easements, parking lots and drives, roadways and
rights-of-way, sidewalks, signs, refuse disposal and recycling areas,
sidewalks, bicycle paths and parking facilities, fences, electrical equipment,
recreational facilities, drainage facilities, and other freestanding
structures, as determined necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
         2.   The location, quantity, size, name and condition, both botanical
and common, of all existing plant materials, including trees and other material
in the right-of-way, and indicating plant material to be retained and removed.
         3.   The location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and common,
of all proposed plant material including, but not limited to, shade and
evergreen trees, shrubs, groundcover, annuals/perennials and turf.
         4.   The existing and proposed grading of the site indicating contours
at one (1) foot intervals. Proposed berming shall be indicated using one (1)
foot contour intervals.
         5.   Elevations of all proposed fences, steps, stairs, retaining walls
both fixed (cast concrete, unitized walls) and any natural rock outcroppings on
the site.
         6.   Elevations, cross-sections, and other details as determined
necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
      C.   Minor Changes to Approved Landscape Plans
         Minor changes to the landscape plan that do not result in a reduction
in the net amount of plant material as specified on the approved landscape plan
shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator. Changes to the size and amount
of plant materials of an approved landscape plan shall not be considered a
minor change. Major changes shall be approved by the body granting approval of
the landscape plan initially.
14.4.   SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PLANT MATERIALS
      A.   Selection
         All planting materials used shall be of good quality and meet American
Association of Nurserymen (AANS) standards for minimum acceptable form, quality
and size for species selected, and capable of withstand the seasonal
temperature variations of Northeastern Illinois, as well as the individual site
microclimates. The use of species native to Northeastern Illinois shall be
encouraged. Size and density of plant material, both at the time of planting
and at maturity, are additional criteria that shall be considered when
selecting plant material. Where appropriate, the use of drought and salt
tolerant plant material is preferred.
      B.   Installation
         All landscaping materials shall be installed in accordance with the
current planting procedures established by the AANS. All plant materials shall
be free of disease and shall be installed so that soil of sufficient volume,
composition and nutrient balance are available to sustain healthy growth.
      C.   Required Element
         Landscape materials depicted on landscape plans approved by the
Village shall be considered to be required site plan elements in the same
manner as buildings, parking and other improvements. As such, the owner of
record, or in some instances the homeowner’s association, shall be responsible
for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscape materials, and
fences, steps, retaining walls and similar landscaping elements over the entire
life of the development.
      D.   Maintenance
         All landscaping materials shall be maintained in good condition, shall
present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance, and shall be kept free of
refuse and debris. Any dead, unhealthy or missing plants shall be replaced
within six (6) months of notification by the Village or the next reasonable
available growing/planting season. All fences, steps, retaining walls and
similar landscaping elements required within the landscaping plan shall be
maintained in good repair. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for
the maintenance, repair, and replacement of all landscape materials, fences,
steps, retaining walls and similar landscaping elements, and refuse disposal
areas. Irrigation systems, when provided, shall be maintained in good operating
condition to promote the health of the plant material and the conservation of
water.
14.5.   LANDSCAPE DESIGN STANDARDS
      Landscape plans, as described above, shall be prepared by a licensed
landscape architect, registered in the State of Illinois, and evaluated and
approved based on the following design criteria.
      A.   Scale and Nature of Landscape Material
         The scale and nature of landscape materials shall be appropriate to
the size of the site and related structures.
      B.   Selection of Plant Material
         Plant material shall be selected for its form, texture, color, pattern
of growth and suitability to local conditions.
      C.   Shade Trees
         All deciduous shade trees shall have a minimum trunk size of two and
one-half (2½) inches in caliper at planting, unless otherwise specified.
      D.   Evergreen Trees
         Evergreens trees shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet at
planting and shall be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site,
particularly in those areas where year-round screening and buffering is
required.
      E.   Ornamental Trees
         Single stem ornamental trees shall have a minimum trunk size of three
(3) inches in caliper at planting, unless otherwise specified. Multiple stem
ornamental trees shall have a minimum height of eight (8) feet at planting,
unless otherwise specified.
      F.   Shrubs
         Unless otherwise specified, all large deciduous and evergreen shrubs
shall have minimum height of three (3) feet at installation, and all small
deciduous and evergreen shrubs shall have a minimum height of eighteen (18)
inches at installation.
         Large shrubs shall be considered to be those shrubs that reach five
(5) or more feet in height at maturity. Small shrubs shall be considered to be
those shrubs that can grow up to five (5) feet in height if left unmaintained,
but are generally kept at heights of eighteen (18) to thirty (30) inches.
      G.   Softening of Walls and Fences
         Plant material shall be placed against long expanses of building
walls, fences and other barriers to create a softening effect and to help break
up long expanses of blank walls with little architectural detail.
      H.   Planting Beds
         Planting beds may be mulched with shredded hardwood, granite mulch,
river rock, feather rocks or similar materials. Lava rock is not permitted.
      I.   Irrigation
         Landscape design pursuant to the requirements of this Section shall
recognize the need for irrigation and water conservation. Sprinkler irrigation
systems may be required for certain landscaped areas, as determined by a
landscape architect. The need for sprinkler irrigation systems shall be
determined by the type of plant material and the condition/growing medium that
they are installed in. For instance, whether there is a permanent means
available to water plant material, such as hose bibs, shall be a consideration.
All irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize the use of water.
      J.   Energy Conservation
         Plant material placement should be designed to reduce the energy
consumption needs of the development. In addition, landscaping designs shall
take into account and make an effort to implement LEED policy and design
standards, where appropriate.
      K.   Species Diversity
         Diversity among required plant material is required not only for
visual interest, but to reduce the risk of losing a large population of plants
due to disease.
Table 14-1: Diversity Requirements indicates the percentage of diversity
required based on the total quantity of species being used. For instance, if a
development requires forty-five (45) shade trees, no more than eighteen (18)
trees nor less than five (5) trees can be of one (1) species, and there must be
a minimum of five (5) different species within the forty-five (45) trees.
TABLE 14-1: DIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS
TOTAL NUMBER OF       DIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS                MINIMUM NUMBER OF
PLANTS PER PLANT TYPE MAXIMUM OF ANY MINIMUM OF ANY SPECIES SPECIES
                      SPECIES
TABLE 14-1: DIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS
TOTAL NUMBER OF       DIVERSITY REQUIREMENTS                MINIMUM NUMBER OF
PLANTS PER PLANT TYPE MAXIMUM OF ANY MINIMUM OF ANY SPECIES SPECIES
                      SPECIES
1-4                   100%           Not Applicable         1
5-10                  60%            40%                    2
11-15                 45%            20%                    3
16-75                 40%            10%                    5
76-500                25%            5%                     8
500-1,000             30%            5%                     10
1,000+                15%            4%                     15
 
      L.   Berming
         Earthen berms and existing topographic features shall be incorporated
into the landscape treatment of a site where there is sufficient space and, in
particular, when berms and existing topographic features can be combined with
plant material to facilitate effective screening. Minimum unretained berm side
slopes shall be maintained at no less than a 4:1 slope ratio to prevent erosion
and be properly and safely maintained. Retained slopes may be implemented with
the appropriate terracing necessary to reduce the need for safety railing.
14.6.   ON-LOT LANDSCAPING
      A.   Turf Required
         All areas within yards that are unpaved shall be landscaped primarily
with turf or live groundcover.
      B.   Required Trees
         Shade trees shall be provided on all zoning lots at a minimum of:
         1.   One (1) shade tree per new single-family residential lot.
         2.   Two (2) shade trees per multi-family development.
         3.   Four (4) shade trees per non-residential development.
         4.   Existing trees shall be counted toward this required minimum
number.
14.7.   BUILDING FOUNDATION LANDSCAPING
      A.   If a multi-family residential, mixed-use or non-residential
development maintains a front and corner side setback of ten (10) feet or more,
building foundation landscaping is required. (See
Figure 14-1: Building Foundation Landscaping)
FIGURE 14-1: BUILDING FOUNDATION LANDSCAPING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3132.jpg]
      B.    Foundation plantings shall work in concert with buffer yard
plantings to frame important views, while visually softening long expanses of
walls, particularly those that lack windows and/or other architectural details.
Foundation plantings shall respond to the materials and the form of a building.
      C.    Foundation plantings shall be installed across sixty percent (60%)
of the length of the façade of the building, except where walkways and
driveways are located.
      D.   Foundation plantings may consist of a mix of trees, shrubs and
perennials.
14.8.   PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
      A.   Parking Lot Landscaping Design Guidelines
         All parking lots of ten (10) or more spaces are subject to site plan
review and a landscape plan as a condition of obtaining a building permit.
Perimeter landscaping is required for all parking lots and shall be established
along the edge of the parking lot. Interior parking lot landscaping is required
for those lots of ten (10) or more spaces. Nothing in this section shall be
deemed to prevent the applicant’s voluntary installation of additional interior
parking lot landscaping, so long as parking space requirements and parking lot
design requirements are complied with.
      B.   Existing Parking Lots
         1.   For existing parking lots that currently do not comply with the
required parking lot landscaping, such landscaping shall be provided when:
            a.   A new principal building or building addition is constructed,
or exterior remodeling of the principal building occurs.
            b.   Over fifty percent (50%) of the total area of an existing
parking lot is reconstructed. Resealing or re-striping of an existing parking
lot, which does not entail paving or resurfacing by replacement of the asphalt
or concrete, shall not be subject to this requirement.
            c.   When an existing parking lot under ten thousand (10,000)
square feet in area is expanded by fifty percent (50%) or more in total surface
area.
            d.   When an existing parking lot over ten thousand (10,000) square
feet in area is expanded by twenty-five percent (25%) or more in total surface
area.
         2.   When an existing parking lot is required by Paragraph 1. above to
provide landscaping, which would result in creating a parking area that no
longer conforms to the parking regulations of this Ordinance such existing
parking lot shall not be required to install all or a portion of the required
landscaping. The applicant shall be required to show that landscaping cannot be
accommodated on the site. If only certain requirements are able to be
accommodated on the site, those elements shall be required. The Zoning
Administrator shall make the determination that all or a portion of required
landscaping does not have to be installed.
14.9.   PARKING LOT PERIMETER LANDSCAPE YARD
(Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
      Perimeter parking lot landscaping provides for the enhancement and
screening of parking lots by requiring a scheme of pedestrian walls and/or
landscaping along public streets. (See
Figure 14-2: Parking Lot Perimeter Landscape Yard) Perimeter landscaping is
required for all parking lots and shall be established along the edge of the
parking lot. The landscape treatment shall run the full length of the parking
lot and shall be located between the property line and the edge of the parking
lot. All perimeter parking lot screening areas shall be protected with raised
concrete curbs. Landscaped areas outside of shrub and tree masses shall be
planted in turf or other groundcover. The landscaped area shall be improved as
follows:
      1.   One (1) shrub, measuring a minimum of eighteen (18) inches at
planting and not to exceed three and one-half (3½) feet at maturity, shall be
planted for every three (3) feet of landscaped area length, spaced linearly to
adequately screen vehicle bumpers. Alternatively, a low pedestrian wall the
height of which provides effective screening to a maximum height of three (3)
feet may be used instead of shrubs. Where feasible, plant materials shall be
installed between the sidewalk and the wall to provide a softening effect on
the fence or wall.
      2.   The perimeter parking lot landscaping area shall be at least three
(3) feet in width, as measured from the back of curb, in order to accommodate
vehicle bumper overhang and ensure planting areas that are adequate in size.
FIGURE 14-2: PARKING LOT PERIMETER LANDSCAPE YARD
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3134.jpg]
14.10.   INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
      For parking lots consisting of thirty (30) or more spaces, interior
parking lot landscaping shall be required. (See
Figure 14-3: Interior Parking Lot Landscaping)
      A.   A mount
         One (1) parking lot island shall be provided between every fifteen
(15) contiguous parking spaces. As part of the landscape plan approval, parking
lot island locations may be varied based on specific site requirements or
design scheme, but the total number of islands shall be no less than the amount
required one (1) island for every fifteen (15) spaces. However, all rows of
parking spaces shall be terminated by a parking lot island or landscaped area.
      B.   Size of Parking Lot Islands
         Parking lot islands shall be the same dimension as the parking stall.
Double rows of parking shall provide parking lot islands that are the same
dimension as the double row.
      C.   Design of Planting Areas
         Parking lot islands or landscaped areas shall be at least one hundred
forty-four (144) square feet in area and at least six (6) inches above the
surface of the parking lot and protected with concrete curbing, except where
designed specifically for the absorption of stormwater. Such islands and
landscaped areas shall be properly drained and irrigated as appropriate to the
site conditions to ensure survivability.
      D.   Type of Landscape Material
         Shade trees shall be the primary plant materials used in parking lot
islands and landscaped areas. Ornamental trees, shrubs, hedges and other plant
materials may be used to supplement the shade tree plantings but shall not
create visibility concerns for automobiles and pedestrians.
      E.   Quantity of Landscape Material
         A minimum of one (1) shade tree shall be provided for every parking
lot island or landscaped area. If the island extends the width of a double row,
then two (2) shade trees shall be provided.
      F.   Groundcover
         A minimum of seventy-five percent (75%) of every parking lot island
shall be planted in turf or other live groundcover, perennials or ornamental
grasses.
FIGURE 14-3: INTERIOR PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/ b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3136.jpg]                    IMAGES/0-0-0-3138.jpg]
14.11.    BUFFER YARDS
      A.    This section esta blishe s standards for the dimensions and
improvement require ments of buffer yards between land uses and/or zoning
districts within the rear or interior side yard. Nothing in this section shall
be deemed to prevent the applicant’s voluntary installation of buffer yards to
these design specifications where they are not required.
      B.   Buffer yards are required in the following situations:
         1.   Where a multi-family or townhouse development in the R-4 or R-
5 District abuts a R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
         2.   Where a commercial, manufacturing or institutional district abuts
a residential district.
         3.   Where a non-residential use is located within a residential
district.
         However, a buffer yard is not required where the rear wall of a
commercial building is located on the rear property line or where an alley is
located between a commercial use and a residential use.
      C.   Buffer yards shall be provided in interior side and rear yards.
Buffer yards may be located within required yards, and shall be reserved for
the planting of material and installation of screening as required by this
section. No parking, driveways, sidewalks, accessory buildings or other
impervious surfaces are permitted within the buffer yard area.
      D.   All plantings in the buffer yard shall be in accordance with the
design standards of this Section. The minimum size and improvement of buffer
yards shall be as follows:
         1.   A buffer yard shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width.
         2.   Shade trees shall be planted on an average of one (1) tree for
every twenty-five (25) linear feet of yard length. As part of the landscape
plan approval, trees may be spaced at various intervals based on specific site
requirements or design scheme, but the total number of trees planted will be no
less than the amount required by a linear planting spaced twenty-five (25) feet
apart.
         3.   An opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick), solid screen
fence or dense evergreen hedge, at least six (6) feet in height, shall be
erected along one hundred percent (100%) of the yard length.
         4.   Shrubs shall be planted on an average of one (1) shrub for every
three (3) feet of yard length. As part of the landscape plan approval, shrubs
may be spaced at various intervals based on specific site requirements or
design scheme, but the total number of shrubs planted will be no less than the
amount required by a linear planting spaced three (3) feet apart.
         5.   Areas not planted with trees or shrubs shall be maintained as
turf or other live groundcover.
14.12.   REQUIRED LANDSCAPING ILLUSTRATION
      
Figure 14-4: Landscaping Requirements illustrates the location of the
landscaping requirements in Sections 14.7 (Building Foundation Landscaping),
14.9 (Parking Lot Perimeter Landscape Yard), 14.10 (Interior Parking Lot
Landscaping) and 14.11 (Buffer Yards).
FIGURE 14-4: LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3140.jpg]
14.13.    SCREENING REQUIREME NTS
      A.   Refuse Disposal Dumpsters and Refuse Storage Areas
         All refuse containers shall be fully enclosed on three (3) sides by a
solid wood or simulated wood screen fence, an opaque masonry wall (stone,
stucco or brick) or principal structure wall six (6) feet in height and the
enclosure shall be gated. The materials used for screening, including the
enclosure, shall complement the architecture of the principal structure. An
extension of an exterior principal structure wall may be used as one of the
screening walls for a refuse container, provided that such wall meets the
minimum six (6) foot height requirement and is of the same building materials
as the principal structure. Such wall may not be the gated enclosure. Best
efforts shall be made to keep refuse container enclosures at least five (5)
feet away from the property line in all zoning districts where the adjacent
property is residential.
      B.   Loading Berths
         Where feasible, loading berths shall be located and oriented so as not
be visible from the street and adjacent properties, while still allowing access
to the use it is serving. In addition, loading berths in all zoning districts
shall be screened as much as possible, unless such screening is determined
unnecessary by the body approving the landscape plan. Such screening shall
consist of an opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick), a solid wood or
simulated wood screen fence, or dense evergreen hedge, at least six (6) feet in
height.
      C.   Outdoor Storage and Display Areas
         1.   Outdoor Storage Areas
            All outdoor storage areas shall be completely screened by an opaque
masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick) or a solid wood or simulated wood screen
fence no less than six (6) feet in height. Where feasible, plant materials
shall be installed along the fence or wall located along the public right-of-
way to provide a softening effect. No materials stored outdoors shall be of a
greater height than that of the required fence or wall.
         2.   Outdoor Sales and Display Areas
            a.   When the rear or interior side yard of an outdoor display area
abuts a residential district, or the rear yard is separated from a residential
district by an alley, the outdoor display area shall be effectively screened
from view by an opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick), a solid wood or
simulated wood screen fence or dense evergreen hedge, at least six (6) feet in
height.
            b.   All outdoor display areas shall be designed with a landscaped
yard along the public right-of-way, excluding alleys, a minimum of ten (10)
feet in width and planted with shade or evergreen trees at a rate of one (1)
tree per twenty-five (25) feet, and supplemented with shrubs and perennials to
enhance the view from the public right-of-way. These screening requirements are
not intended to prohibit openings reasonably necessary for access drives and
walkways.
            c.   Motor vehicle dealerships or rental establishments with
outdoor sales and display lots shall be designed with permanent screening along
the right-of-way meeting the requirements of Paragraph b. above, but such
plantings may be clustered. However, the screening may consist of small shrubs
and/or a low pedestrian wall of no less than three (3) feet in height, rather
than shade or evergreen trees, to optimize the view of motor vehicles for sale.
            d.   Growing areas for nursery stock located in the front or corner
side yard shall be considered to meet screening requirements.
      D.   Drive-Through Facility (Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
         Drive aisles of drive-through facilities shall be effectively screened
from view along the public right-of-way and at the edges of sites adjacent to
residential properties in order to minimize the impact of exterior site
lighting, headlight glare and any menu intercom displays. Such screening shall
be approved during the site plan review process and shall consist of an opaque
masonry wall (stone, stucco or brick), a solid wood or simulated wood screen
fence or dense evergreen hedge at least six (6) feet in height.
SECTION 15. SIGNS
15.1.   Purpose
15.2.   Sign permit required
15.3.   Location
15.4.   Sign dimension computations
15.5.   General construction standards
15.6.   Master sign plan required
15.7.   Prohibited signs
15.8.   Temporary signs
15.9.   Exempt permanent signs
15.10.   Permanent sign standards
15.11.   Nonconforming signs
15.1.   PURPOSE
      The purpose of this Section is to establish a framework for a
comprehensive system of sign controls governing the display, design,
construction, installation and maintenance of signs that will:
      A.   To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the Village
by ensuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding architecture and land
uses.
      B.   To create a more attractive business and economic climate in the
commercial and industrial areas of the Village by enhancing and protecting the
orderly and effective display of signs.
      C.   To discourage an excessive number of signs and unsightly, dissimilar
and inappropriate signs.
      D.   To protect the public from hazardous conditions that result from the
indiscriminate use and placement of signs, structurally unsafe signs, signs
which obscure the vision of pedestrians or motorists, and signs which compete
or conflict with necessary traffic signals and warning signs.
15.2.   SIGN PERMIT REQUIRED
      Unless specifically permitted as exempt from sign permit requirements by
this Section, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, relocate, or
structurally alter any sign or other advertising structure without first
obtaining a sign permit from the Village in accordance with
Section 4.7 (Sign Permit). The Zoning Administrator may revoke any sign permit
where there has been a violation of the provisions of this Ordinance or
misrepresentation of fact on the sign permit application.
15.3.   LOCATION
      A.   No signs, other than those placed by agencies of government or signs
whose placement has been authorized by this Section or the Zoning Administrator
shall be erected on any public property. Any sign placed on public property
without authorization may be removed without notice.
      B.   No signs shall be placed on any private property without prior
consent of the owner thereof and, where applicable, issuance of a Village sign
permit.
      C.   No sign mounted on the exterior of a building shall cover any
windows, doors or any architectural features.
15.4.   SIGN DIMENSION COMPUTATIONS
      The following principles shall control the computation of sign
dimensions.
      A.   Computation of Sign Area
         Sign area is calculated as described in this Section.
         1.   For signs on a background, the entire area of the background
shall be calculated for sign area, including any material or color forming the
sign face or background used to differentiate the sign from the structure
against which it is placed. Sign area does not include any supporting framework
or bracing, unless such framework or bracing is part of the message or sign
face. (See
Figure 15-1: Sign Area Computation 1)
FIGURE 15-1: SIGN AREA COMPUTATION 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3142.jpg]
         2 .   For signs consisting of freestanding letters or logos, the area
of a sign face (“sign area”) is calculated by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle or triangle, or combination thereof, that will encompass the
extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem or other display. Sign
area does not include any supporting framework or bracing, unless such
framework or bracing is part of the message or sign face. Window signs printed
on a transparent film and affixed to a window pane shall be considered
freestanding letters or logos, provided that the portion of the transparent
film around the perimeter of the sign message maintains the transparent
character of the window and does not contain any items in the sign message.
(See
Figure 15-1 : Sign Area Computation 2)
FIGURE 15-1: SIGN AREA COMPUTATION 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3144.jpg]
         3.    The sign area of free-form or sculptural (non-planar) signs is
calculated as fifty percent (50%) of the sum of the area of the four (4)
vertical sides of the smallest cube that will encompass the sign. (See
Figure 15-1: Sign Area Computation 3)
FIGURE 15-1: SIGN AREA COMPUTATION 3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3146.jpg]
         4.    For a double-faced sign, if the interior angle between two (2)
sign faces is forty-five (45) degrees or less, the sign area is computed as the
area of one (1) face only. If the angle between two (2) sign faces is greater
than forty-five (45) degrees, the sign area is computed as the sum of the areas
of the two (2) faces.
      B.   Measurement of Sign Height
         Sign height is measured as described below. When measuring sign
height, the height of the entire structure, including decorative elements, must
be included.
         1.   For monument signs, height shall be calculated as the vertical
distance measured from grade to the highest point of the sign.
         2.   For signs attached to buildings, height shall be calculated as
the vertical distance from the base of the building to which a sign is attached
to the highest point of the sign.
         3.   For pole signs, height shall be measured from the crown of the
nearest roadway access to the property, other than an overpass or an approach
to an overpass.
15.5.   GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
      A.   Construction
         All signs constructed, erected, modified or altered shall comply with
the provisions of this Section and the requirements of the Village Code.
      B.   Sign Structure and Installation
         Supports and braces shall be an integral part of the sign design.
Supports or braces shall be hidden from public view to the extent technically
feasible. All signs attached to a building shall be installed and maintained so
that wall penetrations are watertight and the structure does not exceed
allowable stresses of supporting materials.
      C.   Sign Face
         No sign or sign structure shall have any nails, tacks, wires, or sharp
metal edges protruding from it. Exposed neon tubing shall be prohibited on all
signs located on an exterior wall surface.
      D.   Wind Pressure and Direct Load Requirements
         All signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind
pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of net surface
area, and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required by the Village
Code.
      E.   Electrical Components
         All electrical fixtures, devices, circuits, conduits, raceways or
apparatus used to illuminate, move or project any sign shall be installed and
maintained as required in the Village Code.
      F.   Illumination (Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
         1.   Goose-neck reflectors and lights shall be permitted for wall
signs and projecting signs provided that the reflectors shall concentrate the
illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street
or adjacent property.
         2.   Internal illumination of monument signs, pole signs, wall signs,
marquee signs and projecting signs shall be permitted.
         3.   All sign illumination shall be designed, located, shielded and
directed so as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent
publicly dedicated roadways and surrounding properties, or distract operators
of vehicles or pedestrians in the public right-of-way. The light level shall be
no greater than one (1) footcandle at any property line.
      G.   Glass
         Glass forming any part of a sign must be safety glass and in
compliance with all applicable Village ordinances, codes, rules and
regulations.
      H.   Lettering
         All letters, figures, characters or representations in cut-out or
irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to, or superimposed
upon any sign must be safely and securely built or attached to the sign
structure.
      I.   Limitation on Items of Information
         1.   All signs must limit the number of items of information on any
single sign face to no more than six (6) items to prevent traffic hazards for
passing motorists and to minimize the cluttered appearance of signs.
         2.   Each piece of information on a sign shall be defined as an item
of information. For example, each of the following would be defined as one (1)
item of information: a telephone number, the name of the business, even if
multiple words, or the business logo. If the sign advertises products or
services, each product or service would be one (1) item of information. The
street number address of the business is not counted as an item of information.
(See
Figure 15-2: Items of Information)
FIGURE 15-2: ITEMS OF INFORMATION
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3148.jpg]
         3.   The changeable message component of changeable message signs,
where the items of information are changed manually, is counted as one (1) item
of information. For a sign that contains a time and temperature component or
electronic message display, the time and temperature or electronic message
display component shall not be counted as an item of information.
         4.   All signs on a zoning lot must be related to goods and/or
services sold or offered on the premises, with the exception of non-commercial,
political, campaign or election signs.
         5.   Signs for multi-tenant commercial buildings used to advertise
which tenants are located within the development, are limited to one (1) item
of information per tenant within the development, which may exceed six (6)
items, in addition to the name and address of the development.
         6.   Directory signs are exempt from the items of information
limitation.
      J.   Data to be Posted
         Every sign or other advertising structure shall have painted on or a
metallic sticker applied, in a conspicuous place thereon, the date of erection,
the permit number and the voltage of any electrical apparatus used in
connection therewith. Such information shall not count toward the limitation on
the items of information described in Paragraph H. above.
      K.   Sign and Premises Maintenance
         1.   All signs, and the premises surrounding the sign, shall be
maintained in a clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, and free and clear
of all noxious substances, rubbish and weeds.
         2.   If the Village shall find that any sign or other advertising
structure, as defined herein, is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the
public, has been abandoned, or has been constructed or erected or is being
maintained in violation of the provisions of this Section, the Zoning
Administrator shall immediately be advised of such condition and he/she shall
give written notice to the sign permit holder thereof. If sign permit holder
fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the standards
herein set forth such sign or other advertising structure, as defined in this
Section, may be removed by Village at the expense of the sign permit holder or
the owner of the property upon which it is located. The Village may cause any
other sign or other advertising structure that is an immediate peril to persons
or property to be removed summarily and without notice.
      L.   Abandoned Signs
         Any sign which advertises a business, service or product which is no
longer operated, provided or sold on the premises where the sign is located
shall be considered an abandoned sign. Any sign which was erected or placed on
the premises by a tenant or lessee whose lease on the premises has expired
shall also constitute an abandoned sign. The occupant, owner or lessee of all
premises where an abandoned sign is located shall remove the sign within
fourteen (14) days after receiving notice from the Zoning Administrator to do
so.
15.6.   MASTER SIGN PLAN REQUIRED
      A.   When more than one (1) wall sign, projecting sign, window sign, or
awning/canopy sign is proposed on any building with multiple tenants, the
applicant shall submit a master sign plan by the Zoning Administrator.
      B.   A master sign plan shall provide for coordinated design for all
building-mounted signage and shall include, at a minimum, criteria and
specifications for general appearance, format of message, font size and style,
lighting, location and construction materials.
      C.   Where signs are to be located on a wall of a multi-tenant shopping
center, they shall be located at a generally uniform height on the building
wall and shall not cover or overhang any architectural feature.
15.7.   PROHIBITED SIGNS
      It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain the following signs:
      A.   Animated Signs
         Animated signs are prohibited.
      B.   Banner Signs (Permanent)
         Permanent banner signs used to advertise a business, its products or
its services are prohibited. Banners may be used as temporary signs in
accordance with
Section 15.8 (Temporary Signs).
      C.   Flashing Signs
         No sign shall have blinking or flashing lights, or other illuminating
device that has a changing light intensity, brightness or color, traveling/
chasing or blinking lights, or rotating beacons. Time and temperature and
electronic message display components of signs are not considered flashing
signs.
      D.   Graffiti Signs
         Graffiti signs are prohibited, in accordance with Section
130.02 of the Village Code.
      E.   Moving Signs
         No sign or other advertising structure shall have moving, revolving or
rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of any kind. Street clocks with
movable hands shall be permitted.
      F.   Obscene Signs
         No sign or other advertising device shall display any matter in which
the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to a prurient
interest in sex, or is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary
community standards relating to the description or representation of sexual
matters, and is utterly without redeeming social value.
      G.   Off-Premise Temporary Signs
         Off-premise temporary signs are prohibited.
      H.   Painted and Illegally Affixed Signs
         1.   Signs painted directly on an exterior wall, roof, fascia, parapet
or chimney of a building or on a fence are prohibited.
         2.   Any sign painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to any tree, rock,
utility pole, hydrant, bridge, sidewalk, curb or street, bench or trash
receptacle shall be prohibited. Logos and labels located on mechanical
equipment, recycling bins, trash containers or dumpsters, which are part of the
equipment as manufactured and/or installed, shall not be considered illegally
affixed signs.
      I.   Portable Signs
         Portable signs are prohibited, except for portable municipal signs and
governmental traffic control signs.
      J.   Roof Signs
         Roof signs are prohibited.
      K.   Signs on Vehicles
         Signs placed or painted on parked vehicles where the primary purpose
is to advertise a product or service, or to direct the public to a business or
activity located on or off the premises are prohibited. Signs displayed on
trucks, buses or other vehicles, which are being operated and stored in the
normal course of a business, such as signs indicating the owner or business
that are located on delivery trucks, moving vans and rental trucks, are
permitted, provided that the primary purpose of such vehicles is not the
display of signs and that they are parked or stored in areas appropriate to
their use as vehicles. Temporary or permanent signs resting on, or attached to,
vehicles or trailers used as a means to circumvent the provisions of this
Section are prohibited.
      L.   Signs that Interfere with Traffic
         No sign or other advertising structure, as regulated in this Section,
shall:
         1.   Obstruct free and clear vision at any street, intersection,
parking lot entrance or exit, or driveway.
         2.   Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal or device because of its position, shape or
color.
         3.   Make use of the words STOP, LOOK, DETOUR, DANGER or any other
word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that misleads, interferes with,
or confuses traffic.
         4.   No sign in direct line of vision of a traffic signal shall be
illuminated in red, green or amber color, so as to resemble a traffic signal.
      M.   Strobe Lights, Spotlights and Floodlights
         Strobe lights, spotlights and floodlights used to advertise a business
or event are prohibited.
      N.   Unsafe Signs
         No sign or other advertising structure shall constitute a hazard to
safety or health by reason of inadequate design, construction, repair or
maintenance.
15.8.   TEMPORARY SIGNS
      Temporary signs are permitted in accordance with the provisions of this
Section except that, where other sections of this Ordinance regulate such
signs, the more restrictive regulation shall apply.
      A.   General Regulations for all Temporary Signs
         1.   Any sign listed in
Section 15.7 (Prohibited Signs) is prohibited.
         2.   Temporary signs must be related to goods and/or services sold on
the premises, except for non-commercial or political messages. Temporary off-
premises signs are prohibited.
         3.   No temporary sign may be illuminated.
         4.   All temporary signs must remain in good condition during the
display period. Throughout the display period, corrective action must be taken
immediately should there be any problems with the appearance, condition or
maintenance of the sign and/or support hardware.
         5.   No temporary sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in
sign area.
         6.   No more than one (1) temporary sign shall be permitted on a
zoning lot.
      B.   Temporary Signs Exempt from Sign Permit
         The following temporary signs are exempt from sign permit
requirements, however they must comply with all requirements of this Section
and this Ordinance.
         1.   A-Frame Signs
            A-frame signs are exempt from sign permit requirements subject to
the following:
            a.   A-frame signs are permitted only within the C-1, C-2 and C-
4 Districts.
            b.   A-frame signs are limited to six (6) square feet in area and
four (4) feet in height.
            c.   The use of A-frame signs is limited to business hours only.
Signs must be stored indoors at all other times. A-frame signs must not be used
outdoors when high winds or heavy snow conditions exist.
            d.   Only one (1) A-frame sign is permitted per business. A minimum
twenty (20) foot separation is required between all A-frame signs.
            e.   An A-frame sign must be placed within fifteen (15) feet of the
primary entrance of the business, and must not interfere with pedestrian
traffic or violate standards of accessibility as required by the ADA or other
accessibility codes. A-frame signs may be placed in the public right-of-way but
must maintain a five (5) foot sidewalk clearance at all times.
         2.   Banners (Temporary)
            Temporary banners are exempt from sign permit requirements subject
to the following:
            a.   Temporary banners are permitted for any non-residential use.
            b.   Temporary banners are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet
in area.
            c.   Only one (1) banner is permitted per zoning lot.
            d.   No temporary banner may be located higher than the roofline of
the building to which it is attached or, if attached to a permanent sign,
higher than the sign. There must be no encroachment into the public right-of-
way.
            e.   Temporary banners are limited to a display of fourteen (14)
days when not related to a date specific or, if date specific, may be erected
no earlier than five (5) days prior to the event plus the duration of the event
and must be removed within two (2) days after the event. Temporary banners may
be erected on a zoning lot no more than four (4) times in a year. (Amended 01/
18/2011: CO-2011-01)
         3.   Construction Signs
            Construction signs identifying the architect, engineer, developer
and/or contractor when placed upon a construction site shall be exempt from
sign permit requirements, subject to the following:
            a.   Such signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet in area
and eight (8) feet in height.
            b.   Such signs shall not be erected prior to approval of a site
plan and shall be removed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit.
            c.   Construction signs shall be limited to one (1) sign per
premises.
         4.   Garage or Yard Sale Signs
            Temporary residential garage or yard sale signs shall be exempt
from sign permit requirements, but must conform to the requirements set forth
in Section
121.07 of the Village Code.
         5.   Political, Campaign and Election Signs
            Political, campaign and election signs shall be exempt from sign
permit requirements subject to the following:
            a.   A maximum of two (2) campaign or election signs for each
candidate or election issue may be placed on any zoning lot or lot of record.
            b.   The maximum permitted size of a political, campaign or
election signs in residential zoning districts shall be four (4) feet by four
(4) feet. The maximum permitted size of political, campaign and election signs
in non-residential zoning districts shall be four (4) feet by eight (8) feet.
            c.   No political, campaign or election sign shall extend over or
into any street, alley, sidewalk or other public right-of-way, or be located in
or on any public property, or right-of-way, and shall not be placed or project
over any wall opening.
            d.   Political, campaign or election signs are to be posted on
private property only, and only with the permission of the property owner.
            e.   Even where the above number, size and location limitations are
met, the number, size and/or location of political, campaign and election signs
displayed may not create a safety hazard to traffic by distracting motorists,
interfering with safe pedestrian flow, or obstructing the view of motorists or
pedestrians. In such cases, the Chief of Police or Zoning Administrator is
authorized to require that the number or size of signs be reasonably reduced or
the signs relocated.
            f.   Political, campaign and election signs that become torn,
tattered, faded, or otherwise unfit for public display due to weather or other
wear and tear constitute a nuisance and must be removed or replaced by the
person or organization responsible for the erection or distribution or any such
signs, or the owner, or his agent, of the property upon which the signs may be
located. Nuisance signs not removed or replaced within two (2) days of
notification by the Village of such nuisance condition may result in a citation
and/or abatement as any other nuisance under the Village Code. Signs that
present a safety risk to the public due to their condition or location shall be
immediately removed, repaired or relocated by the property owner or occupant
upon notice from the Village or the signs may be removed by the Village after
attempting to notify the property owner or occupant in person. (Amended 03/13/
2013: CO-2013-14) (Amended 04/16/2013: CO-2013-27)
            g.   Each campaign, political organization or individual candidate
desiring to erect campaign and election signs on property within the Village
must post a refundable bond of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) prior to
such erection. The bond amount will cover costs incurred by Village staff in
removing illegally erected signs during the pendency of the campaign and in
removing signs following the election if such signs become nuisance signs and
are not removed by the campaign or political organization itself as required
herein upon notice. The Village may remove and destroy the signs of any
candidate whose campaign has failed to post the required bond or signs that are
placed in violation of this Ordinance. (Amended 03/13/2013: CO-2013-14; Amended
04/16/2013: CO-2013-27)
         6.   Real Estate Signs
            Real estate signs shall be exempt from sign permit requirements,
subject to the following:
            a.   Real estate signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area
and five (5) feet in height shall only advertise the sale, rental, lease or
management of the premises upon which said signs are located. One (1) such sign
is permitted per street frontage.
            b.   Real estate signs must be located ten (10) feet from any side
lot line.
            c.   Real estate signs shall be removed within forty-eight (48)
hours of sale or lease.
         7.   Window Signs (Temporary)
            a.   Temporary signs affixed to the inside of a window advertising
goods or services sold on the premises shall be exempt from sign permit
requirements, provided that the total of all window signs, whether temporary or
permanent, shall occupy no more than fifty percent (50%) of the total window
area. Temporary window signs are permitted for all non-residential uses. See
Section 15.4 for calculation of window sign area.
            b.   No handwritten signs, unless professionally created, may be
used as a temporary window sign.
      C.   Temporary Signs Requiring Sign Permit
         The following temporary signs require a sign permit:
         1.   Attention-Getting Devices
            a.   Attention-getting devices require a sign permit and a
refundable bond of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per attention-getting device
prior to installation.
            b.   Attention-getting devices are permitted for non-residential
uses in a commercial district.
            c.   No inflatable promotional device shall exceed fifteen (15)
feet in height, or the height of the principal building to which it relates,
whichever is lower. No inflatable promotional device shall be mounted on a roof
of a structure.
            d.   Attention-getting devices may not be erected or maintained
more than thirty (30) days prior to the date on which the event or activity
advertised is to occur or be conducted and shall be removed within three (3)
days after the end of the event. Attention-getting devices may be erected on a
zoning lot no more than four (4) times in a year.
            e.   Attention-getting devices shall not be erected or maintained
in such a location or manner as may endanger the public safety or interfere
with or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular travel or create a traffic safety
problem.
            f.   Attention-getting devices shall not be erected or maintained
within any public right-of-way except pursuant to a permit authorized by the
Village Board.
            g.   The Zoning Administrator may impose, as a condition of the
issuance of a sign permit, such requirements as to the material, manner of
construction, and method of erection of a sign as are reasonably necessary to
assure the safety and convenience of the public.
         2.   Temporary Pole Signs
            a.   Temporary pole signs are permitted for any non-residential
use.
            b.   Temporary pole signs are limited to thirty-two (32) square
feet in area and six (6) feet in height.
            c.   All temporary pole signs must be set back ten (10) feet from
any property line.
            d.   Temporary pole signs are limited to a display of thirty (30)
days and must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the expiration of
the permit. Temporary pole signs may be erected on a zoning lot no more than
four (4) times in a year.
         3.   Temporary Wall Signs
            a.   Temporary wall signs are permitted for any non-residential
use.
            b.   Temporary wall signs are limited to thirty-two (32) square
feet in area.
            c.   Every temporary sign attached to a wall shall be attached with
wire or steel cables or other approved supports as provided by Village Code.
            d.   No temporary wall sign may be located higher than roofline of
the building to which it is attached. There must be no encroachment into the
public right-of-way. No temporary wall sign may cover windows, doors or
architectural features.
            e.   Temporary wall signs are limited to a display of thirty (30)
days and must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the expiration of
the permit. Temporary wall signs may be erected on a zoning lot no more than
four (4) times in a year.
15.9.   EXEMPT PERMANENT SIGNS
      The following permanent signs, and sign alteration and maintenance
activities are exempt from the sign permit requirements of this Section.
      A.   Alteration and Maintenance Operations
         The following activities shall be exempt from sign permit
requirements:
         1.   Changing of the advertising copy or message on an existing
changeable copy sign or similar approved sign, whether illuminated or non-
illuminated.
         2.   Painting, repainting, cleaning, changing permitted items of
information, or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign, not involving
structural changes or changes in the electrical components of the sign.
      B.   Flags
         Flags of any government or governmental agency, or any patriotic,
religious, charitable, civic, educational or fraternal organization shall be
exempt from sign permit requirements. There shall be no more than three (3)
flagpoles per zoning lot.
      C.   House Number Signs
         House number signs shall be exempt from sign permit requirements.
House number signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet.
      D.   Memorial Plaques
         Memorial or commemorative plaques or tablets denoting a building name
and/or date of erection, or a location of historic significance, and not
exceeding four (4) square feet in area shall be exempt from sign permit
requirements. Memorial signs shall be cut into any masonry surface or
constructed of bronze or other incombustible materials.
      E.   Miscellaneous Information Matter
         Matter appearing on gasoline pumps, newspaper vending boxes and other
vending machines, automatic teller machines, or matter appearing on or adjacent
to entry doors such as PUSH, PULL, OPEN and/or CLOSED, or matter appearing on
display windows or doors denoting hours of operation, credit cards accepted,
and similar information shall be exempt from sign permit requirements. Service
station rate signs and the changing of copy of such signs, including the names
of grades of fuel and prices and conditions relating to prices such as full or
self-service shall be permitted without a permit.
      F.   Municipal Signs
         Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices, railroad crossing
signs, signs regulating vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or designating or
giving direction to streets, schools, historic sites or public buildings, and
such temporary emergency or non-advertising signs shall be exempt from sign
permit requirements, but are subject to approval by the Village Board.
      G.   Nameplate and Occupational Signs
         Nameplate and occupational signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in
area denoting only the name and profession of an occupant in any commercial
building shall be exempt from sign permit requirements.
      H.   Neon Window Signs
         Neon window signs shall be exempt from sign permit requirements
subject to the following:
         1.   Neon window signs must be located entirely inside the window. No
exterior neon signs are permitted.
         2.   Series lighting or neon tubing used to accentuate or trim
windows, architectural features, or to outline borders of signs or buildings,
is specifically prohibited.
         3.   Neon window signs shall be included in the calculation of total
window sign area, which may not exceed fifty percent (50%) of total window
area. See
Section 15.4 for calculation of window sign area.
         4.   Neon window signs are permitted in the commercial and
manufacturing districts only.
      I.   Parking Lot Signs
         Parking lot signs, such as “No Parking” or “Unauthorized Users Shall
Be Towed,” are permitted but may not exceed six (6) square feet and must be
oriented to the parking area.
      J.   Residential Development Signs
         Residential development signs shall be exempt from sign permit
requirements and shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet. No more than two
(2) signs per development shall be erected.
      K.   Warning Signs
         Warning signs, such as “Beware of Dog,” “No Trespassing” or “No
Dumping,” not exceeding two (2) square feet per sign shall be exempt from sign
permit requirements.
15.10.   PERMANENT SIGN STANDARDS
      A.   Awnings and Canopies
         Awnings and canopies that are considered an architectural feature of a
structure and are not used for identifying the premises or the goods and/or
services sold are not considered a sign. Awnings and canopies used as signs are
subject to the following regulations:
         1.   The manner of construction and materials used for all awnings and
canopies shall meet the requirements of this Section and other applicable
Village Code requirements.
         2.   Awning and canopy signs are permitted for multi-family
residential and non-residential uses in any district.
         3.   All awning or canopy signs must maintain a minimum clearance of
eight (8) feet. Awnings and canopies must not extend beyond a point two (2)
feet from the curb line.
         4.   Only the name and nature of the business conducted on the
premises shall be printed on any awning or canopy. Printing on any awning or
canopy sign is limited to ten (10) inches in height.
         5.   Awning and canopy signs shall be constructed out of canvas or
canvas-like material. Back-lit and metal awnings and canopies are prohibited.
         6.   Awning and canopy signs must be securely attached to and
supported by a building. All frames and supports must be made of metal or
similar rigid material. Frames and supports may not be made of wood or
plastics.
         7.   All frames and supports for awnings and canopies shall be
designed so as not to obstruct pedestrian traffic.
         8.   Under-awning signs are permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-
4 Districts subject to the following:
            a.   Under-awning signs must be attached to the underside of an
awning. Under-awning signs must not project beyond the awning.
            b.   Under-awning signs must maintain a minimum clearance of seven
(7) feet.
            c.   A maximum of one (1) under-awning sign per business
establishment with frontage on the street where the awning is mounted is
permitted.
            d.   Under-awning signs may not exceed three (3) square feet.
            e.   Under-awning signs must be securely fixed to the awning with
metal supports.
         9.   All awnings or canopies shall comply with the following design
standards:
            a.   Awnings and canopies shall be compatible in material and
construction to the style and character of the building. The color of the
awning or canopy shall be compatible with the overall color scheme of the
façade.
            b.   When feasible, awnings shall be generally aligned with others
nearby in order to maintain a sense of visual continuity.
            c.   Awnings and canopies shall fit the opening of the building and
positioned so that distinctive architectural features remain visible.
      B.   Billboards
         Billboards are regulated by
Chapter 153 of the Village Code.
      C.   Directional Signs and Menu Board Signs
         1.   Directional Signs
            a.   Such signs shall only identify the use and directional words
such as ENTRANCE or EXIT. Directional signs shall be located entirely on the
property to which they pertain and shall identify parking lot entrances,
restrooms, walkways, exits and features of a similar nature.
            b.   One (1) directional sign is permitted for each driveway access
from a public street. One (1) additional directional sign is permitted for each
intersection of driveways within a site, to identify traffic routing, entrances
and services, such as drive-in lanes.
            c.   Directional signs must be located at least three (3) feet from
any lot line.
            d.   Directional signs are limited to a maximum height of five (5)
feet and a maximum surface area of six (6) square feet. Directional signs shall
not project beyond the property line. Directional signs may be internally
illuminated.
         2.   Menu Board Signs
            Drive-through establishments are permitted a menu board sign for
each drive-through lane. Each menu board sign shall be constructed as monument
sign, no more than forty (40) square feet in sign area, no more than six (6)
feet in height and no less than fifteen (15) feet from any lot line. Menu
boards may be internally illuminated.
      D.   Electronic Message Displays
         1.   Electronic message displays are permitted uses in the OS, I and
GL Districts for governmental, educational and cultural uses and as a special
use in the C-3 District for commercial users. (Amended 10/18/2011: CO-2011-17)
         2.   There shall be only one (1) electronic message display per zoning
lot.
         3.   Each message displayed on an electronic message display must be
static or depicted for a minimum of six (6) seconds. The continuous scrolling
of messages is prohibited.
         4.   No illumination from an electronic message display shall glare
into any residential premises. In addition, no illumination from such sign
shall interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public
thoroughfares.
         5.   Electronic message displays shall be permitted as pole or
monument signs or wall signs, and shall be subject to the requirements of this
Section for those sign types.
         6.   No electronic message display sign shall exceed ten (10) square
feet.
         7.   Electronic message displays must be integrated into a pole or
monument sign or wall sign, but in no case shall the combined sign area of such
pole or monument sign or wall sign and electronic message display exceed the
permitted maximum sign area for such pole or monument sign or wall sign.
         8.   The addition of an electronic message display to any
nonconforming sign is prohibited.
         9.   Electronic message displays shall not display any off-premises
advertising.
         10.   Electronic display screens are prohibited.
      E.   Pole Signs
         Pole signs are permitted in the C-3, C-4, M-1, BIP, OS and I
Districts. It shall be unlawful to construct, erect, locate or maintain any
pole sign for which a permit is required unless the following requirements are
met.
         1.   The manner of construction and the materials used shall meet the
requirements of this Section and other applicable Village Code requirements.
         2.   There shall be no more than one (1) pole sign in front of a
building or buildings which share a common wall. Where a business has frontage
on more than one (1) street, one (1) pole sign shall be permitted on each
street frontage.
         3.   All pole signs shall be securely built, constructed and erected
upon posts and standards which are sunk below the natural surface in a manner
that will prevent the sign from overturning.
         4.   No pole sign shall exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
         5.   No pole sign shall be erected within a distance in all directions
equal to ten (10) feet greater than the sign’s height from any utility lines,
conductors or service drops.
         6.   No part of a pole sign shall project into, over or otherwise
encroach on a public right-of-way.
         7.   Pole signs shall be limited to forty (40) square feet in sign
area.
      F.   Marquees
         Marquees may be permitted in the C-4 District, if a special use permit
is granted in accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.4 (Special Use). It shall be unlawful to construct, erect or maintain
any marquees unless the following requirements are met:
         1.   The manner of construction and materials used for all marquees
shall meet the requirements of this Section and other applicable Village Code
requirements.
            a.   Marquees shall be supported solely by the building to which
they are attached. No exterior columns or posts shall be permitted as supports.
            b.   Every marquee, including the anchors, bolts, supports, rods
and braces, shall be built securely, and shall be designed by a structural
engineer or registered architect, and shall be approved by the Building
Department as being in compliance with the Building Code and the Electrical
Code of the Village.
            c.   No marquee shall be erected on any building or other structure
of wood frame construction.
         2.   The roof of a marquee shall not be used for any purpose other
than to form and constitute a roof and shall be constructed of noncombustible
material. The roof of any marquee shall be designed and constructed to support
a live load of not less than one hundred (100) pounds per square foot.
         3.   Water from the roofs of marquees shall not drain, drip or flow
onto the surface of a public right-of-way. Sufficient downspouts, drains and
gutters shall be installed as part of each marquee to prevent water from the
roof of the marquee from flowing onto the surface of a public right-of-way.
         4.   Marquees shall be the width of the building entrance with an
additional five (5) feet on each side of the entrance permitted. No marquee
shall extend beyond the curb line.
         5.   No portion of a marquee shall be less than eight (8) feet above
the level of the sidewalk or other public thoroughfare.
         6.   No temporary sign shall be attached to or hung from a marquee. No
advertising material shall be placed upon the roof of any marquee.
      G.   Monument Signs
         1.   Monument signs are permitted in the non-residential districts and
for non-residential uses in residential districts.
         2.   One (1) monument sign is permitted per street frontage of a
zoning lot.
         3.   Monument signs shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. Monument
signs shall be limited to a maximum sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet.
         4.   No monument sign shall encroach into the public right-of-way.
         5.   The ground area directly surrounding the base of a monument sign
must consist of five (5) square feet of landscaped area around the sign base,
unless the monument sign has a decorative base.
         6.   The address of the property shall be clearly visible on the face
of the monument sign.
      H.   Projecting Sign
         1.   The manner of construction and materials used for all projecting
signs shall meet the requirements of this Section and other applicable Village
Code requirements.
         2.   Projecting signs are permitted in C-2 District.
         3.   The maximum area of a projecting sign is twenty-four (24) square
feet.
         4.   One (1) projecting sign per ground floor establishment with
frontage on a public street is permitted.
         5.   Projecting signs shall not project more than three (3) feet from
the face of the building to which they are attached, including the area between
the sign and the face of the building.
         6.   The bottom of any projecting sign must be at least eight (8) feet
above the sidewalk or thoroughfare. No projecting sign affixed to a building
may project higher than the building height, including the sign support
structure.
         7.   Projecting signs, including frames, braces, and supports must be
designed by a licensed structural engineer or manufacturer. No projecting sign
may be secured with wire, chains, strips of wood or nails nor may any
projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign. Any movable part of a
projecting sign, such as the cover of a service opening, must be securely
fastened by chains or hinges.
      I.   Wall Sign
         1.   Wall signs are permitted in any nonresidential district and for
non-residential uses in the residential districts.
         2.   The permitted sign area for a wall sign shall be as follows:
            a.   For an interior lot, the maximum size of a wall sign shall be
established at one (1) square foot per linear foot of zoning lot frontage as
measured along the front lot line, with a minimum of twenty-five (25) square
feet permitted. No wall sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
            b.   For a corner lot, the maximum size of a wall sign located on
each building wall shall be established at one (1) square foot per linear foot
of zoning lot frontage as measured along the front or corner side lot line of
that building wall, with a minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet permitted
for each sign. The size of a wall sign on each side of the building shall be
limited to the square footage calculated on that side only. In no case shall
the square footage permitted for the building wall located along the front lot
line and the square footage permitted for the building wall located along the
corner side lot line be combined to create a larger sign on a wall other than
that permitted on each individual wall. No wall sign shall exceed one hundred
(100) square feet.
            c.   In a multi-tenant structure, each tenant shall be permitted a
wall sign of one (1) square foot per linear foot of business frontage, with a
minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet permitted for a wall sign for each
tenant. In no case, shall the total amount of wall signs on the structure
exceed one (1) square foot per linear foot of business frontage or the sum
total of twenty-five (25) square feet per tenant, whichever is greater. If a
multi-tenant structure is located on a corner lot, the maximum size of the wall
sign located on the wall along the corner lot line shall be limited to one (1)
square foot per linear foot of zoning lot frontage as measured along the front
lot line, with a minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet permitted. No wall
sign shall exceed one hundred (100) square feet.
         3.   Wall signs must be safely and securely attached to the building
wall at no less than eight (8) feet above the ground. Wall signs must be
affixed flat against the building wall and must not project more than twelve
(12) inches from the building wall.
         4.   No wall sign shall cover, wholly or partially, any wall opening.
         5.   No wall sign affixed to a building, including sign support
structure, may project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is
attached. On existing buildings, a parapet wall must not be constructed for the
sole purpose of increasing the allowable height of a wall sign. For new
buildings, when a sign is to be mounted on a parapet wall, that parapet wall
must be consistent with the architectural design of the building, including
building materials. Wall signs may not be attached to un-reinforced masonry
parapets. Wall signs shall not cover windows, doors or architectural features.
         6.   Wall signs shall be constructed of wood or metal. Wall signs
shall not be painted on the exterior wall.
      J.   Window Sign (Permanent)
         1.   Window signs are permitted for all non-residential uses.
         2.   All window signs, whether temporary, permanent or neon window
signs, shall occupy no more than fifty percent (50%) of the surface of each
window area. Window area is counted as a continuous surface until divided by an
architectural or structural element. Mullions are not considered an element
that divides window area.
         3.   No handwritten signs, unless professionally created, may be used
as a permanent window sign.
15.11.   NONCONFORMING SIGNS
      See
Section 16 (Nonconformities) for the provisions of
Section 16.6 (Nonconforming Signs).
SECTION 16. NONCONFORMITIES
16.1.   Purpose
16.2.   General standards of applicability
16.3.   Nonconforming use
16.4.   Nonconforming structures
16.5.   Nonconforming lots of record
16.6.   Nonconforming signs
16.1.   PURPOSE
      The purpose of this Section is to provide for the regulation of
nonconforming structures, lots and uses, and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which nonconforming structures and uses shall be eliminated.
16.2.   GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY
      A.   Authority to Continue
         Any structure, lot or use that existed as a lawful nonconformity at
the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, and any building, structure, lot or
use that has been made nonconforming because of the terms of this Ordinance or
its subsequent amendments, may continue subject to the provisions of this
Section so long as it remains otherwise lawful. A structure or use that is
illegal at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance, remains illegal if it
does not conform with each and every requirement of this Ordinance.
      B.   Burden on Property Owner to Establish Legality
         In all cases, the burden of establishing the legality of a
nonconformity under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be upon the property
owner of the nonconforming structure, use or lot.
      C.   Safety Regulations
         All police power regulations enacted to promote public health, safety,
convenience, comfort and general welfare including, but not limited to, all
building, fire and health codes shall apply to nonconforming structures.
16.3.   NONCONFORMING USE
      A.   Definition of Nonconforming Use
         A nonconforming use is the use of land or a structure that, as of the
effective date of this Ordinance, are used for purposes that are not allowed in
the zoning district in which they are located.
      B.   Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance
         Normal maintenance and incidental repair may be performed on any
structure that is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming use, provided
it will not create any new nonconformity, increase the degree of nonconformity
or increase the bulk of the structure in any manner.
      C.   Structural Alterations
         No structural alterations shall be performed on any structure devoted
to a nonconforming use, except in the following situations:
         1.   When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore
the structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official charged with
protecting the public safety.
         2.   When the alteration is for the purpose of bringing about a
conforming use.
         3.   When the alteration will not create any new nonconformity,
increase the degree of any existing nonconformity or increase the bulk of the
structure in any manner.
         4.   When the alteration is for the purpose of improving livability of
a residential dwelling unit, provided that there is no increases in the number
of dwelling units or the bulk of the building.
      D.   Expansion of Use
         A nonconforming use of land or a structure shall not be expanded,
extended, enlarged or increased in intensity. Such prohibited activity shall
include, without limitation:
         1.   Expansion of any structure devoted entirely to a nonconforming
use.
         2.   An expansion, extension or relocation of a use or its accessory
uses to any land area or structure not currently occupied by such nonconforming
use.
         3.   An expansion, extension or relocation of such use, including its
accessory uses, within a structure, to any portion of the floor area that was
not occupied by such nonconforming use.
         4.   An expansion or extension into any required yards or open space.
         5.   An increase in the number of dwelling units in a nonconforming
residential use.
      E.   Relocation
         A nonconforming use of land or a structure shall not be relocated, in
whole or in part, to any other location on the same lot or parcel. The
nonconforming use may only be relocated to another lot or parcel if the use
conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is relocated,
including all use regulations.
      F.   Change of Use
         A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use other than one
allowed within the zoning district in which it is located. When such a
nonconforming use has been changed, in whole or in part, to an allowed use, the
whole or part which has been made to conform may not be changed back to a use
that is prohibited. A change of use shall be deemed to occur when an existing
nonconforming use has been terminated and another use has commenced. Any change
in use in violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed an abandonment of the
previously existing lawful nonconforming use.
      G.   Discontinuation or Abandonment (Amended 01/21/2014: CO-2014-02;
Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
         If a nonconforming use is discontinued, or the structure that it
occupies becomes vacant and/or remains unoccupied by the occupants who operated
the nonconforming use for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days
for nonconforming non-residential uses and three hundred sixty-five (365) days
for residential uses, such use at the location shall be deemed to be abandoned
and shall not be reestablished or resumed regardless of the intent to resume or
to continue the use. When determining abandonment of a residential use in the
residential zoning districts, the Zoning Administrator shall take into
consideration factors such as active rental/leasing and sales efforts, active
maintenance of the structure, continued utility services, rehabilitation
activities, continued weatherproofing of the structure, and similar efforts in
determining whether the structure is in active use and therefore would not be
considered abandoned. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such land or structure
shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which such land or
structure is located. The period of such discontinuance caused by government
action or Acts of God shall not be included in calculating the length of
discontinuance for this section.
      H.   Damage or Destruction
         1.   In the event that any structure and/or property that is devoted
in whole or in part to a nonconforming non-residential use, is damaged or
destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement value
at that time, then the nonconforming non-residential use cannot be continued
unless the structure conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located.
         2.   In the event that any structure and/or property that is devoted
in whole or in part to a nonconforming non-residential use is damaged or
destroyed to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement
value at that time, the structure and/or property may be repaired,
reconstructed or restored and the nonconforming non-residential use continued,
provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree
of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit must be obtained for such
rebuilding, restoration, repair or reconstruction within one (1) year of the
date of damage or destruction, and construction shall be completed within one
(1) year of issuance of the building permit.
         3.   The replacement value of the structure and/or property, exclusive
of foundation, which is devoted in whole or in part to a nonconforming non-
residential use, shall be based on: 1) the sale of that structure and/or
property within the previous year or, if that is not applicable; 2) an
appraisal within the last two (2) years or, if that is not available; 3) the
amount for which structure and/or property was insured prior to the date of
damage or destruction or, if that is not available; 4) an alternative method
determined acceptable by the Village.
         4.   In the event that the permit is not obtained within one (1) year
from the date of damage or destruction, or that repairs or restoration are not
completed within one (1) year of the issuance of the building permit, then the
nonconforming non-residential use shall not be continued.
16.4.   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
      A.   Definition of Nonconforming Structure
         Structures which at one time conformed to applicable zoning
regulations, but because of subsequent amendments to the Ordinance no longer
conform to applicable setback, height, lot coverage or other dimensional or
bulk provisions or do not meet other on-site development standards, such as an
insufficient number of parking spaces, of this Ordinance, are considered
nonconforming structures.
      B.   Ordinary Repairs and Maintenance
         Normal maintenance and incidental repair may be performed on any
nonconforming structure. No repairs or reconstruction shall be made that would
create any new nonconformity, increase the degree of any previously existing
nonconformity, or increase the bulk of the structure in any manner.
      C.   Structural Alterations
         No structural alterations shall be performed on any nonconforming
structure, except in the following situations:
         1.   When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore
the structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official charged with
protecting the public safety.
         2.   When the alteration will result in eliminating the nonconformity.
         3.   When the alteration will not create any new nonconformity or
increase the degree of any existing nonconformity.
      D.   Additions and Enlargements
         A structure that is nonconforming with respect to its bulk shall not
be added to or enlarged.
      E.   Relocation
         A nonconforming structure shall not be relocated, in whole or in part,
to any other location on the same zoning lot or parcel. A nonconforming
structure may be relocated to another zoning lot or parcel if the structure
conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in which it is relocated.
      F.   Damage or Destruction
         1.   In the event that any nonconforming structure is structurally
damaged or destroyed, the structure, as restored or repaired, shall comply with
all requirements of this Ordinance.
         2.   In the event that any nonconforming non-residential structure is
damaged or destroyed, by any means not within the control of the property owner
or tenant, to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement
value at that time, then the structure may not be restored or rebuilt unless
the structure, including foundation, is made to conform to all regulations of
the zoning district in which it is located. When any nonconforming residential
structure is damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more
of its replacement value at that time, it may be repaired and reconstructed
provided that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree
of nonconformity is not increased.
         3.   When any structure is damaged or destroyed, by any means not
within the control of the property owner or tenant, to the extent of less than
fifty percent (50%) of the replacement value at that time, or when any
residential nonconforming structure is damaged or destroyed to the extent of
fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement value at that time, it may be
repaired and reconstructed provided that no new nonconformities are created and
that the existing degree of nonconformity is not increased. A building permit
shall be obtained for such rebuilding, restoration, repair or reconstruction
within one (1) year of the date of damage or destruction, and the construction
shall be completed within one (1) year of issuance of the building permit.
         4.   The replacement value of the structure shall be based on: 1) the
sale of that structure within the previous year or, if that is not applicable;
2) an appraisal within the last two (2) years or, if that is not available; 3)
the amount for which the structure or property was insured prior to the date of
the damage or destruction or, if that is not available; 4) an alternative
method determined acceptable by the Village.
         5.   In the event that the building permit is not obtained within one
(1) year, or that repairs are not completed within one (1) year of the issuance
of the building permit, then the structure shall not be restored unless it
conforms to all regulations of the district in which it is located.
16.5.   NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD
      A.   Individual Lots of Record
         Any single nonconforming lot of record that does not meet the
requirements for minimum lot width and area shall be used for a permitted use
provided that yards are not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the minimum
required dimensions or areas.
      B.   Lots of Record in Residential Districts Owned by Related Parties
         1.   If two (2) or more contiguous lots of record are held in common
ownership or owned or controlled by related parties and one (1) or more of the
lots does not meet the requirements for lot area or lot width as established by
this Ordinance, then the lots of record shall be considered to be a single
undivided parcel for purposes of this Ordinance. Owners of such lots are
encouraged to apply to the Village for a plat of consolidation which may be
approved administratively under applicable provisions of the Village Code,
provided the lot created by said plat of consolidation meets or exceeds the
minimum lot area and width requirements for the applicable zoning district
classification and is otherwise in full compliance with applicable provisions
of this Ordinance.
         2.   No portion of the parcel shall be used, transferred or conveyed
which does not meet the lot width and lot area requirements established by this
Ordinance. No division of the parcel shall be made which leaves the remaining
lot(s) with lot width or lot area below the requirements of this Ordinance. No
building permit shall be issued for the use of any lot, or portion of a lot,
transferred or conveyed in violation of this Section.
16.6.   NONCONFORMING SIGNS
      A.   Signs and sign structures existing at the time of the enactment of
this Ordinance which do not conform to the provisions of this ordinance, but
that were constructed in compliance with previous regulations and ordinances
are nonconforming signs.
      B.   A nonconforming sign shall not be:
         1.   Changed to another nonconforming sign.
         2.   Expanded.
         3.   Re-established after its discontinuance for a period of thirty
(30) days.
         4.   Moved in whole or in part to another location unless said sign
and the use thereof is made to conform to the regulations of this Ordinance.
         5.   Re-established after damage or destruction in an amount exceeding
fifty percent (50%) of the estimated initial value of the sign as determined by
the Zoning Administrator.
      C.   Nonconforming signs are subject to the following amortization
provisions:
         1.   All nonconforming signs, including any and all billboards and
outdoor advertising structures must cease to exist in accordance with the
following:
            a.   Where the cost of a sign on the effective date of this
Ordinance is three thousand dollars ($3,000) or less, such sign shall cease to
exist three (3) years from the effective date of this Ordinance.
            b.   Where the cost of a sign at the time of the effective date of
this Ordinance is five thousand dollars ($5,000) or less, such sign shall cease
to exist five (5) years from the effective date of this Ordinance.
            c.   Where the cost of a sign at the time of the effective date of
this Ordinance is ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or less, such sign shall cease
to exist seven (7) years from the effective date of this Ordinance.
            d.   Where the cost of a sign at the time of the effective date of
this Ordinance is ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or more, such sign shall cease
to exist ten (10) years from the effective date of this Ordinance.
         2.   All references to cost in this subsection shall be to the actual
installation cost of the sign pursuant to documentation provided by the owner
or to current replacement cost of the sign, whichever is lower.
         3.   This subsection is not intended to preclude any right an owner of
a lawfully erected billboard or other off-premises outdoor advertising sign may
have to just compensation under Section 10-5-5 of the Eminent Domain Act (735
ILCS 30/10-5-5).
SECTION 17. DEFINITIONS
17.1.   Purpose
17.2.   Interpretation
17.3.   Rules of generic use definitions
17.4.   Generic use definitions
17.5.   General terms definitions
17.1.   PURPOSE
      This Section contains definitions for generic uses and general terms used
throughout the Ordinance.
17.2.   INTERPRETATION
      The language set forth in the text of this Ordinance shall be interpreted
in accordance with the following rules of construction:
      A.   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the
singular.
      B.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the
future tense includes the present.
      C.   The word “shall” is mandatory, while the word “may” is permissive.
      D.   Both of the terms “shall not” and “may not” are prohibiting.
      E.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
      F.   Whenever a defined word or term appears in the text of this
Ordinance, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition. Any
word appearing in parenthesis, between a word and its definition herein, shall
be construed in the same sense as that word. Words not defined shall be
interpreted in accordance with the definitions considered to be normal
dictionary usage.
      G.   If a definition contains a regulation and the use is inconsistent
with that regulation, the use is prohibited.
17.3.   RULES OF GENERIC USE DEFINITIONS
      A.   Certain terms in this Section are defined to be inclusive of many
uses in order to eliminate overly detailed lists of uses in the zoning
districts established by this Ordinance. These terms shall be referred to in
this Ordinance as “Generic Use Definitions.”
      B.   A use that is not specifically listed in a zoning district or does
not fall within a generic use definition as defined in this Section, or as
interpreted pursuant to
Section 4.10 (Zoning Interpretations), is prohibited.
17.4.   GENERIC USE DEFINITIONS
(Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22; Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
      Adult Use. “Adult Uses” shall include the following, as defined by this
Section and this Ordinance: adult bookstores, adult entertainment cabarets,
adult hotel/motel, adult motion picture theaters, adult novelty stores, massage
parlors, and other similar uses.
      A.   Adult Bookstore. An establishment having at least twenty-five
percent (25%) of its sales or display area devoted to books, magazines, films
for sale or for viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or by
coin-operated means, and periodicals which are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to “Specified
Anatomical Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas,” or an establishment
with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such materials, or
an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a purveyor of such
materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays, actual sales, presence
of video preview or coin-operated booths, exclusion of minors from the
establishment’s premises or any other factors showing the establishment’s
primary purpose is to purvey such material.
      B.   Adult Entertainment Cabaret. A public or private establishment which
features topless dancers, strippers, go-go dancers, male or female
impersonators, lingerie or bathing suit fashion shows, not infrequently
features entertainers who display “Specified Anatomical Areas” or features
entertainers who, by reason of their appearance or conduct, perform in a manner
which is designed primarily to appeal to the prurient interest of the patron or
features entertainers who engage in, or are engaged in, explicit simulation of
“Specified Sexual Activities.”
      C.   Adult Health Spa/Sauna. A health spa, sauna or massage parlor that
excludes minors by reason of age and/or provides steam baths, heat bathing,
massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar
treatment or manipulation of the human body, and is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified
Anatomical Areas,” as defined herein. This definition does not include health
clubs, health spas, salons or similar establishments that offer massage therapy
or other manipulation of the human body provided by a licensed massage
therapist.
      D.   Adult Hotel/Motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial
establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration that
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes or video cassette recorders, DVDs or DVD players,
slides, or other photographic reproductions for viewing or recording,
characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of “Specified
Sexual Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas” and/or rents, leases or lets
any room for less than a six (6) hour period, or rents, leases or lets any
single room more than twice in a twenty-four (24) hour period.
      E.   Adult Massage Parlor. An establishment providing massages, for hire,
by persons other than a licensed health care professional, that rub, stroke,
knead, or tap the body with the hand or an instrument, or both, for the
purposes of or engaging in sexual gratification or as related to “Specified
Sexual Activities.” This does not include any licensed or sanctioned athletic
or medical rehabilitation activity that generally employs or use the services
of a physical trainer. In addition, this does not include massage offered by a
licensed massage therapist within a health club, day spa or beauty services
establishment.
      F.   Adult Motion Picture Theater. A building or area used for presenting
materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to “Specified Sexual Activities” or “Specified
Anatomical Areas” for observation by patrons therein.
      G.   Adult Novelty Store. An establishment having a substantial or
significant portion of its sales or stock in trade consisting of toys, devices,
clothing novelties, lotions and other items distinguished or characterized by
their emphasis on or use for “Specialized Sexual Activities” or “Specified
Anatomical Areas,” or an establishment that holds itself out to the public as a
purveyor of such materials based upon its signage, advertising, displays,
actual sales, exclusion of minors from the establishment’s premises or any
other factors showing the establishment’s primary purpose is to purvey such
material.
      H.   Specified Sexual Activities. For the purpose of this Title,
“Specified Sexual Activities” means: 1) human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal; 2) acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; and 3) fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks or female breasts.
      I.   Specified Anatomical Areas. For the purposes of this Title,
“Specified Anatomical Areas” means: 1) less than completely and opaquely
covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts below a point
immediately above the top of the areola; and 2) human genitals in a discernable
turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
      Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishment. An adult-use cannabis craft
grower, cultivation center, dispensing organization, infuser organization,
processing organization or transporting organization, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act. (Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020- 22)
      Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower. A facility operated by an organization
or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
(Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
      Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to cultivate, process, transport and perform necessary activities
to provide cannabis and cannabis-infused products to licensed cannabis business
establishments, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act. (Amended 08/18/2020:
CO-2020- 22)
      Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act. (Amended 08/18/2020: CO-
2020-22)
      Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser. A facility operated
by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act. (Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
      Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor. A facility
operated by an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds
to produce cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate
into a product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act. (Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
      Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter. An
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business
establishment or a community college licensed under the Community College
Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act. (Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
      Animal Hospital. An establishment for the care and treatment of the
diseases and injuries of animals and where animals may be boarded during their
convalescence. An “Animal Hospital” shall not include “Kennel/Dog ‘Day Care’
Service.”
      Art Gallery. A commercial establishment engaged in the sale, loan and/or
display of paintings, sculpture, video art or other works. “Art Gallery” does
not include “Cultural Facility,” such as a library, museum or non-commercial
gallery that may also display paintings, sculpture, video art or other works.
      Artisan Manufacturing. Small-scale businesses that produce artisan goods
or specialty foods, primarily for direct sales to consumers, such as artisan
leather, glass, wood, paper, ceramic, textile and yarn products, specialty
foods and baked goods. This land use includes the design, processing,
fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of products; as well as the
incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products. (Amended 01/07/
2025: CO-2025-03)
      Assisted Living Facility. A facility that provides daily assistance and
long-term residence for disabled or elderly individuals, but not regular in-
patient medical care. This includes a combination of housing, supportive
services, personalized assistance and health care designed to respond to the
individual needs of those who need help with activities of daily living, such
as dressing, grooming, bathing, etc. An “Assisted Living Facility” shall not
include “Independent Living Facility,” “Community Residence” or “Nursing Home.”
      Bed and Breakfast Establishment. Single-family dwellings, occupied by an
owner or resident manager, which offer lodging on a temporary basis to paying
guests in a room(s) without cooking facilities, and may offer breakfast or
other meals to these guests. “Bed and Breakfast Establishment” is
differentiated from hotel/motel in that they typically were designed originally
as a single-family residence and are open to transient guests.
      Body Art Establishment. An establishment that offers tattooing services,
bod y piercing, and/or non-medical body modification. “Body Art Establishment”
does not include an establishment that offers only ear piercing as an ancillary
service. “Body Art Establishment” may offer microblading and permanent make-up
as an additional service but does not include those establishments which only
offer those services, which are considered a “Personal Care Establishment.”
(Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
      Brewery/Winery/Distillery. An establishment primarily engaged in brewing
fermented malt beverages including beer, ale, malt liquors, and nonalcoholic
beer (brewery), manufacturing and bottling wine on the premises (winery), or
manufacturing, by distillation, intoxicating spirits on the premises
(distillery) but not including on-premises consumption by patrons. (Amended 01/
07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      Brewpub. A combined restaurant-brewery that brews beer primarily for sale
in the restaurant and/or bar and is dispensed directly from the brewery's
storage tanks. Total production capacity shall not exceed one hundred fifty-
five thousand (155,000) gallons per calendar year. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-
2025-03)
      Cannabis Business Establishment. A cultivation center, craft grower,
processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing organization or
transporting organization. As used in this section, a cannabis business
establishment shall also include all medical cannabis cultivation centers and
dispensaries licensed under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program
Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.). (Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
      Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act. The Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
(410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.), as amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder. (Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
      Cemetery. Land used or dedicated to the burial of the dead, including
crematoriums, mausoleums, and necessary sales and maintenance facilities.
Mortuaries may be included when operated within the boundary of such cemetery.
      Car Wash. A commercial establishment engaged in the washing and cleaning
of passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles or other light duty equipment,
whether automatic or by hand, within an enclosed building.
      Commercial/Community Kitchen. A kitchen that has durable equipment
designed for the large-scale production of food to be sold or consumed off-
site. The term may include kitchens where small groups of people meet to cook
together or where groups of individuals pool resources to produce large
quantities of food. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      Commercial Services Establishment. An establishment or place of business
primarily engaged in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed commercial
services. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, animal grooming
establishments, shoe repair, laundromats, dry cleaners, and tailors.
“Commercial Services Establishment” shall not include any adult uses as defined
in
Section 17.5 (General Terms Definition) for “Adult Uses.” “Commercial Services
Establishment” shall not include “Personal Care Establishment.” (Amended 06/20/
2023: CO-2023-35)
      Community Residence. A group residence consisting of a group home or
specialized residential care home licensed, certified or accredited by the
appropriate state or federal agencies, and serving as a single housekeeping
unit for the housing of unrelated persons with functional disabilities who
share responsibilities, meals, recreation, social activities and other aspects
of residential living. “Community Residence” does not include a residence which
services persons as an alternative to incarceration for a criminal offense, or
persons whose primary reason for placement is substance or alcohol abuse, nor
does it include a nursing or medical facility.
      A.   Community Residence - Small: A community residence providing living
accommodations for no more than eight (8) residents, including live-in staff.
Visiting staff who do not reside within the community residence shall not be
counted for purposes of establishing the number of residents.
      B.   Community Residence - Large: A community residence providing living
accommodations for more than eight (8) residents, including live-in staff.
Visiting staff who do not reside within the community residence shall not be
counted for purposes of establishing the number of residents.
      Contractor Storage Yard. Any land or buildings used primarily for the
storage of equipment, vehicles, machinery, building materials, paints, pipe, or
electrical components used by the owner or occupant of the premises in the
conduct of any building trades or building craft, or storage of equipment,
vehicles and machinery used primarily by a business engaged in landscaping,
garbage and waste collection and recycling, demolition and excavation, or
construction activities.
      Coworking Space. A space in which workers employed at different
establishments engaged in office businesses as defined in this Ordinance work
together in a single shared space. Coworking spaces typically charge membership
dues and contain office equipment for shared use including computers, internet,
and printers. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      Cultural Facility. A use that is open to the public and provides cultural
services and facilities including, but not limited to, museums, cultural
centers, historical societies and libraries operated by a public, private or
non-profit organization.
      Currency Exchange. A commercial use that exchanges common currencies,
sells money orders, or cashier’s checks and cashes checks as its principal
business activity. “Currency Exchange” shall not include a “Financial
Institution.”
      Day Care Center, Adult. A facility, other than within a residential
dwelling unit, providing care for more than three (3) elderly and/or
functionally-impaired adults in a protective setting for less than twenty-four
(24) hours per day. An “Adult Day Care Center” does not include a program
operated by a “Place of Worship,” that provides care for elderly and/or
functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for less than twenty-four
(24) hours per day.
      Day Care Center, Child. A facility, other than within a residential
dwelling unit, providing care for more than three (3) children in a protective
setting for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. A “Child Day Care Center”
does not include a program operated by an “Educational Facility” (all types) or
“Place of Worship,” that provides care for children three (3) years of age or
older for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day.
      Day Care Home, Adult. A dwelling in which a permanent occupant of the
dwelling provides care in a protective setting for up to eight (8) elderly and/
or functionally impaired adults who do not spend the night at the dwelling.
      Day Care Home, Child. A dwelling in which a permanent occupant of the
dwelling provides care for up to eight (8), children from outside households.
The number counted includes the family’s natural or adopted children and all
other persons under the age of twelve (12). “Child Day Care Home” does not
include facilities that receive only children from a single household.
      Drive-Through Facility. Premises used to provide or dispense products or
services through an attendant, window or automated machine, to persons
remaining in motor vehicles in a designated stacking aisle. A “Drive-Through
Facility” may be in combination with other uses, such as a “Financial
Institution,” “Personal Services Establishment,” “Retail Goods Establishment”
or “Restaurant.” A “Car Wash,” “Gas Station” or “Motor Vehicle Service and
Repair (Major and Minor)” shall not be considered to maintain a “Drive-Through
Facility.”
      Driving Range. An area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls and
tees for practicing the striking of golf balls, which may include a snack-bar
and pro-shop. Miniature golf courses are considered “Outdoor Recreation” and
not a “Driving Range.”
      Dwelling, Above the Ground Floor. Dwelling units within multi-story
buildings located above non-residential uses on the ground floor or located
behind non-residential uses on the ground floor. In the case of dwelling units
located behind non-residential uses on the ground floor, non-residential uses
must be located along the street frontage.
      Dwelling, Multi-Family. A building containing three (3) or more
individual dwelling units with varying arrangements of party walls and
entrances where each dwelling unit has an individual entrance to a common
hallway or the outdoors. “Multi-Family Dwelling” shall not include “Townhouse
Dwelling.”
      Dwelling, Single-Family. A building containing one (1) individual
dwelling unit, which is located on an individual lot and is not attached to any
other dwelling unit.
      Dwelling, Townhouse. A structure consisting of no less than three (3)
dwelling units, with no other dwelling, or portion of other dwelling, directly
above or below, where each unit has a separate entrance and direct ground level
access to the outdoors. These units are connected to other dwelling units by a
single party wall with no opening. “Townhouse Dwelling” shall not include
“Multi-Family Dwelling.” “Townhouse Dwelling” refers to the design of a
building and does not reflect the type of ownership of the individual units.
      Dwelling, Two-Family. A building designed as a single structure,
containing two (2) separate living units, each of which is designed to be
occupied as a separate permanent residence for one (1) household. A “Two-Family
Dwelling” may include a common interior stairwell to both dwelling units but
each dwelling unit shall have an individual entrance.
      Educational Facility, College/University. A post-secondary institution
for higher learning that grants associate or bachelor degrees. The institution
may also have research facilities, and/or professional schools that grant
master and doctoral degrees. “Educational Facilities, College/University” also
includes post-secondary theological schools for training ministers, priests or
rabbis. “Educational Facilities, College/University” shall not include
“Educational Facilities, Vocational.”
      Educational Facility, Primary. A public, private or parochial school
offering instruction at the elementary and/or junior high school levels with a
full range of curricular programs. Places of worship with primary educational
facilities, as defined here, shall be classified as “Educational Facilities,
Primary.”
      Educational Facility, Secondary. A public, private or parochial school
offering instruction at the senior high school level with a full range of
curricular programs. “Educational Facilities, Primary/Secondary” also includes
secondary theological schools for training ministers, priests or rabbis. Places
of worship with secondary educational facilities, as defined here, shall be
classified as “Educational Facilities, Secondary.”
      Educational Facility, Vocational School or Training Academy. (Amended 11/
20/2014: CO-2014-41) A school established to provide for the training and
instruction of industrial, clerical, managerial, artistic, or other
occupational or job skills, and/or training academies focused primarily on the
instruction in dance, music, drama, gymnastics, martial arts, or other similar
pursuits. This definition applies to schools that are owned and operated
privately for-profit or operated as a not-for-profit, and that do not offer a
complete educational curriculum. "Educational Facilities, Vocational School or
Training Academy" shall not include "Educational Facilities, College/University
or Primary or Secondary Educational Facilities.
      Entertainment, Indoor. Predominantly spectator uses conducted within an
enclosed building including, but not limited to, movie theaters and sport or
game matches or exhibitions, which are run for-profit and typically charge an
entrance fee. An “Indoor Entertainment” includes accessory uses, such as snack
bars or refreshment stands, which are designed and intended primarily for the
use of patrons. “Indoor Entertainment” shall not include “Indoor Recreation” or
“Live Entertainment.” “Indoor Entertainment” is distinguished from “Indoor
Recreation” in that the predominant use is spectator-oriented and not
participatory.
      Entertainment, Outdoor. Predominantly spectator uses conducted outdoors
in open or only partially enclosed facilities, which are run for-profit and
typically charge an entrance fee. Typical uses include, but are not limited to,
stadiums, outdoor theaters, raceways, theme parks and amusement parks. “Outdoor
Entertainment” shall include accessory uses, such as snack bars or refreshment
stands that are designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons.
“Outdoor Entertainment” shall not include “Outdoor Recreation.”
      Financial Institution. A bank, savings and loan, credit union, mortgage
office, or automated teller machine (ATM).
      Food Hall. A collection of more than one (1) restaurant located together
within an enclosed building. The provision of seating within the food hall and
dining and consumption of the food products sold on-site is typically included.
(Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      Forest Preserve. Designated open space that preserves natural features
and protects wildlife and critical environmental features. A “Forest Preserve”
may include opportunities for passive recreation and environmental education.
      Funeral Home. A building used for the preparation of the deceased for
burial display of the deceased and rituals before burial or cremation. A
“Funeral Home” includes chapels located within the building used for the
display of the deceased and the conducting of rituals before burial or
cremation.
      Gas Station. A business where flammable or combustible liquids or gases
used as fuel for motor vehicles are stored and dispersed from fixed equipment
into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles.
      Golf Course. A tract of land laid out with at least nine (9) holes for
playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A
golf course may include a clubhouse, restrooms, pool and shelters as accessory
uses. A “Driving Range” may be included as part of a “Golf Course.”
      Government Facility. A building or structure owned, operated and/or
occupied by a governmental agency to provide a governmental service to the
public. “Government Facility” shall include public safety facilities and public
works facilities, but shall not include park district field houses or
recreation centers, which would be considered a “Park/Playground,” or school
buildings, which would be considered “Educational Facilities.”
      Greenhouse/Nursery. Retail business whose principal activity is the
selling of plants grown on the site and having outside storage, growing or
display.
      Group Assembly. A building, together with its accessory buildings and
uses, where persons regularly assemble for meetings or religious purposes and
related social events and which building, together with its accessory buildings
and uses, is maintained and controlled by a religious institution or a private
association that typically restricts access to the general public and owns,
leases or holds the building in common for the benefit of its members.
      Heavy Retail and Service Establishment. This use includes retail and/or
service (including rental) establishments that have regular outdoor service or
storage areas, or partially enclosed structures including, but not limited to,
large-scale home improvement centers, lumberyards, heavy equipment rental and
leasing, heavy equipment and truck repair and inspection, and playground
equipment sales and rental.
      Hospital. An institution providing health services primarily for
inpatient, or medical or surgical care for the sick or injured, and including
the related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient departments, training
facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices that are an integral
part of the facility.
      Hotel/Motel. An establishment providing, for a fee, sleeping
accommodations and customary lodging services, including maid service, the
furnishing and upkeep of furniture and bed linens, and telephone and desk
service, for transients on a short-term basis. Related ancillary uses may
include, but shall not be limited to, conference and meeting rooms,
restaurants, pools, and exercise facilities.
      Independent Living Facility. A residential complex containing dwellings
where the occupancy is limited to persons who are fifty-five (55) years of age
or older or, if two (2) persons occupy a unit, at least one (1) shall be fifty-
five (55) years or older. Such facilities may include common areas for meals
and socializing, offer minimal convenience services, but exclude institutional
care such as medical or nursing care. An “Independent Living Facility” shall
not include “Assisted Living Facility,” “Community Residence” or “Nursing
Home.”
      Kennel/Pet “Day Care” Service. An establishment where pet animals owned
by another person are temporarily boarded for pay or remuneration of any sort.
“Kennel/Pet ‘Day Care’ Service” shall include those facilities where pet
animals are boarded for the day. “Kennel” shall not apply to animal hospitals
operated by veterinarians duly licensed under the law where the boarding of
animals is accessory to medical treatment.
      Live Entertainment. A musical, theatrical, dance, cabaret or comedy act
performed live by one (1) or more persons.“Live Entertainment” shall not
include any adult uses as defined in
Section 17.5 (General Terms Definition) for “Adult Uses.” (Amended 06/20/2023:
CO-2023-35)
      Manufacturing, General. The manufacturing from previously prepared
materials of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication,
assembly, treatment, and packaging of such products, and incidental storage,
sales, and distribution of such products, provided all manufacturing activities
are contained entirely within a structure, and noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare,
and vibration resulting from the manufacturing activity are confined entirely
within a structure. Such uses may have an outdoor storage component. “General
Manufacturing” does not include junkyards and automobile wrecking
establishments.
      Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the applicable State of Illinois
agency designated to oversee said facility to perform necessary activities to
provide only registered medical cannabis dispensing organizations with usable
medical cannabis in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois. (Amended
07/26/2014: CO-2014-26; Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
      Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization. A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the applicable State of Illinois
agency designated to oversee said facility to acquire medical cannabis from a
registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis,
paraphernalia, or related supplies and educational materials to registered
qualifying patients in accordance with the laws of the State of Illinois.
(Amended 07/26/2014: CO-2014-26; Amended 08/18/2020: CO-2020-22)
      Medical/Dental Clinic. A facility operated by one (1) or more physicians,
dentists, chiropractors or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts for
the examination and treatment of persons solely on an outpatient basis.
“Medical Clinics” shall also include alternative medicine clinics, such as
acupuncture, and physical therapy offices. “Medical Clinics” do not include
“Methadone Clinics.”
      Methadone Clinic. A medical clinic established for the distribution of
methadone and/or similar or supplementary medications to patients addicted to
heroin and/or other opiates to eliminate or reduce opiate usage by maintaining
the patient on methadone. Some clinics may also offer drug counseling services.
However, a methadone clinic shall not have a residential care component.
      Microbrewery/Microwinery. A combination retail, wholesale, and/or small-
scale artisan manufacturing business that brews, ferments, processes, packages,
distributes, and serves either beer or wine for sale on- or off-site. A
microbrewery shall produce no more than one hundred fifty-five thousand
(155,000) gallons of beer per year for sale on the premises for either on-
premises or off-premises consumption. These facilities may include a tasting
room and retail component in which guests/customers may sample and purchase the
product. Off-site distribution of the beverages shall be consistent with state
law. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      Microdistillery. A small-scale artisan manufacturing business that
blends, ferments, processes, packages, distributes and serves alcoholic spirits
on and off the premises and produces no more than fifteen thousand (15,000)
gallons per calendar year on-site. The microdistillery facility may include a
tasting room and retail component in which guests/customers may sample and
purchase the product. Off-site distribution of the alcoholic beverages shall be
consistent with state law. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      Motor Vehicle Dealership. Any business establishment that sells or leases
new or used automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats
or motorcycles, or other similar motorized transportation vehicles. An
automobile dealership may maintain an inventory of the vehicles for sale or
lease either on-site or at a nearby location, and may provide on-site
facilities for the repair and service of the vehicles sold or leased by the
dealership.
      Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment. Rental of automobiles and light
trucks and vans, including incidental parking and servicing of rental vehicles.
      Motor Vehicle Service and Repair. Establishments involved in engine
rebuilding, major reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers,
towing and collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or
repair, and painting of motor vehicles, or minor repairs to motor vehicles,
including repair or replacement of cooling, electrical, fuel and exhaust
systems, brake adjustments, relining and repairs, wheel servicing, alignment
and balancing, repair and replacement of shock absorbers, and replacement or
adjustment of mufflers and tail pipes, hoses, belts, light bulbs, fuses,
windshield wipers/wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, and the like.
“Motor Vehicle Service and Repair” includes establishments where gasoline and/
or fuel oil, and oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories are
sold in addition to the repair facilities.
      Music Studio and Production. Work space for musicians and musical
producers and other professionals involved in the music industry. Such spaces
may include the use of space for the equipment used for the recording and
mixing of instrumental or vocal musical performances. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-
2025-03)
      Nursing Home. A facility providing bed care and inpatient services on a
twenty-four (24) hour per day basis for persons requiring regular medical
attention. This definition excludes a facility providing surgical or emergency
medical services, or a facility providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction,
mental disease or communicable disease. A “Nursing Home” shall not include
“Independent Living Facility,” “Assisted Living Facility” or “Community
Residence.”
      Off-Street Parking Lot (Principal Use). An open, hard-surfaced area,
other than street or public way, available to the public, to be used for the
storage, for limited periods of time, of operable passenger automobiles and
commercial vehicles. Such storage may be for compensation, free or as an off-
site accommodation to residents of a multi-family dwelling, or clients and
customers of a business.
      Office Business. A use that engages in the processing, manipulation or
application of business information or professional expertise. Such an office
may or may not offer services to the public. A “Professional Office” is not
materially involved in fabricating, assembling or warehousing of physical
products for the retail or wholesale market, nor is an office engaged in the
repair of products or retail services. It is characteristic of a “Professional
Office” that retail or wholesale goods are not shown on the premises to a
customer. Examples include, but are not limited to, professional offices for
non-profit organizations, advertising, accounting, investment services,
insurance, contracting, architecture, planning, engineering, legal services and
real estate services. “Professional Office” does not include government
offices, which are considered a “Government Facility.”
      Outdoor Dining. A seating area located outdoors of a contiguous
restaurant, usually in addition to an indoor seating area. Outdoor seating
areas for tavern/bars, typically referred to as a beer garden, are considered
“Outdoor Dining.”
      Outdoor Storage Yard. The storage of any material, as a principal use of
the zoning lot, for a period greater than twenty-four (24) hours, including
items for sale, lease, processing and repair not in an enclosed building.
      Park/Playground. A non-commercial, not-for-profit facility designed to
serve the recreation needs of the residents of the community. “Parks” include,
but are not limited to, ballfields, football fields, soccer fields, basketball
courts, playgrounds and park district field houses that may have indoor
recreation facilities.
      Parking Structure (Principal Use). A structure composed of one (1) or
more levels or floors used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles.
      Payday or Title Loan Agency. An establishment providing loans to
individuals in exchange for receiving personal checks or titles to the
borrowers’ motor vehicles as collateral. “Payday or Title Loan Agencies”
include consumer installment lender establishments.
      Personal Care Establishment. An establishment that provides services and
treatments to enhance a client's physical appearance and well-being, staffed by
trained professionals that are licensed , certified, and/or accredited
including, but not limited to, hairstylists, estheticians, nail technicians,
and massage therapists. This use includes, but is not limited to, beauty shops,
barbershops, tanning salons, nail salons, esthetician, skin care, and
cosmetology services, electrology, microblading and permanent make-up, massage,
and body contouring services. “Personal Care Establishment” does not include
any medically invasive procedures. A “Personal Care Establishment” includes
facilities such as self-care establishments and incubator spaces where spaces
and/or seats may be rented or leased to multiple licensed, certified, and/or
accredited professionals that provide different personal care services.
(Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
      Planned Unit Development. The development of a land area as a single
unified development, where certain Zoning Ordinance regulations, such as bulk
and use standards, may be modified to allow for more flexible planning in
conformance with the planned unit development standards and approval processes.
      Pop-Up Business. A retail goods establishment or restaurant as defined in
this Ordinance that operates on a temporary basis for a period of ninety (90)
days or fewer per calendar year. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      Recreation, Indoor. Predominantly participant uses where recreational
activities or games of skill are conducted within a wholly enclosed building
including, but not limited to, a bowling alley, pool hall, indoor miniature
golf course, indoor child’s play facility, arcade, private swim clubs and
tennis courts, gymnasium containing equipment for physical exercise, or similar
uses, which are run for-profit and typically charge an entrance fee. An “Indoor
Recreation Facility” shall include accessory uses, such as snack bars or
refreshment stands that are designed and intended primarily for the use of
patrons. “Indoor Recreation” may also include those establishments that
maintain a restaurant on-premises for patrons of the establishment. “Indoor
Recreation” shall not include “Indoor Entertainment.” Park district field
houses with indoor recreation facilities are not considered “Indoor
Recreation.” (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      Recreation, Outdoor. Predominantly participant uses that take place
outside of a building including, but not limited to, miniature golf courses,
private swim clubs and tennis courts, and other similar facilities, which are
run for-profit and typically charge an entrance fee. “Outdoor Recreation” shall
include accessory uses, such as snack bars or refreshment stands that are
designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons. “Outdoor Recreation”
may also include those establishments that maintain a restaurant on-premises
for patrons of the establishment. “Outdoor Recreation” shall not include
“Outdoor Entertainment,” “Park/Playground,” “Golf Course” and “Driving Range.”
      Recycling Centers. A facility designed to be a collection point where
recyclable materials, such as newspapers, magazines, books, and other paper
products, glass, metal cans, and other products, are sorted and/or temporarily
storied prior to delivery to a site where they shall be remanufactured into new
products.
      Research and Development Facility. An establishment where research and
development is conducted in industries that include, but are not limited to,
biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, medical instrumentation or supplies,
communications and information technology, electronics and instrumentation, and
computer hardware and software. “Research and Development Facility” does not
involve the manufacture, fabrication, processing or sale of products.
      Residential Amenity Space. A common area or areas as an accessory use on
a lot, which is provided for the exclusive use of residents of the buildings on
the lot for recreational or social purposes. Such spaces may be provided within
the enclosed building or outside the building and may include gyms, exercise
studios, shared spaces with office equipment. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025- 03)
      Restaurant. A structure in which the principal use is the preparation and
sale of food and beverages for consumption on the premises or for carry-out
including but not limited to coffee shops, bakeries, and delicatessens. A
“Restaurant” with scheduled musical performances requires a Live Entertainment
Permit from the Village. (Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35; Amended 01/07/2025:
CO-2025-03)
      Restaurant , Drive-Through. A structure in which the principal use is the
preparation and sale of food and beverages for consumption on the premises or
for carry-out and includes a drive-through facility. A drive through restaurant
may or may not include indoor seating for consumption on the premises. (Amended
06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
      Retail Goods Establishment. (Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35) A commercial
enterprise that provides physical goods, products, or merchandise directly to
the consumer, where such goods are typically available for immediate purchase
and removal from the premises by the purchaser. Such establishments do not
include other retail uses separately defined herein. “Retail Goods
Establishment” shall not include any adult uses or “Smoke or Tobacco Shop.”
This definition distinguishes “Retail Goods Establishment” in three categories:
      A.   Retail Goods Establishment - No Sales of Alcohol or Tobacco. A
retail goods establishment with no minimum gross floor area requirement that
does not sell any alcohol or tobacco/hemp products.
      B.   Retail Goods Establishment with Sales of Beer, Wine, and Tobacco -
Minimum 3,200sf in Gross Floor Area or More Required. A retail goods
establishment permitted to sell beer, wine, and similar alcohol products as
well as tobacco/hemp products where the gross floor area of the establishment
is a minimum of three thousand two hundred (3,200) square feet in area.
Establishments less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in gross floor area
are not permitted to sell liquor/spirits package goods.
      C.   Retail Goods Establishment with Sales of Liquor/Spirits Package
Goods - Minimum 10,000sf in Gross Floor Area or More Required. A retail goods
establishment permitted to sell liquor/ spirits package goods where the gross
floor area of the establishment is a minimum of ten thousand (10,000) square
feet in gross floor area. Such establishments are also permitted to sell beer,
wine, and similar alcohol products as well as tobacco/hemp products. (Amended
07/26/2014: CO-2014-23)
      Rooming House. A structure, other than a hotel/motel, in which sleeping
accommodations not constituting a dwelling unit are furnished for a fee for
four (4) or more persons ordinarily renting such accommodation at a specified
rate for a specified time and occupying the premises as a permanent place of
abode rather than on a transient basis.
      Self-Storage Facility. A facility used only for the storage of personal
property (no commercial storage) where individual renters control individual
storage spaces and no commercial transactions are permitted other than the
rental of the storage units.
      Smoke or Tobacco Shop. An establishment that specializes in the sale of
tobacco/hemp products and smoking paraphernalia. Such establishments typically
sell items such as cigarettes, cigars, pipes, hookahs, and electronic
cigarettes/vapes. A “Smoke or Tobacco Shop” may also sell items typically
related to tobacco/hemp product consumption, defined as smoking paraphernalia
within this Ordinance. This does not include medical or recreational cannabis
as authorized by this Ordinance. (Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
      Smoking Lounge. An establishment engaged in the sale of tobacco/hemp
products, as defined in this Ordinance, and similar products for on-site
consumption. “Smoking Lounge” includes, but is not limited to, establishments
known variously as cigar lounges, hookah lounges, vape lounges, tobacco clubs,
tobacco bars, etc. (Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
      Solid Waste Transfer Station. A site or facility that is licensed by the
Village and the State of Illinois which accepts solid waste for temporary
storage prior to transportation to a point of processing or disposal. A
transfer station is an intermediary point between the location(s) of waste
generation (e.g., households, businesses, industries) and the site(s) of
ultimate processing or disposal.
      Special Event Space. An establishment which is rented by individuals or
groups to accommodate private functions and events such as fundraisers,
banquets, weddings, anniversaries , and other similar celebrations. (Amended
06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
      Utility, Private. Utilities that are not subject to Village acceptance
for operation or maintenance. For purposes of this Ordinance, private utilities
include natural gas lines, power lines, telephone lines, cable television
lines, fiber optic lines and other communication lines, their appurtenances and
components and the utility companies’ operation, maintenance, repair and
replacement of same. Aboveground private utility structures, such as pedestals
for cable wire access or other access points for underground infrastructure
(communications wiring, fiber optic, etc.) shall be considered a “Private
Utility.”
      Video Gaming within Full-Service Restaurant. A full-service restaurant
that includes electronic video game machine that, upon insertion of cash, is
available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including, but not
limited to video poker, line up, and black jack, as authorized by the Illinois
Gaming Board, utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which the player
may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. (Amended 06/
20/2023: CO-2023-35)
      Warehouse/Distribution. The storage, wholesale and distribution of
manufactured products, supplies and equipment.
17.5.   GENERAL TERMS DEFINITIONS
      Abut. To share a common lot line or zoning district boundary without
being separated by a street or alley.
      Accessibility Ramp. A ramp or similar structure that provides wheelchair
or similar access to a building.
      Accessory Structure. A structure located on the same lot with the
principal building and is customarily incidental and subordinate to the use of
the principal building.
      Accessory Use. A use that is customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use of a lot or the main building thereon and located on the same
lot as the principal use or building.
      Addition or Enlargement. Any construction that increases the size of a
building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width or floor
area.
      Alley. A public way not exceeding thirty (30) feet in width at its
intersection with a street, customarily used for ingress to and egress from
service entrances of buildings.
      Alteration. Any change in the size, shape, character, occupancy, or use
of a building or structure.
      Amateur (HAM) Radio Equipment. An amateur (HAM) radio station licensed by
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including equipment such as, but
not limited to, a tower or alternative tower structure supporting a single,
radiating antenna platform and other equipment.
      Architectural Feature. A part, portion, or projection that contributes to
the aesthetics of a building or structure, exclusive of signs, that is not
necessary for the structural integrity of the building or structure, or to make
said building or structure habitable.
      Arbor. A freestanding structure used in a garden to support vines or
climbing plants.
      Attention Getting Device. Any pennants, flag, festoon, valance,
propeller, pole covers, spinner, streamer, searchlights, balloons, flashing
lights, changing colors, rotating or moving displays and any similar device or
ornamentation designated for the purposes of attracting attention, promoting or
advertising.
      Awning. A roof-like cover, often of fabric or metal, designed and
intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and
which projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk or door.
For “Awnings” used as a sign, see “Sign, Awning.”
      Bakery. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of baked
products for consumption off-site. The products may be prepared either on- or
off-site. Such use may include incidental food service.
      Balcony. A platform which projects from the exterior wall of a building
above the ground floor, exposed to the open air and has direct access to the
interior of the building, which is not supported by posts or columns extending
to the ground. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      Banner. See “Sign, Banner.”
      Basement. That portion of a building located partly underground, but
having one-half (½) or more of its clear floor-to-ceiling height above the
average grade of the adjoining ground. The basement shall be counted as a story
for the purposes of height measurement.
      Bay Window. A window which projects outward from the building, beginning
at least two (2) feet above ground, which does not rest on the building
foundation or on the ground and has no additional structural support to the
ground.
      Berm. An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest on a site,
screen undesirable views, reduce noise or fulfill other such purposes.
      Bowling Alley. Indoor facility for the sport of ten-pin or duck-pin
bowling, with customary accessory uses such as snack bars.
      Blockface. That portion of a block or tract of land facing the same side
of a single street and lying between the closest intersecting streets, or
between an intersecting street and railroad right-of-way or waterway.
      Buffer Yard. Land area with landscape plantings and other components used
to visibly separate one (1) use from another or to shield or block noise,
lights, or other nuisances.
      Buildable Lot. A lot on which a building or other structure may be
erected in conformity with zoning and building code requirements.
      Building Height, Principal Building. The vertical distance measured from
grade:
      A.   In the case of a flat roof, to the highest point.
      B.   In the case of a mansard roof, to the deck line.
      C.   In the case of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, to the mean point
between the eaves and the ridge. Where there is more than one (1) peak,
building height shall be measured as described between the highest peak and the
highest eaves.
      Chimneys, spires, steeples, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks, parapet
walls, cooling towers, stacks, stair enclosures that do not contain occupied
space, and necessary mechanical appurtenances and similar projections other
than signs shall not be included in calculating the height.
      Building Height, Accessory Structure. The vertical distance measured from
the established average finished grade to the highest point of the roof or the
highest point of the structure.
      Building. Any structure with substantial walls and roof securely affixed
to land and entirely separated on all sides from any similar structure by space
or by walls in which there are no communicating doors, windows or similar
openings.
      Building Coverage. The portion of a lot that is occupied by buildings or
structures, including accessory structures, expressed as a percentage of total
lot area.
      Building, Principal. A non-accessory building in which a principal use of
the lot on which it is located is conducted.
      Business. An occupation, employment, or enterprise which occupies time,
attention, labor and materials, or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold, or
where services are offered.
      Caliper. The American Association of Nurserymen standard for trunk
measurement of nursery stock, as measured at six (6) inches above the ground
for trees up to and including four (4) inch caliper size, and as measured at
twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger sizes.
      Canopy. A structure, other than an awning, made of materials such as
cloth or metal, or materials with a frame, either attached to a building or
projecting from a building, and carried by a frame supported by the ground or
sidewalk. For “Canopies” with advertising see “Sign, Canopy.”
      Carnival/Circus. A traveling or transportable group or aggregation of
rides, shows, games, or concessions or any combination thereof.
      Cellar. A story having more than one-half (½) its height below the curb
level or below the highest level of the adjoining ground. A cellar shall not be
counted as a story for the purposes or height measurement.
      Chimney. A vertical shaft of reinforced concrete, masonry or other
approved material enclosing one (1) or more flues, for the purpose of removing
products of combustion from solid, liquid or gaseous fuel.
      Christmas Tree Sales Lot. A retail sales operation, generally conducted
wholly outdoors, that offers for sale on a temporary, limited basis Christmas
trees and related holiday items such as wreaths and Christmas tree stands.
      Commercial Vehicle. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of
persons or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial
enterprise, for-hire or not-for-hire, but not including a commuter van, a
vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement when being used for that purpose, or
a recreational vehicle not being used commercially.
      Conforming Structure. Any structure that complies with all the
regulations of this Ordinance, or any amendment hereto, governing bulk for the
zoning district in which such structure is located or is designed or intended
for a conforming use.
      Contiguous. Adjoining or abutting.
      Deck. A deck is a roofless outdoor space built as an aboveground platform
projecting from the wall of a building and is connected by structural supports
at grade or by the building structure.
      District. A portion of the Village within which certain uniform
regulations and requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply under the
provisions of this Ordinance.
      Driveway. A paved or unpaved access strip of land providing a vehicular
connector between the street and a parking space or garage.
      Dwelling. A structure or portion thereof designed for occupancy by one
(1) family or household for residential purposes as a single housekeeping unit.
In no case shall a motor home, trailer coach, tent, or portable building be
considered a “Dwelling.”
      Dwelling, Attached. A dwelling designed as a single structure, containing
separate dwelling units, each of which is designed to be occupied as a separate
permanent residence for one (1) family or household. Each dwelling is separated
from the other by a wall extending from the ground to the roof or a ceiling and
floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for a common
stairwell exterior to both dwelling units.
      Dwelling, Detached. A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space
on the same lot.
      Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit consists of a group of rooms constituting
all or part of a dwelling, which are arranged, designed, used or intended for
use exclusively as living quarters for one (1) family or household, which
include permanently installed bathroom and kitchen facilities.
      Easement. Land which has been designed by lawful agreement between the
owner(s) of the land and a person(s) for a specified use only by such person
(s).
      Eave. The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a
building.
      Electrical Generator. A device for generating electrical energy.
      Encroachment. The extension or placement of any structure or building, or
component of such, into a required yard.
      Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix.
      Exterior Stairwell. One (1) or more flights of stairs and the necessary
landings and platforms connecting them to form a continuous passage from the
entryway of one (1) floor or level to another in a building or structure
located on the exterior of a principal building.
      Farmer’s Market. The seasonal selling or offering for sale of home-grown
vegetables or produce, occurring in a pre-designated area where the vendors are
generally individuals who have raised the vegetables or produce or have taken
the same on consignment for retail sale.
      Family. One (1) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption or
a group of not more than five (5) persons, who need not be related by blood,
marriage or adoption, living together and maintaining a common household, but
not including sororities, fraternities or other similar organizations.
      Fence. An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or other combination of materials erected to enclose, screen or separate
areas.
      Fence, Solid Screen. A fence, including gates, which conceals from
viewers in or on adjoining properties and streets, materials stored and
operations conducted beyond it.
      Flags. Flags, symbols or crests of nations, of any organization or
nations, states and cities, fraternal, religious and civic organizations.
      Floor Area, Gross. The sum of the gross horizontal area of the plans of
the several floors of a building, as measured from the outside face of the
walls.
      Footcandle. A unit of illumination. It is equivalent to the illumination
at all points that are one (1) foot distant from uniform source of one (1)
candlepower.
      Garage. A building, either attached or detached, used or designed to be
used for the parking and storage of vehicles by those resident upon the
premises.
      Gazebo. A freestanding outdoor structure that is open-sided in design for
recreational use and not for habitation.
      Grade. The established grade of a lot, whether vacant or improved, is the
elevation of the sidewalk at the street line as fixed by the Village.
      A.   For buildings adjoining one (1) street only, the elevation of the
sidewalk at the center of that wall adjoining the street.
      B.   For buildings adjoining more than one (1) street, the average of the
elevations of the sidewalk at centers and walls adjoining streets.
      Any wall parallel to a street line is to be considered as adjoining the
street.
      Green Roof. A roof at least partially encompassed with a waterproofing
membrane, growing medium such as soil, and plants located on top of the
traditional roof of a structure designed for the purpose of stormwater
management, energy conservation, and other environmental benefits. Other design
elements including pedestrian paths, patios, and outdoor seating areas may be
provided as part of a green roof. (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      Greenhouse, Private. A building or structure constructed chiefly of
glass, glasslike or translucent material, cloth or lath, which is devoted to
the protection or cultivation of flowers or other tender plants.
      Hazardous, Radioactive or Toxic Material. Material that exhibits certain
hazardous properties (ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity or toxicity) or is
included on a specific list of wastes identified by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
as hazardous because it poses substantial present or potential hazards to human
health or the environment. Toxic material is harmful or fatal when ingested or
absorbed. Radioactive material contains or is contaminated with radionuclides
at concentrations or radioactivity levels greater than those established as
“exempt” by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency.
      Hedge. A row of closely planted shrubs, bushes, or any kind of plant
forming a boundary or fence.
      Home Occupation. An occupation carried on in a dwelling unit by the
resident, where the use of the dwelling unit for the occupation is secondary to
the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes.
      Household. Any number of individuals living together on the premises as a
single housekeeping unit.
      Impervious Surface. Any portion of a site that is occupied by buildings,
structures, pavement, and other impervious surfaces that do not allow for the
absorption of water, including, but not limited to, swimming pools, decks,
porches, patios, parking and driveway areas, gravel areas, sidewalks, and paved
recreation areas.
      Impervious Surface Coverage. A measurement of development intensity
determined by dividing that area of a lot which is occupied by impervious
surface by the gross area of the lot.
      Incompatible Use. A use that is incapable of direct association with
certain other uses because it is contradictory, incongruous or discordant.
      Intensity of Use. For the purposes of this Ordinance, “Intensity of Use”
is defined as square feet of gross floor area, number of dwelling units, number
of employees, or other factor used as a basis for requiring parking or loading
facilities.
      Lighting, Fully Shielded. A fixture that is shielded in such a manner
that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or
indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running
through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted.
      Lighting, Unshielded. A fixture that allows light, either directly from
the lamp or indirectly from the fixture or a reflector, to be emitted above the
horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is
emitted.
      Live-Work Unit. A building with a small commercial enterprise on the
ground floor and a residential unit above or behind with a common tenant in
both spaces (no dual occupancy is permitted). (Amended 01/07/2025: CO-2025-03)
      Loading Berth. A space within a loading facility exclusive of driveways,
aisles, maneuvering areas, ramps, columns, landscaping areas, office, and work
areas for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or
unloading goods or materials, and which abuts upon a street, alley, or other
appropriate means of access.
      Logo. A business trademark or symbol.
      Lot. A parcel or tract of land located within a single block, occupied,
or intended for occupancy, by one (1) principal building or principal use, and
having frontage upon a street.
      Lot Area. The computed area of the zoning lot contained within the lot
lines.
      Lot, Corner. A lot situated at the junction of, and abutting on, two (2)
or more intersecting streets. (See
Figure 17-1: Corner and Interior Lots)
FIGURE 17-1: CORNER AND INTERIOR LOTS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3150.jpg]
      Lot Depth. The distance from the front lot line to the rear lot line a
measured by averaging the length of the side lot lines.
      Lot, Double Frontage. A lot having frontage on two (2) nonintersecting
streets.
      Lot, Flag. A lot that does not meet the minimum street frontage
requirements, but is connected to the street by an access strip of less than
the required minimum lot width. Such lots are generally configured in the shape
of a flag, where the strip of land providing access forms the pole of the flag
and the lot that is separated from the street forms the flag.
      Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot. (See
Figure 17-1)
      Lot Line. A property boundary line of any lot. Where any portion of the
lot extends into an abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to
be the established or existing street or alley right-of-way line.
      Lot Line, Corner Side. The lot line that is perpendicular or
approximately perpendicular to the front lot line, which separates the longest
street frontage of a corner lot from the street.
      Lot Line, Front. The lot line that abuts a street. For the purposes of
this Ordinance, the “Front Lot Line” of a corner lot shall be the shortest
street frontage of the lot. In the case of interior lots with irregularly
shaped “Front Lot Lines,” the entire length of the lot line that abuts a street
shall be considered the “Front Lot Line.” (See
Figure 17-2: Irregular Front Lot Line)
FIGURE 17-2: IRREGULAR FRONT LOT LINE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3152.jpg]
      Lot Line, Rear. The lot line that is most distant from and is, or is
approximately, parallel to the front lot line.
      Lot Line, Interior Side. The lot line that is not abutting a street and
is not a rear lot line.
      Lot Line, Side. A lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot
line, which may be an “Interior Side Lot Line” or “Corner Side Lot Line.”
      Lot of Record. A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has
been recorded in the Office of the Cook County Recorder of Deeds, or a parcel
of land separately described as a single tract of land in a recorded deed.
      Lot, Reversed Corner. A corner lot, the street side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.
      Lot Width. The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured along
a line parallel to the front lot line along the minimum front setback.
      Lot, Zoning. A tract of land located within a block which, at the time of
filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a
tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or
control. A “Zoning Lot” may or may not coincide with a “Lot of Record.”
      Luminaire. A complete lighting unit extending from a support structure,
parallel to the ground, consisting of a light source and all necessary
mechanical, electrical and decorative parts. A “Luminaire” does not include a
pole or other support.
      Marquee. A permanent roof-like structure constructed of durable material
extending from part of the wall of a building but not supported by the ground.
      Memorial Plaque. A sign, tablet, or plaque memorializing a person, event,
structure, or site.
      Motor Vehicle. Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designed primarily for
transportation of persons or goods along public streets.
      Movie Theater. A theater designed for showing movies or motion pictures.
      Nameplate. A sign indicating the name and address of the person or
persons occupying the lot or a part of the building.
      Nonconforming Lot. A lot of record that does not meet the lot area or lot
width requirements of this Ordinance for the zoning district in which it is
located.
      Nonconforming Use or Structure. An existing use or structure, or part or
appurtenance thereof, not in conformance with the requirements of this
Ordinance.
      Off-Street Parking. The storage space for an automobile on premises other
than streets or right-of way.
      On-Right-of-Way Parking. The storage space for an automobile that is
located within the street right-of-way.
      Outdoor Display and Sales Area. Part of a lot used for outdoor sales and/
or display of goods accessory to the principal use.
      Outdoor Fireplace. A self-contained, manufactured noncombustible cooking
unit provided with a tight-fitting screen or lid and supported off the ground
by non-combustible legs.
      Outdoor Storage. The keeping of any goods, material, merchandise or
equipment not within an enclosed building, including incidental maintenance and
repair of the material that is being stored.
      Owner. A titleholder of record, or if title is held in trust, the
beneficiary of the trust or the person or persons who have acquired any
interest in the property by contract or purchase or otherwise.
      Parapet. The extension of a false front or wall above a roof-line.
      Parkway. The area, excluding the sidewalk, if any, between the property
line and the curb or, in the absence of a curb, between the property line and
the nearest edge of the street paving.
      Party Wall. A wall starting from the foundation and extending
continuously through all stories to or above the roof, that separates one (1)
building from another, but is in joint use by each building.
      Patio. An impervious surface, no higher than one (1) foot above the
ground, designed and intended for recreational use by people and not as a
parking space.
      Performance Standards. A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic
or noxious matter, vibration, fire, and explosive hazards, or glare of heat
generated by or inherent in use of land or buildings.
      Person. For the purposes of this Ordinance, any individual, corporation,
association, firm, partnership or joint venture.
      Porch. A structure, which can be enclosed or unenclosed, that projects
from the exterior wall of a building, has direct access to the street level of
the building, and is covered by a roof or eaves. An “Unenclosed Porch” is a
porch that is open on two (2) or more sides. An “Enclosed Porch” is a porch
that is enclosed by walls, screens, lattice or other material on two (2) or
more sides. A screened-in porch shall be considered an “Enclosed Porch.”
      Principal Building. A non-accessory building in which a principal use of
the lot on which it is located is conducted.
      Principal Use. The main use of land or structure as distinguished from an
accessory use.
      Property Line. The lines bounding a zoning lot.
      Public Use Area (for Parking Standard Calculations). The area within a
use where the public or a substantial number of the public has access to,
including but not limited to, such areas as dining rooms, restrooms, bar
seating, display areas, etc.
      Pumpkin Patch. A retail sales operation, generally conducted wholly
outdoors, that offers for sale on a temporary, limited basis pumpkins and
related holiday (Halloween) items.
      Recreational Vehicle. A vehicular unit, which is designed as a temporary
dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation use, and which is self-
propelled, mounted on or pulled by another vehicle. Examples include, but are
not limited to, a travel trailer, camping trailer, truck camper, motor home,
fifth-wheel trailer, or van.
      Real Estate Model Unit. A residential unit temporarily used for display
purposes as an example of dwelling units available or to be available for sale
or rental in a particular subdivision or other residential development. Model
units may also incorporate sales or rental offices for dwellings within the
development.
      Retaining Wall. A raised area of soil with the top leveled, supported
around the edges by stone or timber, designed to resist lateral earth and/or
fluid pressures, including any surcharge. This definition of “Retaining Wall”
shall, for the purposes of this Ordinance, include terracing used in
landscaping.
      Roofline. The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is
higher, excluding any cupolas, pylons, chimneys or minor projections.
      Satellite Dish Antenna. A dish antenna designed for transmitting signals
to a receiver or receiving station or for receiving television, radio, data,
communication or other signals from other antennas, satellites or other
services.
      Setback. The minimum distance a building, structure or other improvement
is located from a lot line.
      Shed. A relatively small accessory building often purchased pre-built or
as a kit in pre-fabricated sections. It is not designed to be served by heat,
electricity, or plumbing and does not need to be placed on a permanent
foundation. A “Shed” is typically intended to store lawn, garden, or pool care
equipment.
      Sheet Drainage. Overland run-off of water prior to reaching a drainage
system.
      Shopping Center. A group of retail and other commercial establishments
that is planned, owned and managed as a single property, with shared access for
ingress and egress. The center’s size and orientation are generally determined
by the market characteristics of the trade area served by the center. The two
(2) main configurations of shopping centers are shopping malls and strip
centers.
      Sign. A name, identification, description, display, illustration or
attention-getting device which is affixed to or painted or represented directly
or indirectly upon a building or other outdoor surface or lot, and which
directs attention to a person, business, product, service, place, organization
or entertainment. “Sign” shall not include the flag of any nation, state or
governmental entity.
      Sign, A-Frame. An sign ordinarily in the shape of an “A,” or some
variation thereof, located on the ground, not permanently attached and easily
movable, and usually two-sided.
      Sign, Animated. Any sign which uses movement or change of lighting to
depict action or to create a special effect or scene.
      Sign, Awning. A sign that is printed or displayed upon an awning.
      Sign, Banner. Any sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other flexible
material with or without frames. A banner, in compliance with the regulations
of this Ordinance, is not considered an “Attention-Getting Device.”
      Sign, Campaign. A sign advocating a candidate for public office or public
referendum.
      Sign, Canopy. A sign that is printed or displayed upon a canopy.
      Sign, Construction. A temporary sign identifying an architect,
contractor, subcontractor and/or material supplier participating in
construction on the property on which the sign is located and which may
identify the proposed use for the property.
      Sign, Directory. A sign that serves as common or collective
classification for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same
zoning lot (e.g., shopping center, office complex, etc.). Such sign may name
the persons or businesses included, but carry no other advertising matter.
      Sign, Election. A sign advocating a candidate for public office.
      Sign, Electronic Display Screen. A sign, or portion of a sign, that
displays an electronic image or video, which may or may not include text. This
definition includes television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat
screens, LED screens, video boards, and holographic displays. “Electronic
Display Screens” are prohibited.
      Sign, Electronic Message Display. Any sign or portion of a sign that uses
changing lights to form a sign message or messages in text form wherein the
sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and
can be modified by electronic processes.
      Sign, Flashing. A sign which contains an intermittent or sequential
flashing light source used primarily to attract attention. “Flashing Signs” do
not include “Electronic Message Signs.”
      Sign, Menu Board. A device which functions to list items for sale at an
establishment with drive-through facilities.
      Sign, Monument. Any sign placed upon or supported by the ground
independently of any other structure. “Monument signs” are typically mounted on
a masonry base.
      Sign, Moving. Any sign which, in whole or in part, rotates, elevates or
in any way alters position or geometry. “Moving Signs” do not include clocks.
      Sign, Municipal. A sign erected and maintained pursuant to, and in
discharge of, any municipal functions or as required by law, including but not
limited to, speed limit signs, stop signs, Village limit signs, street name
signs, historical or government sites, and directional signs.
      Sign, Nonconforming. A sign lawfully erected and maintained prior to the
adoption of this Ordinance that does not conform to the requirements of this
Ordinance.
      Sign, Occupational. A sign indicating the name and profession of an
occupant of the lot or a part of the building.
      Sign, Pole. A sign erected and maintained on a freestanding mast(s) or
pole(s) and not attached to any building, but not including “Monument Signs.”
      Sign, Political. A sign advocating action on a public issue.
      Sign, Portable. A sign whose principal supporting structure is intended,
by design and construction, to be used by resting upon the ground for support
and may be easily moved or relocated for reuse. Portable signs shall include
but are not limited to signs mounted upon a trailer, wheeled carrier or other
non-motorized mobile structure, with wheels or with wheels removed.
      Sign, Projecting. Any sign that is attached to a building or other
structure, and extends beyond the surface of the building or structure to which
it is attached.
      Sign, Real Estate. A sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign
is located as being for rent, lease or sale. A “Real Estate Sign” can also
advertise an open house.
      Sign, Residential Development. Signs identifying a subdivision,
condominium complex, apartment complex or other residential development.
      Sign, Roof. Any sign wholly erected, constructed, or maintained above the
roof structure or parapet of any building with the principal support attached
to the roof structure.
      Sign, Temporary Off-Premise. A temporary sign which directs attention to
a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at
any location other than upon the premises where such sign is located or to
which it is affixed.
      Sign, Under-Awning. Any sign attached to and mounted under an awning.
      Sign, Wall. A sign mounted flat against and projecting less than twelve
(12) inches from the wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of
the sign in a plane parallel to the face of the wall. “Wall Sign” shall not
include “Window Sign” as defined herein.
      Sign, Window. A sign attached to, placed upon, or printed on the interior
or exterior of a window or door of a building intended for viewing from the
exterior of such a building. A “Window Sign” may be either permanent or
temporary.
      Smoking Paraphernalia. Any equipment, device, or instrument that is
primarily designed or manufactured for the smoking, chewing, absorbing,
dissolving, inhaling, snorting, sniffing, or ingesting by any other means into
the body of tobacco/hemp products, as defined in this Ordinance. Items or
devices classified as :Smoking Paraphernalia” include, but are not limited to,
pipes, bongs, punctured metal bowls, electric pipes, e-cigarettes, e-cigarette
juice, buzz bombs, vaporizers, hookahs, and devices for holding burning
material. Lighters and matches are excluded from the definition of tobacco
paraphernalia. (Amended 06/20/2023: CO-2023-35)
      Solar Panel. A device that collects and converts direct sunlight as a
source of energy for such purposes as heating or cooling a structure, heating
or pumping water, or generating electricity.
      Stacking Space. A space specifically designated as a waiting area for
vehicles patronizing a drive-through establishment.
      Stoop. An exterior floor typically, but not necessarily, constructed of
concrete and/or masonry, with a finished floor elevation higher than the
adjacent ground level, often with steps leading up to it, and utilized
primarily as an access platform to a building.
      Story. That portion of a building other than a basement included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if
there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling
next above it. Any portion of a story exceeding fourteen (14) feet in height
shall be considered as an additional story for each fourteen (14) feet of
fraction thereof.
      Story, Half. That portion of a building under the gable, hip or gambrel
roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2) sides (opposite exterior
walls) are not more than four and one-half (4½) feet above the finished floor
of such story. In the case of single-family, two-family and multi-family
dwellings less than three (3) stories in height, a half-story in a sloping room
shall not be counted as a story.
      Street. An improved right-of-way that affords a primary means of access
to abutting property.
      Street Wall. The wall of a building nearest to and facing on a street.
      Structural Alteration. Any change in the supporting members of a building
or structure, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders,
or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
      Structure. Anything erected, the use of which requires more or less
permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground. A sign, billboard or other advertising medium, detached
or projecting, shall be construed to be a structure.
      Structure, Temporary. Any structure not designed to be permanently
located, placed or affixed in the place where it is or where it is intended to
be placed.
      Swimming Pool. A receptacle for water and/or an artificial pool of water
over twenty-four (24) inches in depth, either at a private residence intended
only for the use of the individual owner, his or her family and friends, or at
a multiple-unit residence intended only for the use of the tenants of the
building, their families and friends. Temporary swimming pools of plastic,
rubberized cloth or similar material over twenty-four (24) inches in depth are
subject to the same standards as permanent swimming pools.
      Temporary Contractor Trailer. This use includes watchman’s trailers,
construction equipment sheds, contractor trailers and similar uses incidental
to a construction project and sales of homes within a newly constructed
development.
      Temporary Storage Container. Temporary self-storage containers delivered
to residential or commercial uses for the resident or business owner to store
belongings, and then picked up and returned to a warehouse until called for.
Also known as “PODS” (Portable On-Demand Storage containers).
      Tobacco/Hemp Products. Any product in leaf, flake, plug, liquid, or any
other form, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, snuff, smoking
tobacco, any liquid nicotine product including but not limited to any flavored
liquid nicotine product and/or smokeless tobacco, containing nicotine,
tetrahydrocannabinol, or other products derived from the tobacco or hemp plant.
The term Tobacco/Hemp Products also includes electronic cigarettes, also known
as “E-Cigarettes” even if certain e-cigarettes do not contain any tobacco. This
does not include medical or recreational cannabis. (Amended 06/20/2023: CO-
2023-35)
      Trellis. A frame made of bars of wood or metal crossed over each other,
fixed to a wall, to support vines or climbing plants.
      Use. The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
      Use, Permitted. A use permitted in a zoning district without the need for
special administrative review and approval, upon satisfaction of the standards
and requirements of this Ordinance.
      Use, Special. A use that owing to some special characteristics attendant
to its operation or installation is permitted in a zoning district only after
review, and is subject to approval by the Village Board.
      Wall. A constructed solid barrier of concrete, stone, brick, tile or
similar type of material that closes, marks, or borders a field, yard, or lot,
and that limits visibility and restricts the flow of air and light.
      Yard. The required minimum distance a building or structure, or other
improvement on a lot, must be located from a lot line. A yard extends along a
lot line for a depth specified by the zoning district in which such lot is
located. (See
Figure 17-3: Yard Definitions)
      Yard, Corner Side. The required minimum distance a building or structure,
or other improvement on a lot, must be located from a corner side lot line. The
corner side yard extends along the corner side lot line between the front yard
and the rear lot line, for the required minimum depth, as specified for the
district in which such lot is located, measured perpendicular to the corner
side lot line. (See
Figure 17-3)
      Yard, Front. The required minimum distance a building or structure, or
other improvement on a lot, must be located from a front lot line. The front
yard extends the full width of the lot between side lot lines for the required
minimum depth, as specified by the zoning district in which such lot is
located, measured perpendicular to the front lot line. Front doors and
addresses do not regulate what is the front yard as it relates to Zoning. (See
Figure 17-3) (Amended 01/18/2011: CO-2011-01)
      Yard, Interior Side. The required minimum distance a building or
structure, or other improvement on a lot, must be located from an interior side
lot line. The interior side yard extends along an interior side lot line
between the front and rear yards, for the required minimum depth, as specified
for the district in which such lot is located, measured perpendicular to the
interior side lot line. (See
Figure 17-3)
      Yard, Rear. The required minimum distance a building or structure, or
other improvement on a lot, must be located from a rear lot line. The rear yard
extends between the side lot lines for the required minimum depth, as specified
by the zoning district in which such lot is located, measured perpendicular to
the rear lot line. (See
Figure 17-3)
FIGURE 17-3: YARD DEFINITIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b35e2ff351677abbe7195be056a469d24d84c916/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3154.jpg]
 
CHAPTER 155: ADJACENT NEIGHBORS LAND ACQUISITION PROGRAM
Section
   
155.01   Creation and purpose
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Administration
   
155.04   Maintenance of list
   
155.05   Bids and purchase
   
155.06   Restrictive covenants
   
155.07   Conveyance of title
   
155.08   Responsibility for taxes
§ 155.01 CREATION AND PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the Village's Home Rule authority, there is hereby established
in the Village an Adjacent Neighbors Land Acquisition Program (ANLAP Program).
The ANLAP Program will allow the Village to convey certain surplus parcels of
land to adjacent residential property owners for the purpose of returning such
parcels to the tax rolls of the Village and so that such parcels may be
maintained, beautified, and otherwise improved.
(Ord. C0-08-40, passed 9-16-2008)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning.
   ADJACENT NEIGHBOR. An owner of record of an improved parcel of real property
immediately adjacent to a Village-owned parcel of vacant property and who is
not delinquent in the payment of any property taxes or any other debt owed to
the Village, as verified by the Village. Where non-standard parcels are
involved (corner parcel, parcel not facing onto a street, and the like), what
constitutes an adjacent  neighbor shall be in the sole discretion of the
Village Manager. It is the policy of the Village that ANLAP transactions not
create or further perpetuate irregular-shaped lots or flag lots.
   PARCEL. A parcel of vacant real property which is bounded on at least 1 side
by an improved parcel of residential zoned real property and which does not
meet the bulk regulations of the Village's zoning ordinance (such as the
requirements relative to minimum lot area and width).
(Ord. C0-08-40, passed 9-16-2008)
§ 155.03 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director of Sustainability and Innovation or their designee shall be
responsible for the screening of applicants for the acquisition of property
under the ANLAP Program. The Director of Sustainability and Innovation or their
designee shall establish criteria, guidelines, and procedures for the screening
of adjacent neighbor applicants and shall recommend to the President and Board
of Trustees those applicants and parcels eligible for the ANLAP Program. The
Director of Sustainability and Innovation or their designee is authorized to
negotiate and execute, on behalf of the Village, all documents (other than
quitclaim deeds) as are required and necessary to accomplish the conveyance of
properties to approved adjacent neighbor applicants, subject to the review and
approval of the Village Attorney.
(Ord. C0-08-40, passed 9-16-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 155.04 MAINTENANCE OF LIST.
   The Village shall maintain a list of Village-owned real property which shall
include those parcels available for sale under the ANLAP Program. This list
shall be made available to the public in the Village Clerk's office during
normal business hours.
(Ord. C0-08-40, passed 9-16-2008)
§ 155.05 BIDS AND PURCHASE.
   (A)   Purchase price. The minimum purchase price for a single parcel shall
be $500. Upon receipt of an offer by an adjacent neighbor to purchase a parcel,
the Village shall give written notice by certified mail to any other owner of
adjacent property indicating that the Village will accept sealed bids for the
parcel for a period of 30 days from the date of the mailing of the notice. All
bids that conform with the requirements of the ANLAP Program shall be submitted
to the President and Board of Trustees for consideration. The President and
Board of Trustees may, in their sole discretion, accept a particular bid or may
reject all bids. All bids must comply with the requirements of the ANLAP
Program. Acceptance of a bid and authorization for the sale of a parcel shall
be by approval of a resolution by a simple majority vote of the President and
Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Public utilities and easements. If public utilities, street lighting,
sanitary or storm sewers, fire hydrants and related water service lines, public
sidewalks or any other above or below grade infrastructure or public
improvements (the “public facilities”) are located within any portion of the
parcel to be sold, the Village shall reserve in the quitclaim deed, a public
utility or sidewalk easement of sufficient size to accommodate the repair,
replacement, or maintenance of said public facilities or the installation of
additional public facilities. The Village Engineer, in their discretion, shall
determine the size of the required easement area. The quitclaim deed will not
remove or release any existing non-Village easement rights or other conditions
of public record that are enforceable by other persons or private or public
entities.
   (C)   Other costs.
      (1)   Following approval of the authorizing resolution, the adjacent
owner shall, within 30 days of such approval, deposit with the Village $1,500
to pay for the costs incurred by the Village in considering and processing the
offer and sale, including without limitation, the preparation of the quitclaim
deed, other conveyance documents and resolution approving said sale, plat of
consolidation, the mailing of notices required under this chapter, and any
filing or recording fees charged by the County Recorder of Deeds or any other
governmental agency. If the adjacent owner desires to obtain a title commitment
or policy, or to close the transaction at a title company, such title
commitment or policy and closing fees shall be at their sole cost.
      (2)   The adjacent neighbor remains obligated to pay the balance of the
total actual fees and costs incurred by the Village under the ANLAP Program
including any title commitment/policy or closing costs. The balance of any
deposit, after the actual incurred costs and fees are satisfied, shall be
promptly returned to the adjacent neighbor, at or following the closing.
      (3)   Once the deposit is received, the Village Engineer will evaluate
the parcel relative to the Village’s need to retain certain types of easements
or the necessity to relocate any public facilities or to install a sidewalk in
the parcel. There may be public or private easements or conditions of title
that affect the parcel but if the adjacent neighbor desires to acquire the
parcel, they will take subject to such encumbrances. The Village Attorney will
deliver to the adjacent neighbor or to their attorney copies of the title
commitment, if any, and the Village Engineer’s written recommendation relative
to the necessary easements or conditions that the Village will require as part
of the sale.
(Ord. C0-08-40, passed 9-16-2008)
§ 155.06 RESTRICTIVE COVENANTS.
   (A)   Any sales contract and deed conveying a parcel to an adjacent neighbor
pursuant to the provisions of the ANLAP shall contain, at a minimum, covenants
which:
      (1)   Prohibit the adjacent neighbor from conveying, assigning or
otherwise transferring the parcel except in conjunction with the parcel owned
by the adjacent neighbor;
      (2)   Require the adjacent neighbor to maintain the parcel in accordance
with the provisions of the Village Code; and
      (3)   Provide that the parcel is being conveyed in "as is, where is
condition, including any environmental conditions existing in, on, or beneath
the property."
   (B)   The Village Board may require that other covenants be required that
are deemed to be in the public interest.
(Ord. C0-08-40, passed 9-16-2008)
§ 155.07 CONVEYANCE OF TITLE.
   Upon the approval of sale of a parcel by the President and Board of
Trustees, the title of such property shall be transferred to the adjacent
neighbor by issuance of a quitclaim deed by the Village, as grantor, to the
adjacent neighbor-purchaser, as grantee. Fee simple title to the property shall
be conveyed by the Village to the adjacent neighbor in "as is, where is
condition, including any environmental conditions existing in, on, or beneath
the property," and the quoted statement shall be included in the deed. The
President or his proxy are authorized to execute, and the Village Clerk
authorized to attest, quitclaim deeds conveying title to applicants upon
approval by the President and Board of Trustees. The Village, at the adjacent
neighbor's cost, shall record the deed with the office of the County Recorder
of Deeds within 30 days of the date of sale.
(Ord. C0-08-40, passed 9-16-2008)
§ 155.08 RESPONSIBILITY FOR TAXES.
   Subsequent to the date of sale and issuance of the quitclaim deed, the
adjacent neighbor will assume responsibility for all newly imposed real estate
taxes and any other state, county or Village fees, charges, taxes or
assessments applicable to the parcel. As part of the conveyance, the adjacent
neighbor shall execute any documents necessary to consolidate the parcel into
the adjacent improved parcel.
(Ord. C0-08-40, passed 9-16-2008)
CHAPTER 156: TAX REACTIVATION PROGRAM
Section
   
156.01   Establishment, purpose and administration
   
156.02   Administration
   
156.03   Maintenance of list
   
156.04   Purchase
   
156.05   Redevelopment agreement
   
156.06   Conditions of sale
   
156.07   Conveyance of title
   
156.08   Responsibility for taxes
§ 156.01 ESTABLISHMENT, PURPOSE, AND ADMINISTRATION.
   Pursuant to the Village’s home rule authority, there is hereby established a
Tax Reactivation Program to be administered by the Village. The Tax
Reactivation Program will allow the Village to convey certain parcels of land
to eligible applicants for the purpose of returning such parcels to the tax
rolls of the Village and so that such parcels may be maintained, beautified,
and otherwise improved.
(Ord. CO-02-17, passed 6-17-2002; Am. Ord. CO-2012-14, passed 8-21-2012)
§ 156.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director of Sustainability and Innovation or their designee shall be
responsible for the screening of applicants for the acquisition of property
under the Tax Reactivation Program. The Director of Sustainability and
Innovation or their designee shall establish criteria, guidelines, and
procedures for the screening of applicants and shall recommend to the President
and Board of Trustees those applicants and parcels eligible for the Tax
Reactivation Program. The Director of Sustainability and Innovation or their
designee is authorized to negotiate and execute, on behalf of the Village, all
documents (other than quitclaim deeds) as are required or necessary to
accomplish the conveyance of properties to approved applicants, subject to the
review and approval of the Village Attorney.
(Ord. CO-02-17, passed 6-17-2002; Am. Ord. CO-2012-14, passed 8-21-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 156.03 MAINTENANCE OF LIST.
   The Village shall maintain a list of Village-owned real property which shall
include those parcels available for sale under the Tax Reactivation Program.
This list shall be made available to the public in the Village Clerk’s office
during normal business hours.
(Ord. CO-02-17, passed 6-17-2002; Am. Ord. CO-2012-14, passed 8-21-2012)
§ 156.04 PURCHASE.
   (A)   Purchase price. The minimum purchase price for a single parcel shall
be $5,000. All offers that conform with the requirements of the Tax
Reactivation Program shall be submitted to the President and Board of Trustees
for consideration. The President and Board of Trustees, in their sole
discretion, may accept or reject the offer. All offers and accompanying
documentation must conform to the requirements of the Tax Reactivation Program.
Acceptance of a bid and authorization for the sale of a parcel shall be by
approval of a Resolution by a simple majority vote of the President and Board
of Trustees.
   (B)   Public utilities and easements. If public utilities, street lighting,
sanitary or storm sewers, fire hydrants and related water service lines, public
sidewalks or any other above or below grade infrastructure or public
improvements (the “public facilities”) are located within any portion of the
parcel to be sold, the Village shall reserve in the quitclaim deed, a public
utility or sidewalk easement of sufficient size to accommodate the repair,
replacement, or maintenance of the public facilities or the installation of
additional public facilities. The Village Engineer, in their discretion, shall
determine the size of the required easement area. The quitclaim deed will not
remove or release any existing non-Village easement rights or other conditions
of public record that are enforceable by other persons or private or public
entities.
   (C)   Administrative costs reimbursement deposit.
      (1)   Following approval of the authorizing resolution, the applicant
shall, within 48 hours of such approval, make a deposit with the Village in the
amount of $7,500. The purpose of this administrative costs reimbursement
deposit is to provide reimbursement to the Village of the Village’s fees, costs
and expenses to be incurred in the course of preparing, processing, approving,
and carrying out the conveyance of the property and associated redevelopment
agreement, including but not limited to title and closing costs and fees,
survey costs, the preparation of the quitclaim deed and resolution approving
the sale, other conveyance documents, the preparation of a redevelopment
agreement, the mailing of any notices required under this chapter, legal fees
incurred by the Village relative to the conveyance, including the preparation
of any of the foregoing documents, administrative costs to the Village relative
to the sale and development and any filing or recording fees charged by the
County Recorder of Deeds or any other governmental agency. The administrative
costs reimbursement deposit is nonrefundable.
      (2)   The applicant remains obligated to pay, prior to or at closing, the
purchase price, as well as the balance of total actual administrative fees and
costs incurred by the Village under the Tax Reactivation Program in excess of
the amount of the administrative costs reimbursement deposit.
      (3)   Once the deposit is received, the Village Attorney will order a
title commitment and the Village Engineer will evaluate the parcel relative to
the Village’s need to retain certain types of easements or the necessity to
relocate any public facilities or to install a sidewalk in the parcel. There
may be public or private easements or conditions of title that affect the
parcel, but if the Tax Reactivation Purchaser desires to acquire the parcel,
they will take subject to such encumbrances. The Village Attorney will deliver
to the applicant or to their attorney copies of the title commitment and the
Village Engineer’s written recommendation relative to the necessary easements
or conditions that the Village will require as part of the sale.
   (D)   Escrow hold deposit. Following approval of the authorizing resolution,
the applicant shall also, within 48 hours of such approval, make a deposit with
the Village in an amount recommended by staff and approved by the Board of
Trustees as deemed necessary to secure the timely performance of the applicant
of the development and other obligations entered into by the applicant under
this program and the redevelopment agreement to be entered into by the parties.
This "escrow hold deposit" shall be provided by the Village to the title
company at closing, to be held at the title company, in escrow, for the
duration of the development of the property or until termination of the
redevelopment agreement, whichever is earlier. The applicant shall receive a
refund of the escrow hold deposit upon the earlier of the issuance of a final
occupancy certificate for the completed development of the property, or the
termination of the redevelopment agreement. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
redevelopment agreement shall provide that, in the event of the applicant's
non- performance, the escrow hold deposit may be forfeited to the Village as
damages and in reimbursement for the Village's costs in pursuing termination
and reconveyance of the property.
(Ord. CO-02-17, passed 6-17-2002; Am. Ord. CO-2012-14, passed 8-21-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2024-48, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.05 REDEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT.
   All applicants shall, prior to sale, be required to enter into a
redevelopment agreement with the Village wherein the applicant agrees to:
   (A)   Pay the Village for all costs and expenses, including the cost of
obtaining an affidavit of title or title commitment prior to conveyance and the
other costs reimbursable to the Village under this section;
   (B)   Accept title to the parcel by a recordable quitclaim deed;
   (C)   Provide the Village with a list of the project improvements, a site
plan for the property, and any building plans for the property;
   (D)   Complete the project and pay property taxes as set forth in the
redevelopment agreement or title to the property may, in the sole discretion of
the Village President and Board of Trustees, revert back to the Village;
   (E)   Pay all debts, judgments or other money owed the village prior to or
at closing on the parcel;
   (F)   Provide the administrative costs reimbusement deposit required in §
156.04 within 48 hours of approval of the conveyance by the Village Board of
Trustees; and
   (G)   Provide the escrow hold deposit required in § 156.04 within 48 hours
of approval of the conveyance by the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. CO-02-17, passed 6-17-2002; Am. Ord. CO-2012-14, passed 8-21-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2024-48, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.06 CONDITIONS OF SALE.
   (A)   All parcels sold under the Tax Reactivation Program shall either
through covenants, conditions and restrictions in the deed or provisions in the
redevelopment agreement:
      (1)   Require the parcel to be developed as set forth in the
redevelopment agreement. Failure to comply with this may, in the sole
discretion of the Village President and Board of Trustees, obligate the
applicant to pay all taxes, penalties and interest accrued against the property
during the time period the applicant owned the parcel, and cause the property
to be reconveyed to the Village; and
      (2)   Provide that the parcel is being conveyed in “as is, where is
condition, including any environmental conditions existing in, on, or beneath
the property”.
   (B)   The Village Board may require that other covenants, conditions or
restrictions be required that are deemed to be in the public interest.
   (C)   The conditions of sale, whether imposed through the deed or
redevelopment agreement, may be made to run with the land for a period of time
to be determined by the Village.
(Ord. CO-02-17, passed 6-17-2002; Am. Ord. CO-2012-14, passed 8-21-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2024-48, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.07 CONVEYANCE OF TITLE.
   Upon the approval of sale of a parcel by the President and Board of
Trustees, the title of such property shall be transferred to the applicant by
issuance of a quitclaim deed by the Village, as grantor, to the applicant-
purchaser, as grantee. Fee simple title to the property shall be conveyed by
the Village to the applicant in “as is, where is condition, including any
environmental conditions existing in, on, or beneath the property”. The
President or their proxy are authorized to execute, and the Village Clerk
authorized to attest, quitclaim deeds conveying title to applicants upon
approval by the President and Board of Trustees. The Village, at the
applicant’s cost, shall record the deed with the office of the County Recorder
of Deeds within 30 days of the date of sale. Conveyance of the property shall
take place within 90 days of approval. If conveyance does not take place within
the 90 days, the authority given by the President and Board of Trustees for
conveyance of the property shall automatically terminate unless the time for
conveyance has been extended in writing by mutual agreement of the parties.
(Ord. C0-02-17, passed 6-17-2002; Am. Ord. CO-2012-14, passed 8-21-2012; Am.
Ord. CO-2024-48, passed 11-19-2024)
§ 156.08 RESPONSIBILITY FOR TAXES.
   Subsequent to the date of sale and issuance of the quitclaim deed, the
applicant will assume responsibility for all newly imposed real estate taxes
and any other state, county or Village fees, charges, taxes or assessments
applicable to the parcel.
(Ord. CO-02-17, passed 6-17-2002; Am. Ord. CO-2012-14, passed 8-21-2012)
CHAPTER 157: POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY SITING
Section
   
157.01   Definitions
   
157.02   Village approval of pollution control facilities
   
157.03   Pollution Control Facility Siting Hearing Officer
   
157.04   Procedure for filing an application for approval of a pollution
control facility
   
157.05   Procedure for filing written comments to an application for site
location approval for pollution control facility
   
157.06   Hearings on applications
   
157.07   Decisions
   
157.08   Administrative fees and costs
§ 157.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a separate meaning. All other
terms used in this chapter and defined in the Act shall have the same
definitions and meanings as found in the Act, including, but not limited to
those terms defined in § 157.03 (415 ILCS 5/3).
   ACT. The Illinois Environmental Protection Act, as amended from time to
time. (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.)
   APPLICANT. Any person, firm or partnership, association, corporation,
company, limited liability company or organization of any kind proposing to
obtain site location approval and IEPA permits for a new pollution control
facility within the Village's jurisdiction, and includes the fee owner of such
site, the proposed operator, and any other party with an interest in the site,
such as a lessee, contract purchaser or land trust beneficiary.
   RULES AND PROCEDURES. Refers to the "Rules and Procedures - Pollution
Control Facility Siting - Village of Maywood, Illinois", established by the
Board of Trustees pursuant to § 157.08.
   BOARD. The Illinois Pollution Control Board.
   COUNTY. The county in which the new pollution control facility is proposed
to be located.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. A site at which hazardous waste is to be
managed, such as, treated, stored or disposed. "Hazardous waste" is waste so
defined in the "Act".
   HEARING OFFICER. Refers to a person appointed by the Village President, with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees to conduct a public hearing as
provided in this chapter.
   IEPA. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   JURISDICTION. The corporate boundaries of the Village and to the
jurisdiction granted to a municipality pursuant to 65 ILCS 5/11-15.1-2.1.
   PCF. A pollution control facility as defined in the Act. "PCF" includes a
new pollution control facility as defined by the Act.
(Ord. C0-02-34, passed 11-13-2002)
§ 157.02 VILLAGE APPROVAL OF POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITIES.
   No site location approval for the development or construction of a new PCF
within the Village's jurisdiction may be granted by the Board of Trustees
unless an application is filed for approval of such site and is submitted for
consideration to the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. C0-02-34, passed 11-13-2002)
§ 157.03 POLLUTION CONTROL FACILITY SITING HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   Within 14 days following the receipt of the request for site location
approval, the Village President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees shall appoint a Hearing Officer to serve during any public hearing
concerning an application for site location approval. The Hearing Officer shall
serve at the pleasure of the Board of Trustees. Compensation for the services
of the Hearing Officer shall be agreed upon between the Hearing Officer and the
Board of Trustees before a hearing. The duties of the Hearing Officer shall be
as provided for herein and in the rules and procedures.
   (B)   All meetings and hearings on the siting application shall be at the
call of the Hearing Officer at such times as maybe required.
(Ord. C0-02-34, passed 11-13-2002)
§ 157.04 PROCEDURE FOR FILING AN APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF A POLLUTION
CONTROL FACILITY.
   (A)   (1)   To request siting approval for a new PCF within the Village's
jurisdiction, an applicant must file an application with the Village Clerk,
with, unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Trustees pursuant to
subdivision (2) below, a minimum of 25 copies of the application and the
substance of the applicant's proposal showing sufficient details describing the
proposed facility to demonstrate compliance with the Act and Board regulations,
including all site plans, engineering including calculations, exhibits and
maps, and all documents, if any, to be submitted to the IEPA as of the date of
filing the application. At a minimum, the application shall comply with the
rules and procedures. The form of the application may be obtained from the
Village Clerk.
      (2)   A simple majority of the Board of Trustees may, prior to receipt of
a particular request for site location approval hereunder, reduce the number of
copies of such request, or particular portions thereof, which must be submitted
under subsection (1). Such reductions may be granted upon the written motion of
a person who has, pursuant to Section 39.2(b) of the Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et
seq.), filed a notice of intent to submit an application for location approval,
which notice has also advised the recipients of the applicant's intention to
move for a copies reduction under this section. Such reductions motion must be
filed with the Cleric at least 5 calendar days prior to a regularly scheduled
Board of Trustees meeting. The moving party must submit a certified copy of the
notice of intent, and demonstrate that: compliance with the copies requirement
of subsection (1) will be inordinately expensive, without commensurate benefit
to the Village and the public; and that the proposed copies reduction will not
work any fundamental unfairness on the Village or the public, in their ability
to review, and prepare for the hearing on the location approval application.
The Board of Trustees shall act upon the motion expeditiously and may act upon
the request for copies reduction at its first regular meeting after filing of
the motion.
      (3)   (a)   In addition to the foregoing, the applicant shall deposit
with the Village Clerk at the time of filing the application for site approval
of a new PCF a filing fee deposit in the form of a certified or cashier's check
of $250,000, except that a filing fee deposit of $500,000 is required if the
proposed facility is designed as a hazardous waste disposal site or if the
disposal or volume reduction of any waste will be by incineration or burning.
In the event the applicant files an application for site approval of a waste
transfer station only, a reduced cost deposit in the amount of $100,000 must be
submitted to cover the costs as set forth below. If the applicant elects to
file an amended application for site location approval for any PCF in
accordance with this chapter, such filing shall be accompanied by payment of a
supplemental fee of $50,000.
         (b)   The applicable filing fee is intended to defray the reasonable
and necessary costs of processing the application, including, but not limited
to: costs of site inspection, clerical expenses, copying costs, space rental,
Hearing Officer compensation, court reporter expenses, transcription costs,
public notice expenses, Village Attorney and Village consultants (such as
qualified professional engineers, planners, appraisers, environmental counsel,
and the like) (including tests, exhibits, and testimony, if any, provided by
the consultants), and other relevant costs incident to the consideration of an
application, the costs incident to preparing the record for appeal, and the
cost of representing the Village on appeal in case of an appeal of a Board of
Trustees decision (the "Village costs"). If at anytime the funds deposited by
the applicant are reduced below $50,000, the applicant shall deposit an
additional $50,000.
         (c)   The applicant may satisfy its costs deposit obligations through
cash or a combination of cash and an irrevocable letter of credit issued to the
Village, provided that the amount of cash balance available to pay Village-
incurred costs shall never be less than $50,000. In the event that the cash
balance is less than $50,000, the Village shall be authorized to draw down the
letter of credit in the amount of $50,000 and place the proceeds in the cash
deposit account.
         (d)   If there are funds remaining in the filing fee deposit after
payment of the Village costs, such amount shall be refunded to the applicant
upon the final resolution of the application process (including appeals to the
Illinois Pollution Control Board, Appellate Court, Illinois Supreme Court,
federal courts, and administrative review in the courts, if any). Should the
Village incur any additional costs in excess of the applicable filing fee
deposit, the applicant shall bear any and all such additional costs and shall
promptly pay over such additional amount to the Village upon request or demand.
The application must be complete, with answers provided for each question on
the application form. The application must contain consecutively numbered pages
and it must be accompanied by all site plans, exhibits, maps and documents
required by this chapter and by the rules and procedures. The date that the
applicant files a complete application in proper from, together with the
applicable filing fee deposit, with the Village Clerk shall be considered the
official filing date for all time limit purposes. The application is not
effective unless the application is in strict compliance with this chapter, the
rules and procedures and with the Act (415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.). If upon review of
the application within 21 days of its submittal, it is determined by the
Village to be incomplete and not in strict conformance with the aforesaid, the
application is deemed not filed and the filing fee (less Village costs and
expenses) shall be returned to the applicant. Failure of the Village to reject
a request for site approval is not, and shall not be deemed, acceptance of the
form or substance of the request, and the applicant remains solely responsible
to demonstrate that the location approval criteria are all met. At any time
prior to completion by the applicant of the presentation of the applicant's
factual evidence and an opportunity for cross-questioning by the Hearing
Officer, Village representatives and any participants, the applicant may file
not more than 1 amended application upon payment of additional fees pursuant to
Section 39.2(k) of the Act (415 ILCS 5/1) and subsection (3) of this chapter.
Provided, however, that the time limitation for final action set forth in
Section 39.2(e) of the Act (415 ILCS 5/1) and § 157.07(B) of this chapter shall
be extended for an additional period of 90 days.
      (4)   In the event a host agreement has been entered into between the
Village and the applicant, fees and costs will be paid in accordance with the
host agreement in lieu of (3) above. If, prior to making a final local siting
decision, the Village has negotiated and entered into a host agreement with the
applicant, the terms and conditions of the host agreement, whether written or
oral, shall be disclosed and made a part of the hearing record for that local
siting proceeding. In the case of an oral agreement, the disclosure shall be
made in the form of a written summary jointly prepared and submitted by the
Village and the applicant and shall describe the terms and conditions of the
oral agreement.
   (B)   (1)   Upon receipt of a proper and complete application, and payment
of the applicable filing fee deposit, the Village Clerk shall date stamp all
the copies and immediately deliver 1 copy to the Chairman or County Executive
of the County Board, 1 copy to the County Solid Waste Director, 1 copy to each
member of the Board of Trustees, 1 copy to the clerk of each municipality
entitled to notice of the public hearings pursuant to §
157.06(B), 1 copy to the head of each Village department or office as follows:
Village Manager’s office; Building and Code Enforcement Department; Water and
Sewer Department; Street Department; Department of Engineering; Community
Development Department; Fire Department; Police Department; Village Attorney’s
Office; and 3 copies to the Hearing Officer selected by the Village President
and Board of Trustees. The Village Manager shall be responsible for
coordinating review of the request for site approval by the aforementioned
Departments and is authorized to call interdepartment meetings for the purpose
of defining those reports and studies which are desired and for setting
deadlines for the submittal of reports and recommendations.
      (2)   The Village Manager may retain consultants on behalf of the Village
to develop a record sufficient to form the basis of an appeal of the Board of
Trustees's decision. The consultants and the Village agencies shall then
commence a study of the application. The applicant shall cooperate fully with
the consultants and the technical staff of the Village in their review of the
application, including providing access to the site for study or testing,
including but not limited to geophysical testing.
   (C)   A copy of the application and all related documents or other materials
on file with the Village Council shall be made available for public inspection
in the office of the Village Clerk during normal business hours. Members of the
public shall be allowed to obtain a copy of the application or any part thereof
upon payment of the actual cost of reproduction as outlined in the Illinois
Freedom of Information Act (5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.)
   (D)   It is the applicant's duty to comply with all notice requirements set
forth in the Act. The applicant shall:
      (1)   No later than 14 days prior to filing an application for site
location approval with the Village Clerk, cause written notice of such
application to be served either in person or by registered mail, return receipt
requested, on the owners of all property within the subject area not solely
owned by the applicant, and on the owners of all property within 250 feet in
each direction of the lot line of the subject property, the owners being such
persons or entities which appear from the authentic tax records of the county
in which the facility is to be located; provided, that the number of all feet
occupied by public roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be
excluded in computing the 250 feet requirement; provided further, that in no
event shall this requirement exceed 400 feet, including public streets, alleys
and other public ways.
      (2)   The applicant shall serve such written notice upon each member of
the General Assembly from the legislative district in which the proposed
facility is to be located, and this notice shall also be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the site is located.
      (3)   The applicant shall state in such notice the name and address of
the applicant, the location of the proposed site, the nature and size of the
development, the nature of the activity proposed, the probable life of the
proposed activity, the date when the request for site approval will be
submitted to the Village Clerk, a description of the right of persons to
comment on such request as hereafter provided, and any other information as may
be required by the rules and procedures and the Act.
      (4)   The applicant shall include in the application proof of compliance
with all pre-filing notice requirements, including verified or certified copies
of those pre-filing notices required by Section 39.2(b) of the Act (415 ILCS 5/
1).
(Ord. C0-02-34, passed 11-13-2002; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am.
Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 157.05 PROCEDURE FOR FILING WRITTEN COMMENTS TO AN APPLICATION FOR SITE
LOCATION APPROVAL FOR A PCF.
   (A)   Any person may file written comments with the Village Clerk concerning
the appropriateness of the proposed site for its intended purpose. The Hearing
Officer shall consider any comment received or postmarked from the date of
acceptance of the application through and until 30 days after the date of the
last public hearing in making his final determination. The written comments
shall be mailed or delivered to the Maywood Village Clerk, 40 West Madison
Street, Maywood, Illinois 60153. The written comments shall clearly designate
reference to the PCF application to which they refer to ensure their
consideration by the Hearing Officer. Upon receipt, the Village Clerk shall
date stamp the comments and refer them to the Hearing Officer.
   (B)   The above-mentioned written comments shall become part of the record
of the proceedings.
(Ord. C0-02-34, passed 11-13-2002)
§ 157.06 HEARINGS ON APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   At least 1 public hearing shall be held by the Hearing Officer no
sooner than 90 days but no later than 120 days from and after the receipt of
the application for PCF site location approval. Any Board of Trustees member
may attend such hearings and a transcript shall be made and retained of all
portions of the public hearing.
   (B)   (1)   The Village shall cause to be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county of the proposed site and in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Village a notice of such public hearing not later
than 14 days prior to the hearing.
      (2)   The Village shall also serve written notice of such hearing by
certified mail, return receipt requested, on all members of the Illinois
General Assembly from the district in which the proposed site is located, to
the governing authority of every municipality contiguous to the proposed site
or contiguous to the municipality in which the proposed site is to be located,
to the County Board where the proposed site is to be located and to the IEPA.
The applicant shall cooperate with the Village Clerk to ensure publication and
service of such notice prior to the commencement of the public hearing.
   (C)   The Hearing Officer shall notify the applicant in writing of the date
and location of the public hearing at least 21 days prior to such hearing.
   (D)   Members or representatives of the governing authority of any
municipality contiguous to the proposed site or contiguous to the municipality
in which the proposed site is to be located and members or representatives of
the County Board in which the proposed site is to be located may appear at and
participate in the public hearings.
   (E)   (1)   The public hearing shall develop a record sufficient to form the
basis of appeal of the decision in accordance with Section 40.1 of the Act (415
ILCS 5/1). During the course of the public hearing before the Hearing Officer,
the Hearing Officer shall receive testimony from the applicant and witnesses
whom the applicant may call in support of the application, any Village
witnesses, any objectors, and any other witnesses having relevant information,
in order for the Board of Trustees to determine if the proposed facility meets
the following criteria (or such amended criteria as may be set forth from time
to time in the Act).
         (a)   That the facility is necessary to accommodate the waste needs of
the area that it is intended to serve;
         (b)   That the facility is so designed, located, and proposed to be
operated that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected;
         (c)   That the facility is located so as to minimize incompatibility
with the character of the surrounding area and to minimize the effect on the
value of the surrounding property;
         (d)   For a facility other than a sanitary landfill or waste disposal
site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-year flood plain,
or that the site is floodproofed; for a facility that is a sanitary landfill or
waste disposal site, the facility is located outside the boundary of the 100-
year flood plain, or if the facility is a facility described in subsection (b)
(3) of Section 22.19a of the Illinois Environmental Protection Act (415 ILCS 5/
22.19a), the site is flood-proofed;
         (e)   That the plan of operations for the facility is designed to
minimize the danger to the surrounding area from fire, spills, or other
operational accidents;
         (f)   That traffic patterns to or from the facility are so designed to
minimize the impact on existing traffic flows;
         (g)   That if the facility will be treating, storing or disposing of
hazardous waste, an emergency response plan exists for the facility which
includes notification, containment and evacuation procedures to be used in case
of an accidental release;
         (h)   That if the facility is to be located in a county where the
County Board has adopted a solid waste management plan consistent with the
planning requirements of the Local Solid Waste Disposal Act, or the Solid Waste
Planning and Recycling Act, the facility is consistent with that plan; and
         (i)   That if the facility will be located within a regulated recharge
area, any applicable requirements specified by the Illinois Pollution Control
Board for such areas have been met.
      (2)   The Hearing Officer and the Board of Trustees may also consider as
evidence the previous operating experience and past record of convictions or
admissions of violations of the applicant (and any subsidiary or parent
corporation of the applicant) in the field of solid waste management when
considering criteria (a) and (e). The applicant shall affirmatively present
oral testimony fairly showing the previous operating experience and past record
of convictions or admissions of violations of the applicant (and any subsidiary
or parent corporation of the applicant) in the field of solid waste management.
   (F)   A transcript shall be kept of all proceedings before the Hearing
Officer. The Hearing Officer shall preside at the public hearing and shall make
any decisions concerning the admission of evidence and the manner in which the
hearing is conducted subject to this chapter and the rules and procedures.
However, the Hearing Officer shall make all rulings and decisions in accordance
with fundamental fairness. No ruling of the Hearing Officer concerning
admissibility of evidence or procedural issues at the public hearing shall be
appealable to the Board of Trustees. Issues of jurisdiction shall be finally
determined by the Board of Trustees.
   (G)   The applicant for site location approval shall have the burden of
proof and the burden of going forward with evidence. The testimonial evidence
introduced by the applicant may not exceed the scope of the application. Such
oral testimony may only explain and clarify the application, not expand or
amend the application.
   (H)   All persons desiring to be participants in the hearing, including
members of the public, must submit written notification of the intent to the
Village Clerk before the first day of the public hearing or register with the
Hearing Officer on the first day of the hearing. Any person so appearing at
such public hearing shall have the right to present testimony and witnesses.
Any such person shall have the right to be represented by an attorney at the
public hearing. Opportunity for any persons appearing at the public hearing to
cross-examine any witness may be reasonably limited in time and duration by the
Hearing Officer, to assure completion of the hearings in accordance with the
deadlines of the Act. The Hearing Officer may propound questions to any witness
or to the applicant to clarify the record established by the participants at
the hearing or to bring out relevant information. The Village shall be deemed a
participant and a party to all proceedings and shall proceed last with its case
and cross-examination.
   (I)   The applicant and the Village's counsel shall be allowed to cross-
examine witnesses by right, subject to such reasonable limitation as may be set
by the Hearing Officer. Cross-examination by the Village shall not be limited
to matters contained in the application. Parties represented by attorneys may
be allowed to cross-examine in the discretion of the Hearing Officer. Other
persons shall be allowed to submit questions to the Hearing Officer, who shall
exercise discretion in the manner in which such questions are to be posed to
witnesses. Sufficient examination of witnesses is to be allowed so as to
provide for fundamental fairness.
   (J)   All witnesses shall testify under oath. Testimony may include the use
of prepared statements and exhibits. If testimony is by prepared statement,
copies of such prepared statements shall be made available at the hearings (or,
prior to the first hearing date, at the office of the Village Clerk) at least 1
day in advance of such testimony being given. All witnesses shall be subject to
reasonable examination as follows: direct, cross-examination, redirect, and
recross.
   (K)   The Hearing Officer may exercise discretion to allow public comment at
each hearing or may set one time for public comment.
   (L)   The Hearing Officer shall, in the Hearing Officer's discretion and to
the extent reasonably practicable, permit the Village, the applicant and any
party to file proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law.
   (M)   The Hearing Officer shall submit his/her report to the Board of
Trustees as soon as practicable, but in no event earlier than the end of the
30-day comment period.
   (N)   The siting approval procedures and criteria provided for in the Act
and in this chapter for new PCF's shall be the exclusive siting procedures and
rules and approval procedures. Local zoning or other local land use requirement
shall not be applicable to such siting decisions. However, to the extent
provided by law, the applicant shall also comply with zoning and other
requirements.
(Ord. C0-02-34, passed 11-13-2002)
§ 157.07 DECISIONS.
   (A)   Once the Hearing Officer has made his written report containing the
public record, the report shall be submitted to the Board of Trustees for its
decision as to the ultimate approval or disapproval of the proposed site
location. Five copies of the record of the public hearing shall also be made
available to the Board of Trustees as soon as the transcript becomes available.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall make a decision based on the record from
the public hearing. The decision of the Board of Trustees shall be by
resolution in writing, specifying the reasons for the decision, such reasons to
be in conformity with Section 39.2(a) of the Act (415 ILCS 5/1). In granting
site location approval, the Board of Trustees may impose such conditions as may
be reasonable and necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Act to the extent
that the conditions are not inconsistent with the Act and the regulations
promulgated by the Illinois Pollution Control Board. Such decisions shall be
available for public inspection at the office of the Village Clerk and may be
copied upon payment of the cost of reproduction. If there is no final action by
the Board of Trustees within 180 days after the filing of the application for
site location approval, the applicant may deem the application approved unless
the time for approval has been extended for an additional period of 90 days
pursuant to the Act and this chapter.
   (C)   An applicant may not file an application for site location approval
which is substantially the same as a request which was disapproved, pursuant to
a finding against the applicant under any criteria (a) through (i) of division
(E) above, and of Section 39.2(a) of the Act (415 ILCS 5/1), within 2 years.
   (D)   Siting approval obtained pursuant to this chapter is transferable and
may be transferred to a subsequent owner or operator. In the event that siting
approval has been transferred to a subsequent owner or operator, that
subsequent owner or operator assumes and takes subject to any and all
conditions imposed upon the prior owner or operator by the Village. However,
any such conditions imposed pursuant to this section may be modified by
agreement between the subsequent owner or operator and the Village. Further, in
the event that siting approval obtained pursuant to this section has been
transferred to a subsequent owner or operator, that subsequent owner or
operator assumes all rights and obligations and takes the facility subject to
any and all terms and conditions of any existing host agreement between the
prior owner or operator and the Village.
   (E)   A local siting approval granted under this section shall expire at the
end of 2 calendar years from the date upon which it was granted, unless the
local siting approval granted under this section is for a sanitary landfill
operation, in which case the approval shall expire at the end of 3 calendar
years from the date upon which it was granted, and unless within that period
the applicant has made application to the agency for a permit to develop the
site. In the event that the local siting decision has been appealed, such
expiration period shall be deemed to begin on the date upon which the appeal
process is concluded.
(Ord. C0-02-34, passed 11-13-2002)
§ 157.08 ADMINISTRATION OF FEES AND COSTS.
   (A)   All expenses incurred by the Village in managing or reviewing of the
request for site approval, conducting the public hearing, arriving at the site
approval decision, and any appeals from the Board of Trustees decision shall be
paid from the costs deposit as provided in this chapter. The costs deposit
shall be placed in 1 or more interest-bearing savings or checking accounts in
the name of the Village, with rights of withdrawal limited to the Village
Treasurer. Depositories shall be financial institutions resident in the
Village.
   (B)   Records of Village-incurred expenses will be submitted to the Village
Treasurer, who shall organize the records and prepare and submit periodic
reports of expenditures to the Board of Trustees, the Clerk and the applicant.
Not earlier than 7 days after the submittal of each such report to the
applicant, the Village Treasurer may draw upon the application fee deposit in
the amount of the reported incurred expenses.
   (C)   Upon termination of proceedings (including appeals), a final
accounting and summary of all authorized expenditures and reimbursements shall
be presented to the Board of Trustees by the Village Treasurer.
   (D)   Any portion of a costs deposit not required for payment of costs or
expenses incurred by the Village hereunder shall be returned to the applicant
within a reasonable time. Should there be costs and/or expenses in excess of
the amount paid by the applicant in the costs deposit, the applicant shall pay
any and all additional costs within a reasonable time of presentment of a
statement from the Village Treasurer.
   (E)   In order to expedite payment of all bills incurred as a result of
administering the hearing process, all bills and questions concerning billing
should be directed to the Village Treasurer.
(Ord. C0-02-34, passed 11-13-2002)
CHAPTER 158: HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION AND DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS AND
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
Section
   
158.01   Purpose; policy
   
158.02   Definitions
   
158.03   Creation of Historic Preservation Commission; term and appointment
   
158.04   Meetings and procedures of Commission
   
158.05   Powers and duties of Commission
   
158.06   Surveys and research
   
158.07   Nominating applications for landmark and historic district
designations
   
158.08   Landmark designation criteria
   
158.09   Landmark designation procedures
   
158.10   Criteria for historic district designation
   
158.11   Historic district designation procedures
   
158.12   Certificate of appropriateness
   
158.13   Application for certificate of appropriateness
   
158.14   Standards for certificate of appropriateness
   
158.15   Design guidelines
   
158.16   Hearing on certificate of appropriateness applications
   
158.17   Issuance of certificate of appropriateness
   
158.18   Denial of certificate of appropriateness
   
158.19   Certificate of economic hardship
   
158.20   Appeals
   
158.21   Natural destruction or demolition
   
158.22   Zoning amendments affecting landmarks and historic districts
   
158.23   Fees
   
158.24   Official landmark or historic district designations
   
158.25   Historic landmark plaques
 
   
158.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.01 PURPOSE; POLICY.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the protection, enhancement,
perpetuation, and use of improvements of special character or historical
interest or value in the interest of the health, prosperity, safety, and
welfare of the people of the Village of Maywood by:
   (A)   Ensuring the preservation of landmarks and historic areas that
represent elements of the Village’s cultural, social, economic, political and
architectural history and the heritage of the Village and residents of the
Village;
   (B)   Promoting civic pride in the beauty and noble accomplishments of the
past as represented in the Village’s landmarks and historic districts;
   (C)   Stabilizing and strengthening the economy of the Village by defining
and enhancing landmarks and historic areas that are significant in the history
of the Village or in other ways;
   (D)   Protecting and enhancing the attractiveness of the Village to buyers,
visitors and shoppers and thereby supporting business, commerce, industry, and
providing economic benefits to the Village;
   (E)   Aiding in the protection of landmarks and historic areas from future
neglect, demolition, or indiscriminate and ill-advised development; and
   (F)   Fostering and encouraging preservation and restoration of landmarks
and historic areas and thereby preventing future urban blight.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALTERATION. Any act or process that changes 1 or more of the exterior
architectural features of a structure, including, but not limited to the
erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure.
   AREA. A specific geographic division of the Village.
   ADDITION. Any act or process which changes 1 or more of the “exterior
architectural features” of a structure designated for preservation by adding
to, joining with or increasing the size or capacity of the structure.
   BOARD or VILLAGE BOARD. The Village President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Maywood.
   BUILDING. Any structure created for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or property of any kind and which is permanently affixed to
the land.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. A certificate from the Historic Preservation
Commission authorizing plans for alterations, construction, removal or
demolition of a landmark or site within a designated historic district.
   COMMISSION. The Village of Maywood Historic Preservation Commission.
   COMMISSIONERS. Voting members of the Village’s Historic Preservation
Commission.
   CONSTRUCTION. The act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the
erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property.
   DEMOLITION. Any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a landmark
or site within a historic district.
   DESIGN GUIDELINE. A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve the
historic and architectural character of a structure or area.
   EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL APPEARANCE. The architectural and general composition
of the exterior of a structure, including, but not limited to, the kind, color,
and the texture of the building material and the type, design and character of
all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant elements.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area designated as a “historic district” by ordinance
of the Village Board and which may contain within definable geographic
boundaries 1 or more landmarks and which may have within its boundaries other
properties or structures that, while not of such historic and/or architectural
significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the
overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the
historic district.
   LANDMARK. Any building, structure or site which has been designated as a
“landmark” by ordinance of the Village Board, pursuant to procedures prescribed
herein, that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, and preservation because
it its historic and/or architectural significance to the Village.
   OWNER OF RECORD. The person, corporation, or other legal entity listed as
the taxpayer of record of a property in the records of the Cook County
Treasurer.
   REHABILITATION. The process of returning a property to a state of utility,
through repair or alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary
use while preserving those portions and features of the property which are
significant to its historic, architectural and cultural values.
   REMOVAL. Any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site.
   REPAIR. Any change that does not require a building permit or that is not
construction, relocation or alteration.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
permanent or temporary location on or in the ground, including, but not limited
to, buildings, fences, gazebos, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for
tennis courts, radio and television and cell phone antennae, including
supporting towers, swimming pools, satellite dishes, solar panels and wind
generation.
   STRUCTURAL CHANGE. Any change or repair in the supporting members of a
building, structure, roof or exterior watts which would expand the building in
height, width or bulk of the building.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.03 CREATION OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION; TERM AND APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   Creation. In furtherance of the creation and designation of landmarks
and historic areas within the Village of Maywood and the purposes of this
chapter, a Historic Preservation Commission composed of concerned citizens is
hereby established as a part of Village government, pursuant to section 11-
48.2-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/11-48.2-2) and pursuant to the
Village’s home rule powers as set forth in Article VII, Section 6 of the
Illinois Constitution of 1970.
   (B)   Term and appointment. The number of members of such Commission and
their terms of office shall be established by the Village Board as follows: the
Commission shall consist of 7 members, including a Chairperson, to be appointed
by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
The members shall be appointed for 2-year terms provided that 2 of the members
initially appointed shall be appointed for 3-year terms. The Chairperson shall
appoint a Commission member to serve as Secretary. The Director of
Sustainability and Innovation or their designee shall serve as the Village
staff liaison to the Commission. The Village President shall appoint 1 Trustee
to serve as the Village Board liaison to the Commission and who shall attend
Commission meetings and report to the Board of Trustees on matters being
considered by the Commission. Commissioners shall serve without compensation.
Members whose term has expired shall continue to serve until a successor is
appointed. The sitting members of the Landmarks Commission at the time of
creation of the Commission shall automatically become members of the Historic
Preservation Commission upon enactment of this chapter for the remainder of
their existing Landmark Commission terms.
   (C)   Qualifications. The members shall be appointed on the basis of
expertise, experience or interest in the area of architectural history,
building construction or engineering, finance, historical and architectural
preservation, neighborhood organizing or real estate.
(Ord. CO-08-29, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2010-04, passed 2-16-2010; Am.
Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 158.04 MEETINGS AND PROCEDURES OF COMMISSION.
   (A)   Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held no less than
quarterly. Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson or any 3
Commissioners.
   (B)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. All decisions or
actions of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be made by a majority
vote of those members present and voting at any meeting where a quorum exists.
   (C)   All meetings, hearings and deliberations shall be open to the public
except as may be provided for in the Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120/
1.01 et seq.). Testimony at any hearing may be required by the Commission to be
given under oath.
   (D)   The Commission shall follow Roberts Rules of Order for all procedural
rules and may adopt additional more specific procedural rules and may adopt
additional more specific procedural rules to govern how business before it is
conducted. Such additional procedural rules shall be consistent with the
statutes of the state, this chapter and the Village Code and shall be filed
with the Village Clerk. Any rule so adopted which relates solely to the conduct
of hearings, and which is not required by the statutes of the state, this
chapter or the Village Code, may be waived by the Chairperson upon good cause
being shown.
   (E)   The Chairman, and in their absence the acting Chairman, may administer
oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
   (F)   No action shall be taken by the Commission that could in any manner
deprive or restrict the owner of property in its use, modification,
maintenance, disposition, or demolition until such owner shall first have had
the opportunity to be heard at public meeting of the Commission, as provided
herein.
   (G)   No member of the Historic Preservation Commission shall vote on any
matter that may materially or apparently affect the property, income or
business interest of that member.
   (H)   The Secretary of the Commission shall mail notice of any decision of
the Commission to the applicant and any other person who has requested notice
of the decision.
   (I)   The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the
vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the
Village Clerk and shall be a public record.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION.
   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To adopt its own procedural regulations;
   (B)   To conduct an ongoing survey to identify historically and
architecturally significant properties, structures and areas within the
Village;
   (C)   To investigate and recommend to the Village Board the adoption of
ordinances designating areas, properties, structures or sites having special
historic, community, or architectural value as “landmarks” or “historic
districts;”
   (D)   To keep a register of all areas, properties, structures and sites that
have been designated as landmarks or historic districts, including all
information required for each designation;
   (E)   To determine an appropriate system of plaques or markers for
identification of landmarks and historic districts and to make recommendations
for the design and implementation of specific markings of the streets and
routes leading from 1 landmark or historic district to another;
   (F)   To advise owners of landmarks and property, structures or sites within
historic districts on physical and financial aspects of preservation,
renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on the
State or National Register of Historic Places;
   (G)   To inform and educate the citizens of the Village concerning the
historic and architectural heritage of the Village by publishing appropriate
maps, newsletters, brochures, and pamphlets, and by holding or sponsoring
programs and seminars;
   (H)   To hold public hearings and to review applications for construction,
alteration, removal, or demolition affecting proposed or designated landmarks
or structures or historic districts and issue or deny certificates of
appropriateness for such actions. Applicants shall be required to submit plans,
drawings, elevations, specifications, and other information as may be necessary
to make decisions;
   (I)   To develop specific guidelines for the alteration, demolition,
construction, or removal of landmarks or property, structures and sites within
historic districts for approval by the Village Board;
   (J)   To review proposed zoning map or text amendments, applications for
special use permits or variances that affect proposed or designated landmarks
and historic districts and provide a recommendation. Such review shall be made,
when possible, prior to the date of the hearing by the Village Plan Commission/
Zoning Board of Appeals;
   (K)   To administer on the behalf of the Village any property or full or
partial interest in real property, including a conservation right as that term
is used in state law, which the Village may have or accept as a gift or
otherwise, upon designation by the Village Board;
   (L)   To accept and administer on behalf of the Village such gifts, grants
and money as may be appropriate for the purposes of this chapter, upon
direction and approval by the Village Board;
   (M)   To call upon available Village staff members as well as other experts
for technical advice, subject to the approval of the Village Manager;
   (N)   To testify before all boards and commissions, including the Village
Plan Commission/Zoning Board of Appeals, on any matter affecting historically
and architecturally significant property and landmarks;
   (O)   To periodically review the Village’s Zoning Ordinance and applicable
Village Code provisions and to recommend to the Village Plan Commission and
Village Board any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use
of landmarks or property and structures within historic districts;
   (P)   To confer recognition upon the owners of historic buildings,
landmarks, and structures for their historic preservation efforts by means of
certificates, plaques, markers or awards;
   (Q)   To review and comment upon Village projects or activities affecting
landmarks or historic districts; and
   (R)   To undertake any other action or activity necessary or appropriate to
the implementation of its powers and duties, or to implementation of the
purposes of this chapter, as assigned from time to time by the Village Board.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.06 SURVEYS AND RESEARCH.
   The Historic Preservation Commission shall undertake an ongoing survey and
research effort in the Village to identify neighborhoods, areas, buildings,
sites, structures, and objects that have historic, community, architectural, or
aesthetic importance, interest, or value. As part of the survey, the Historic
Preservation Commission shall review and evaluate any prior surveys and studies
by any unit of government or private organization and compile appropriate
descriptions, facts, and photographs. The Historic Preservation Commission
shall identify potential landmarks and adopt procedures to nominate them in
groups based upon the following criteria;
   (A)   Potential landmarks in 1 identifiable neighborhood, district, or
geographical area of the Village;
   (B)   Potential landmarks associated with a particular person, event, or
historical period;
   (C)   Potential landmarks of a particular architectural style or school, or
of a particular architect, engineer, builder, designer, craftsman, or artist;
   (D)   Such other criteria as may be adopted by the Commission to assure
systematic survey and nomination of all potential landmarks within the Village.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.07 NOMINATING APPLICATIONS FOR LANDMARK AND HISTORIC DISTRICT
DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Any person, group of persons or association, including, but not
limited to, the Historic Preservation Commission or Village Board, may submit a
nominating application requesting a landmark or historic district designation
for any property, structure, building, site or area within the boundaries of
the Village which may have historic or architectural significance as defined by
this chapter.
   (B)   Initiation of nominations shall be made by filing a nominating
application with the Community Development Department on a form provided by the
Department for that purpose. Persons wishing guidance or advice prior to
completing an application may contact the staff of the Community Development
Department.
   (C)   At a minimum, the nominating application shall include the following:
      (1)   For a landmark;
         (a)   The name and address of the property owner.
         (b)   The legal description and common street address of the property.
         (c)   A written statement describing the property and setting forth
reasons in support of the proposed designation.
         (d)   Documentation that the property owner has been notified or
consents to the application for designation.
         (e)   An overall site plan and photographs of the landmark. The plan
shall also include a front, side and rear elevation drawing.
      (2)   For a historic district:
         (a)   The names and addresses of the property owners.
         (b)   A map delineating the boundaries of the area to be designated.
         (c)   A written statement describing the area and properties within
the historic district and setting forth reasons in support of the proposed
designation.
         (d)   A list and photographs of representative significant properties,
structures, buildings, sites or areas within the proposed district that support
designation of the area as a historic district.
         (e)   A petition in support of designation of the area as a historic
district containing the printed names, addresses and signatures of no less than
51% of the property owners, or, if lease holders with a 5-year or longer
leasehold interest are signatories to the petition, then the petition shall
contain the printed names, addresses and signatures of no less than 51% of the
property owners and/or leaseholders.
   (D)   A filing fee may be required.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.08 LANDMARK DESIGNATION CRITERIA.
   (A)   The following criteria shall be utilized by the Commission in
determining the designation of landmarks:
      (1)   Significant value as part of the historic, heritage or cultural
characteristics of the Village, county, state or nation;
      (2)   Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the Village, county, state or county;
      (3)   Its identification with a particular movement or event of historic,
heritage or cultural significance to the Village, county, state or nation, or
with a person or persons who significantly contributed to such movement or
event;
      (4)   Representative of the distinguishing characteristics of
architecture inherently valuable for the study of a period, type, method of
construction or use of indigenous materials;
      (5)   Notable work of a master builder, designer, architect, engineer,
craftsman or artist whose individual work has influenced the development of the
Village, county, state or nation;
      (6)   Its unique location or singular physical characteristics make it an
established or familiar visual feature;
      (7)   Its character as a particularly fine or unique example of a
utilitarian structure, including but not limited to farmhouses, gas stations,
or other commercial structures, with a high level of integrity or architectural
significance;
      (8)   Area that has yielded or may be likely to yield, information
important in history or prehistory.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.09 LANDMARK DESIGNATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon the filing of a nominating application that meets all the
requirements of this chapter, the Commission or its designee shall, upon
investigation as it deems necessary, make a preliminary determination as to
whether a property, structure, building, site or area possesses the integrity
of design, workmanship, materials, location, setting and/or feeling to merit
consideration for designation as a landmark and meets 1 or more of the above
criteria.
   (B)   A preliminary determination as to whether a property, structure,
building, site or area merits consideration for designation as a landmark shall
be made by the Commission within 45 days of filing of a nomination with the
Commission, unless such matter is continued by the Commission on its motion or
for good cause shown.
   (C)   The Commission shall schedule a public hearing to be held within 60
days after its preliminary determination that a property, structure, building,
site or area merits consideration for designation as a landmark.
   (D)   Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing
shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the Village and
sent by mail to owner(s) of record and to the nominator(s) as well as to the
adjoining property owners, not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the
date of the hearing. The notice shall state the location of the property and a
statement summarizing how the proposed landmark meets the criteria set forth in
§
158.07 (Landmark Designation Criteria).
   (E)   During the public hearing, the Commission shall review and evaluate
the application according to the criteria established by this chapter.
   (F)   The Commission, upon consideration of all information, testimony,
evidence and other materials presented, shall make a determination as to
whether the nominated property, structure, building, site or area does or does
not meet the criteria for designation as a landmark.
   (G)   If the Historic Preservation Commission finds that the hearing or
consideration of the application should be continued, then the Commission may
table or continue the request until a date certain.
   (H)   A certificate of appropriateness shall be required for alteration,
construction, removal or demolition of a proposed landmark from the date when
the nominating application is presented to the Commission until the final
disposition of the request.
   (I)   If the Commission, upon a roll call vote, determines that the
nominated property, structure, building, site or area meet the criteria for
official landmark designation, the Commission shall, within 30) days, forward
its recommendation to the Village Board, along with the Commission’s findings
of fact relative to the recommendation. Said recommendation and findings shall
be accompanied by a map showing the location of the nominated property,
structure, building, site or area. Whenever possible, the owner’s written
consent to designation of the property as a landmark shall be obtained and
forwarded to the Village Board with the recommendation and findings.
   (J)   Approval of an ordinance by the Village Board is necessary for final
approval of a landmark designation.
   (K)   If the Village Board approves the application for a designation, a
notice will be sent to the property owner(s), nominators), the Community
Development Department, and the Village Clerk’s office, and the ordinance
approving the designation shall be recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds.
If the Village Board of Trustees denies the petition, no petitioner or
applicant can refile for 90 days to the Secretary of the Commission.
   (L)   A certificate of appropriateness shall be required for alteration,
construction, removal or demolition of a proposed landmark from the date when
the nominating application is presented to the Commission until the final
disposition of the request. Buildings designated as landmarks shall be subject
to issuance of certificates of appropriateness.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009) Penalty,
see §
158.99
§ 158.10 CRITERIA FOR HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION.
   The following criteria shall be utilized by the Historic Preservation
Commission in determining the designation of historic districts:
   (A)   The historic district contains 1 or more landmarks along with such
other buildings, structures, sites or areas within its definable geographic
boundaries which, while not of such historic significance to be designated as
landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the
landmark or landmarks located in such district;
   (B)   A significant number of buildings, structures, sites, properties or
areas meeting any of the standards of §
158.07 (Landmark Designation Criteria);
   (C)   Establishing a sense of time and place unique to the Village; and/or
   (D)   Exemplifying or reflecting the cultural social, economic, political or
architectural history of the nation, the state, the county, or the Village.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.11 HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Upon the filing of a nominating application that meets all the
requirements of this chapter, the Commission or its designee shall, upon
investigation as it deems necessary, make a preliminary determination as to
whether a nominated area meets 1 or more of the above criteria for a historic
district and therefore merits consideration for designation as a historic
district.
   (B)   A preliminary determination as to whether a nominated area meets 1 or
more of the foregoing criteria shall be made by the Commission within 45 days
of filing of a nomination with the Commission, unless such matter is continued
by the Commission on its motion or for good cause shown.
   (C)   The Commission shall schedule a public hearing to be held within 60
days after its preliminary determination that a nominated area merits
consideration for designation as a historic district.
   (D)   Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing
shall be published in a newspaper having general circulation in the Village and
sent by mail to owner(s) of record and to the nominator(s) as well as to the
property owners immediately adjoining the proposed district, not less than 15
nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state
the location of the property and a statement summarizing how the proposed area
meets the criteria set forth in §
158.09 (Criteria for Historic District Designation).
   (E)   During the public hearing, the Commission shall review and evaluate
the application according to the criteria established by this chapter.
   (F)   The Commission, upon consideration of all information, testimony,
evidence and other materials presented, shall make a determination as to
whether the nominated area does or does not meet the criteria for designation
as a historic district.
   (G)   If the Historic Preservation Commission finds that the hearing or
consideration of the application should be continued, then the Commission may
table or continue the request to a date certain.
   (H)   If the Commission, upon a roll call vote, determines that the
nominated area meet the criteria for official historic district designation,
the Commission shall, within 30 days, forward its recommendation to the Village
Board, along with the Commission’s findings of fact relative to the
recommendation. Said recommendation and findings shall be accompanied by a map
showing the location of the nominated area. Whenever possible, the written
consent of owners within the nominated area to designation of the area as a
historic district shall be obtained and forwarded to the Village Board with the
recommendation and findings.
   (I)   Approval of an ordinance by the Village Board is necessary for
approval of a historic district designation.
   (J)   If the Village Board approves the application for a designation, a
notice will be sent to the property owner(s) within the district, nominator(s),
the Community Development Department, and the Village Clerk’s office, and the
ordinance approving the designation shall be recorded with the County Recorder
of Deeds. If the Board of Trustees denies the petition, no petitioner or
applicant can refile for 90 days to the Secretary of the Commission.
   (K)   A certificate of appropriateness shall be required for alteration,
construction, removal or demolition of buildings, structures, sites, properties
and within a proposed historic district from the date when the nominating
application is presented to the Commission until the final disposition of the
request. Buildings, structures, sites, properties and areas within areas
designated as historic districts shall be subject to issuance of certificates
of appropriateness.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009) Penalty,
see §
158.99
§ 158.12 CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   A certificate of appropriateness (COA) issued by the Commission shall
be required before certain permits relating to alterations, construction,
removal or demolition are issued for any designated historic landmark or any
building, structure, property, or site or part thereof in a designated historic
district or for any property that is a proposed landmark or in a proposed
historic district following the date of presentation of a nominating
application to the Commission. A COA is required if the building, structure or
site wilt be altered, extended, or repaired in such a manner as to produce a
major change in the exterior appearance of such building or structure. Such
major changes include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Major changes by addition, alteration, maintenance, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, renovation or repair;
      (2)   Any new construction and demolition in whole or in part requiring a
permit from the Village;
      (3)   Moving a building;
      (4)   Any construction, alteration, demolition, or removal affecting a
significant exterior architectural feature as specified in the ordinance
designating the landmark or historic district.
   (B)   An exception to the COA requirement shall be if the applicant shows to
the Commission that a failure to grant the permit will cause an imminent threat
to life, health or property.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008) Penalty, see §
158.99
§ 158.13 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   Every application for a demolition or building or other applicable
permits requiring a COA prior to issuance, shall be accompanied by submission
of an application for a COA. Applications for a COA are available from the
Community Development Department. Such applications shall be completed and
submitted to the Community Development Department, which shall forward the
application to the Historic Preservation Commission for consideration.
   (B)   An application for issuance of a COA must include, in addition to any
other information required on the form provided:
      (1)   Street address of the property involved.
      (2)   Legal description of the property involved.
      (3)   Brief description of the present improvements situated on the
property.
      (4)   A detailed description of the construction, alteration, demolition,
or use proposed together with any architectural drawings, plans, specifications
or sketches if those services have been utilized by the applicant and if not, a
sufficient description of the construction, alteration, demolition, and use to
enable anyone to determine what final appearance and use of the real estate
will be.
      (5)   Owner’s name.
      (6)   Developer’s name, if different than owner.
      (7)   Architect’s name.
      (8)   Payment of the filing fee, if any.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009)
§ 158.14 STANDARDS FOR CERTIFICATES OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   In making a determination whether to approve or deny an application
for a COA, the Historic Preservation Commission shall be guided by the
Secretary of the Interior’s “Standards for Rehabilitation,” as follows:
      (1)   A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a
new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the
building and its site environment;
      (2)   The historic character of a property shall be retained and
preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and
spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided;
      (3)   Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time,
place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development,
such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other
buildings, shall not be undertaken;
      (4)   Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired
historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved;
      (5)   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled craftsmanship
that characterize a building, structure, or site shall be treated with
sensitivity;
      (6)   Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a
distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, coter,
texture, and other visual qualities, and, where possible, materials.
Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary,
physical, or pictorial evidence;
      (7)   Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause
damage to historic materials, shall not be used. The surface cleaning of the
structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means
possible;
      (8)   Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be
protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation
measures shall be undertaken;
      (9)   New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction
shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new
work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the
massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic
integrity of the property and its environment; and
      (10)   New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be
undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form
and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.15 DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Design guidelines for applying the criteria for review of certificates
of appropriateness shall, at a minimum, consider the following architectural
criteria:
      (1)   Height. The height of any proposed alteration or construction
should be compatible with the style and character of the landmark and with
surrounding structures in a historic district;
      (2)   Proportions of windows and doors. The proportions and relationships
between doors and windows should he compatible with the architectural style and
character of the landmark;
      (3)   Relationship of building masses and spaces. The relationship of a
structure within a historic district to the open space between it and adjoining
structures should be compatible;
      (4)   Roof shape. The design of the roof, fascia, and cornice should be
compatible with the architectural style and character of the landmark;
      (5)   Landscaping. Landscaping should be compatible with the
architectural character and appearance of the landmark;
      (6)   Scale. The scale of the structure after alteration, construction,
or partial demolition should be compatible with its architectural style and
character and with surrounding structures in a historic district;
      (7)   Directional expression. Facades in historic districts should blend
with other structures with regard to directional expression. Structures in a
historic district should be compatible with the dominant horizontal or vertical
expression of surrounding structures;
      (8)   The direction expression of a landmark after alteration,
construction, or partial demolition should be compatible with its original
architectural style and character;
      (9)   Architectural details. Architectural details including types of
materials, colors, and textures should be treated so as to make a landmark
compatible with its original architectural style and character of a landmark or
historic district; and
      (10)   New structures in a historic district shall be compatible with the
architectural styles and design in said districts.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.16 HEARING ON CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   The Commission shall hold a public hearing for consideration of an
application for a COA within 45 days of submission of the application.
   (B)   Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing for
consideration of the application shall be published not less than 15 days nor
more than 30 days before any such hearing, in a newspaper of general
circulation within the Village. Other persons, including, but not limited to,
owners of property abutting the property that is the subject of the COA request
may be notified at the discretion of the Commission.
   (C)   Decisions of the Historic Preservation Commission on COA applications
shall be by a majority vote of members present and voting at any meeting where
a quorum exists.
   (D)   If the Historic Preservation Commission finds that the hearing on the
application should be continued, then the Commission may table or continue the
request until a date certain.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.17 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   Upon approval of a COA, the Historic Preservation Commission shall
notify the applicants of their approval decision within 5 days. Upon approval
of the application, the Commission shall direct the Community Development
Department to issue a signed COA to the applicant.
   (B)   A COA shall be invalid if changes in the plans reviewed by the
Commission are necessary in obtaining a building or other permit or if the
building or other permit issued for the same work becomes invalid. The COA
remains valid for the same period of validity as the building permit.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009)
§ 158.18 DENIAL OF CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS.
   (A)   Upon denial of a COA, the Commission shall notify the applicant in
writing of their denial decision within 5 days and shall recommend changes, if
any, in the proposed action that would cause the Commission to reconsider its
denial.
   (B)   Within 15 days of receipt of the notification of disapproval, the
applicant may resubmit an amended application for a COA that takes into
consideration the recommendations of the Commission. The application shall be
considered to be withdrawn if no written modification on request for public
hearing is received. Within 45 days of receipt of an amended application for a
COA, the Commission must either issue the COA or hold a hearing.
   (C)   The procedure upon resubmission of a modified COA is as follows:
      (1)   The Commission shall select a reasonable time and place for the
hearing on the modified COA and give due notice thereof to the applicant by
mailing notice of the hearing. The mailing is to be made at least 10 days prior
to the date of the hearing.
      (2)   Notice of the date, time place and purpose of such public hearing
shall be published not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days before the
hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation within the Village. Other
persons, including, but not limited to, owners of property abutting the
property that is the subject of the amended COA request, may be notified at the
discretion of the Commission.
      (3)   The Chairperson shall conduct the hearing and the Historic
Preservation Commission and the applicant shall have the right to introduce
evidence and cross examine witnesses. A recorded or written transcript of the
hearing shall be made and kept.
      (4)   The Commission shall vote, announce its decision, make its
recommendation, and notify the Planning Department and the applicant within 5
days after the conclusion of the public hearing, unless the time is extended by
mutual agreement between the Commission and the applicant.
      (5)   In the event of a denial of a modified COA request by the
Commission, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Village Board, whose
decision shall be final subject only to judicial review as provided by law.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.19 CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this chapter to the contrary,
the Commission may issue a certificate of economic hardship to allow the
performance of work for which a certificate of appropriateness has been denied.
   (B)   Applicants claiming economic hardship shall be required to apply to
the Community Development Department to determine eligibility for
rehabilitation assistance. The eligibility for and availability of financial
aid shall be considered by the Commission in making its decision.
   (C)   An applicant for a certificate of economic hardship may submit any or
all of the following information in order to assist the Commission in making
its determination on the application:
      (1)   The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the
party from whom purchased (including a description of the relationship, if any,
between the owner and the person from whom the property was purchased);
      (2)   The assessed value of the land and improvements thereon according
to the 2 most recent assessments;
      (3)   Real estate taxes for the previous 2 years;
      (4)   Remaining balance on mortgage, if any, and annual debt service, if
any, for the previous 2 years;
      (5)   All appraisals obtained within the previous 2 years by the owner or
applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the
property;
      (6)   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any;
      (7)   Any consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses for
the property;
      (8)   If the property is income-producing, the annual gross income from
the property for the previous 2 years, itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous 2 years, and annual cash flow before and after debt
service, if any during the same period;
      (9)   Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole
proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, limited partnership,
joint venture or other;
      (10)   Any other information, including the income-tax bracket of the
owner, applicant, or principal investors in the property, reasonably necessary
for a determination as to whether the property can be reasonably used or yield
a reasonable return to present or future owners;
   (D)   (1)   If the Commission finds that without approval of the proposed
work, the property owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic return therefrom,
then the application shall be delayed for a period not to exceed 3 months.
During this period of delay, the Commission shall investigate plans and make
recommendations to the Village Board to allow for a reasonably beneficial use
or a reasonable economic return, or to otherwise preserve the subject property.
Such plans and recommendations may include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   A relaxation of the provisions of this chapter; and/or
         (b)   A reduction in real property taxes; and/or
         (c)   Financial assistance; and/or
         (d)   Building code modifications; and/or
         (e)   Changes in zoning regulations.
      (2)   If by the end of this 3-month period, the Commission has found that
without approval of the proposed work, the property cannot be put to a
reasonable beneficial use or the owner cannot obtain a reasonable economic
return therefrom, then the Commission shall issue a certificate of economic
hardship approving the proposed work. If the Commission finds otherwise, it
shall deny the application for a certificate of economic hardship.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.20 APPEALS.
   (A)   When a certificate of appropriateness or a certificate of economic
hardship is denied for either a landmark or a building, structure, site,
property, area, or part thereof within a historic district, the applicant may,
within 30 days, appeal the Commission’sdecision to the Village Board by filing
a notice of appeal with the Village Clerk. The Village Board may receive
comments on the contents of the record but may not consider any new matter in
reaching a decision. The Village Board may affirm the decision or recommend
changes by a majority vote of the members present after due consideration of
the facts contained in the record submitted to the Board by the Commission. The
Village Board may, by a majority vote of four or more members, overturn the
Commission’s decision. If the Village Board decides that a certificate of
economic hardship or certificate of appropriateness should be issued, the
Secretary shall notify the applicant and the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation within 7 days of the Board’s decision and the Director of
Sustainability and Innovation shall then issue the permit within 15 days.
   (B)   If the Village Board concurs with the Commission’s decision not to
issue a certificate of economic hardship or certificate of appropriateness, the
Secretary shall notify the applicant and the Director of Sustainability and
Innovation within 7 days.
   (C)   Denials on appeal by the Village Board of COA’s or certificates of
economic hardship shall be final subject only to judicial review as provided by
law.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-09-27, passed 10-6-2009; Am. Ord.
CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 158.21 NATURAL DESTRUCTION OR DEMOLITION.
   In the case of partial or complete natural destruction or demolition of a
site within a historic district or of a landmark, the owner will be required to
obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the Commission prior to
reconstruction. Although exact duplication of the previous structure may not be
required, the exterior design of the property shall be in harmony with:
   (A)   The exterior design of the structure prior to damage; and
   (B)   The character of the historic district.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.22 ZONING AMENDMENTS AFFECTING LANDMARKS AND HISTORIC DISTRICTS.
   The Director of Sustainability and Innovation shall, whenever possible,
advise in writing the Chairperson of the Commission of all applications for
zoning amendments affecting designated landmarks and historic districts,
including variations, special uses, rezoning, or text amendments to the Zoning
Code. The Historic Preservation Commission shall evaluate the effect of the
proposed zoning amendment on the landmark or historic district, considering,
among other things, compatibility of developments with the long-range
preservation of historic structures, sites and areas. The Commission may, in
its discretion, present evidence at the public hearing on the proposed zoning
amendment either in support or in opposition, or may recommend further study.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2025-12, passed 6-10-2025)
§ 158.23 FEES.
   The Commission may recommend that the Village Board establish an appropriate
system of processing fees for the review of nominations and COAs.
(Ord. C0-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
§ 158.24 OFFICIAL LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   The following properties, structures, buildings, sites or areas have
received official designation as landmarks by the Village Board pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   501 N. 3rd Avenue, PIN 15-11-114-007-0000.
      (2)   703 N. 6th Avenue, PIN 15-02-333-007.
      (3)   902 S. 3rd Avenue, PIN 15-11-361-008-0000.
      (4)   216 S. 10th Avenue, PIN 15-10-406-007-0000.
      (5)   400 S. 18th Avenue, PIN 15-10-314-010-0000.
      (6)   704 N. 4th Avenue, PIN 15-02-334-017.
      (7)   224 N. 1st Avenue, PIN 15-11-131-010.
      (8)   1001 N. 2nd Avenue, PIN 15-02-313-002-0000.
      (9)   804 S. 17th Avenue, PIN 15-10-331-016-0000.
   (B)   The following areas have received official designation as historic
districts by the Village Board pursuant to the provisions of this chapter: None
at this time.
(Ord. CO-08-29, passed 7-15-2008; Am. Ord. CO-2013-07, passed 2-5-2013; Am.
Ord. CO-2014-20, passed 6-18-2014; Am. Ord. CO-2014-21, passed 6-18-2014; Am.
Ord. CO-2015-08, passed 3-31-2015; Am. Ord. CO-2015-09, passed 3-31-2015: Am.
Ord. CO-2016-12, passed 7-26-2016; Am. Ord. CO-2016-13, passed 7-26-2016; Am.
Ord. 2017-40, passed 11-21-2017; Am. Ord. CO-2022-10, passed 5-18-2022)
§ 158.25 HISTORIC LANDMARK PLAQUES.
   In order to promote and recognize the landmark designation program, the rich
history of the Village, and the landmarked properties themselves, each owner of
a property receiving a landmark designation shall receive a historic landmark
plaque from the Village free of charge. Historic landmark plaques shall be
displayed by the owner in a prominent location on the front façade of the
designated property, or at an alternative location on the structure or property
as approved by the Commission, all in conformance with historic landmark plaque
display guidelines to be adopted by the Commission. Participation through
display of the historic landmark plaque is deemed to be important to the
success of the Village’s historic landmark designation program, and any owner
failing to display the provided plaque in conformance with this section shall
be liable to the Village for the costs of creating the plaque.
(Ord. CO-2012-31, passed 8-21-2012)
§ 158.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who undertakes or causes an alteration, construction,
demolition, or removal of any nominated or designated landmark or property
within a nominated or designated landmark or designated historic district
without a COA shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500. Every day
such violation shall continue to exist shall constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   The Historic Preservation Commission may recommend to the Village
Board that it institute any appropriate action or proceeding in the name of the
Village to enjoin, correct, or abate any violation of this chapter.
(Ord. CO-08-29, passed 7-15-2008)
CHAPTER 159: STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES ON PUBLIC RIGHTS-
OF-WAY
Section
   
159.01   Standards
   
159.02   Incorporation
§ 159.01 STANDARDS.
   Standards for construction of utility facilities on public rights-of-way are
set forth in Chapters
100 and
101 of this Code.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007)
§ 159.02 INCORPORATION.
   The provisions of Title IX (General Regulations),
Chapter 101: Standards for Construction of Utility Facilities on Public Rights-
of-Way and any amendments thereto are incorporated by reference into this Title
XV (Land Usage) and are in full force and effect as if set forth in full
herein.
(Ord. C0-07-29, passed 8-21-2007)
CHAPTER 160: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   
160.01   Purpose
   
160.02   Interactions with other Code provisions and laws
   
160.03   Definitions
   
160.04   Zoning
   
160.05   Permits; application process
   
160.06   Construction
   
160.07   Permit duration
   
160.08   Height limitations
   
160.09   General requirements
   
160.10   Stealth, concealment and design standards
   
160.11   Reservation of Village utility pole space
   
160.12   Applicability of existing agreements
   
160.13   Collocation on Village owned infrastructure
   
160.14   Notice of sale or transfer
   
160.15   Abandonment
   
160.16   Dispute resolution
   
160.17   Indemnification
   
160.18   Insurance
   
160.19   Maintenance of small wireless facilities
   
160.20   Revocation of permit
   
160.21   Exceptions to applicability
§ 160.01 PURPOSE.
   Consistent with the requirements of the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment
Act (Public Act 100-585), and in anticipation of a continued increased demand
for placement of small wireless facilities of the type regulated by the Act
both within the public rights-of-way and in other locations within the
jurisdiction of the Village, the Village Board has found it to be in the best
interests of the public health, safety and general welfare of the Village to
adopt the code amendments set forth in this chapter in order to establish
generally applicable standards for the design, permitting, location,
construction, deployment, regulation, operation, maintenance, repair and
removal of such small wireless facilities both within the public rights-of-way
and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the Village so as to, among
other things:
   (A)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
Village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located both within public
rights-of-way and in other locations within the jurisdiction of the Village;
   (B)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which such small
wireless facilities are installed;
   (C)   Minimize any adverse visual impact of small wireless facilities and
prevent visual blight in the neighborhoods in which such facilities are
installed;
   (D)   Ensure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to small wireless facilities;
   (E)   Provide appropriate aesthetic protections to any designated historic
landmarks or districts within the Village; and
   (F)   Ensure that the placement of small wireless facilities does not
negatively impact public safety and the Village's public safety technology.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.02 INTERACTION WITH OTHER CODE PROVISIONS AND LAWS.
   (A)   Other code provisions. The provisions of this chapter are intended to
supplement general requirements and standards relative to the regulation of
telecommunications and wireless providers, siting and design of
telecommunication facilities and generally applicable requirements for
construction within public rights-of-way set forth elsewhere within this Code,
including but not limited to the regulations set forth in
Chapter 100 (Telecommunications),
Chapter 101 (Standards for Construction of Utility Facilities On Public Rights-
of-Way), and
Chapter 120 (Wireless Communication Towers and Antennas). In the event of a
conflict, however, the provisions of this chapter shall control in all matters
involving small wireless facilities, as defined below.
   (B)   State and federal laws. In the event that applicable federal or state
laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this chapter, a wireless
provider shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the maximum
extent possible without violating such federal or state laws or regulations.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.03 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
   ACT. The Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-585).
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or
Mechanical Codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local
amendments to those codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
   APPLICANT. Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit
to collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   AUTHORITY. The Village or other unit of local government that has
jurisdiction and control for use of public rights-of-way as provided by the
Illinois Highway Code for placements within public rights-of-way or has zoning
or land use control for placements not within public rights-of-way.
   COLLOCATE or COLLOCATION. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole, whether existing or new.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. Cable service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153(33), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER. A cable operator, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
522(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 U.S.C.
153(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 U.S.C. 153
(51), as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT or HISTORIC LANDMARK.  A building, property, or site, or
group of buildings, properties, or sites that are either (i) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with Section
VI.D.1.a.i through Section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR Part 1, Appendix C; or (ii) designated as a locally
landmarked building, property, site, or historic district by an ordinance
adopted by the Village pursuant to a preservation program that meets the
requirements of the Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office or where such certification of the preservation
program by the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW. A federal or state statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order,
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY. A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   PERMIT. A written authorization required by the Village or other permitting
authority to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization, including an authority.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY. The functional division of the federal government, the
state, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this state, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 3-105 of the
Public Utilities Act, 220 ILCS 5/3-105.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway,
street, public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible
use. RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include authority-owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: (i) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than 6 cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than 6 cubic feet; and (ii) all other wireless
equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the facility is
cumulatively no more than 25 cubic feet in volume. The following types of
associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment
volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation
box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-
off switch, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other
services.
   STRUCTURAL ENGINEER. A person licensed under the laws of the State of
Illinois to practice structural engineering.
   UTILITY POLE. A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control, or a similar function.
   VILLAGE. The Village of Maywood, Cook County, Illinois.
   VILLAGE UTILITY POLE. A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in
public rights-of-way.
   WIRELESS FACILITY. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
(i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
WIRELESS FACILITY includes small wireless facilities. WIRELESS FACILITY does
not include: (i) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or (ii) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the state that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider and/or a wireless
services provider. This does not include, and expressly excludes, any person
who is providing service to or for a private niche market.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE does not include a utility pole.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.04 ZONING.
   (A)   Small wireless facilities shall be classified as permitted uses and
shall not be subject to zoning review, if collocated in rights-of-way in any
zoning district, or outside rights-of-way in the following zoning districts:
      (1)   BIP Business Industrial Park Zoning District; and
      (2)   M-1 General Manufacturing Zoning District.
   (B)   In all other zoning districts, the Village's normal zoning approvals,
processes and restrictions shall apply, if zoning approval, processes or
restrictions are required by the Village's zoning ordinance.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.05 PERMITS; APPLICATION PROCESS.
   Unless otherwise specifically exempted in this chapter, a permit to
collocate a small wireless facility within the Village is required in all
cases. Permits are subject to the following:
   (A)   Permit applications. Permit applications for the collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be made on a form provided by the Village for such
purpose. In addition to any generally applicable information required of other
communications service providers or for other installations in the public
right-of-way, applicants must, when requesting to collocate small wireless
facilities on a utility pole or wireless support structure, provide the
following information:
      (1)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Village utility pole,
make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined
in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
      (2)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and digital photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. The photographs shall include a digital
photo simulation of the proposed location providing "before and after" views
demonstrating the true visual impact of the proposed small wireless facilities
on the surrounding environment;
      (3)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in Section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
      (4)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      (5)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved;
      (6)   Certification that, to the best of the applicant's knowledge, the
collocation complies with the written design standards established by the
Village, and with the various other requirements set forth in this chapter and
Code;
      (7)   Copies of all licenses, permits and approvals required by or from
the Village (i.e. zoning approval, where required), other agencies and units of
government with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and
operation of said small wireless facility. The applicant shall maintain such
licenses, permits and approvals in full force and effect and provide evidence
of renewal or extension thereof when granted; and
      (8)   In the event the small wireless facility is proposed to be attached
to an existing utility pole or wireless support structure owned by an entity
other than the Village, legally competent evidence of the consent of the owner
of such pole or wireless support structure to the proposed collocation.
   (B)   Means of submission. Permit applications, along with all supporting
information, for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall be
submitted by personal delivery or by other means approved by the Village.
   (C)   Multiple applications for same location. Multiple applications for
collocation on the same utility pole or wireless support structure shall be
processed based on a first fully complete application, first-served basis.
   (D)   Permit application fees. All applications for collocation of small
wireless facilities shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in
the following amounts:
 
Request to collocate a small wireless
facility that includes the installation of $1,000.00
a new utility pole
Request to collocate a single small
wireless facility on an existing utility   $650.00
pole or wireless support structure
Request to collocate multiple small
wireless facilities on existing utility    $350.00 per small wireless facility
poles or wireless support structures
addressed in a single application
 
   (E)   Permit review timelines.
      (1)   Completeness of application. 
         (a)   Requests for the collocation of small wireless facilities shall
be reviewed for conformance with the requirements of the Act, this chapter, and
other applicable provisions of this Code. Within 30 days after receiving an
application, the Village must determine whether the application is complete and
notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information. Processing deadlines are tolled
from the time the Village sends a notice of incompleteness to the time the
applicant provides the missing information.
         (b)   An application shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to
provide notification to the applicant within 30 days of the date when all
documents, information, and fees specifically enumerated in the Village's
permit application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village.
      (2)   Existing pole or wireless support structure. Requests for the
collocation of small wireless facilities on an existing utility pole or
wireless support structure shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and
either approved or denied within 90 days of submission of a completed
application. A permit application shall be deemed approved if the Village fails
to approve or deny the application within 90 days, subject to the following: if
an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed
approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing of its
intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than 75 days after the
submission of a completed application. The permit shall be deemed approved on
the later of the 90th day after submission of the completed application, or the
10th day after receipt of the deemed approved notice by the Village. Receipt of
a deemed approved notice by the Village shall not preclude the Village from
denying the permit within the allowed time limit.
      (3)   New utility pole. Requests for the collocation of small wireless
facilities that include the installation of a new utility pole shall be
processed on a nondiscriminatory basis and either approved or denied within 120
days of submission of a completed application. A permit application shall be
deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the application within
120 days, subject to the following: if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than 105 days after the submission of a completed application. The
permit shall be deemed approved on the later of the 120th day after submission
of the completed application, or the 10th day after receipt of the deemed
approved notice by the Village. Receipt of a deemed approved notice by the
Village shall not preclude the Village from denying the permit within the
allowed time limit.
   (F)   Tolling. The time limitations for approval or denial of applications
shall be tolled by notice to an applicant that its application is incomplete as
set forth above, upon mutual agreement of the parties, or by a local, state or
federal disaster declaration or similar emergency that causes a delay.
   (G)   Pole replacement. Permit approval shall be conditioned on the
replacement of a utility pole or wireless support structure at the applicant's
sole cost where such replacement is deemed necessary for compliance with the
requirements of this chapter or Code relative to the siting of small wireless
facilities, or other applicable codes and regulations that concern public
safety.
   (H)   Denial. The Village shall deny an application that does not meet the
requirements of this chapter. The reasons for any denial of a permit shall be
provided in a written notice of denial sent to the applicant, and shall include
the specific Code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based.
   (I)   Resubmittal after denial. In the case of a permit denial, an applicant
may cure the deficiencies identified in the notice of denial and resubmit a
revised application once within 30 days after the notice of denial is sent
without payment of an additional application fee. The Village shall have 30
days to approve or deny the resubmitted application or it is deemed approved if
the applicant has notified the Village of its intention to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which notification may be
submitted with the resubmitted application. Review of a resubmitted application
is limited to the deficiencies cited in the original notice of denial. This
section does not apply if a revised application is not resubmitted within 30
days, or curing any deficiencies in the original application requires review of
a new location, new or different structure for collocation, new antennas, or
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility. In such
cases, a new application and application fee are required.
   (J)   Consolidated applications. Consolidated applications for small
wireless facilities for the collocation of up to 25 small wireless facilities
shall be allowed if the collocations each involve substantially the same type
of small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure. Each
consolidated application shall provide all the information required by this
chapter for each small wireless facility at each location. If such an
application includes incomplete information for 1 or more small wireless
facility collocations, or includes requests for small wireless facilities that
do not qualify for consolidated treatment, or that are otherwise denied, the
Village may remove such collocation requests from the application and treat
them as separate requests. Separate permits may be issued for each collocation
approved in a consolidated application.
   (K)   Alternate locations. If an applicant is seeking to install a new
utility pole as part of its application, the Village may propose that the small
wireless facility be located on an existing utility pole or existing wireless
support structure within 100 feet of the proposed collocation. The applicant
shall accept the proposed alternate location so long as it has the right to use
the location on reasonable terms and conditions, unless the alternate location
imposes technical limits or additional material costs as determined by the
applicant. If the applicant refuses an alternate location based on the
foregoing, the applicant shall provide legally competent evidence in the form
of a written certification, under oath, describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons that prevent the alternate location
from being utilized.
   (L)   Exemptions. 
      (1)   No application, permit approval or fee shall be required from a
communications service provider authorized to occupy the right-of-way when the
work in question is for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance not requiring replacement of wireless
facilities if the wireless provider notifies the Village in writing at least 48
hours prior to the planned maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village in writing at least 10 days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications, including (i) equipment type
and model numbers, for the replacement of equipment consistent with the
equipment specifications information required on a permit application for
original installation; and (ii) information sufficient to establish that the
replacement is substantially similar. The wireless provider shall provide all
information necessary and requested by the Village to establish that the
replacement is substantially similar. The Village has the sole right and
responsibility to determine if a proposed small wireless facility is
substantially similar to the existing small wireless facility; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables that are
strung between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety
codes.
      (2)   The foregoing shall not exempt communications service providers
from Village permitting requirements where traffic patterns are affected or
lane closures are required.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.06 CONSTRUCTION.
   Collocations for which permits are approved shall be completed within 180
days of issuance of the permit, unless the Village agrees to extend the period
or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Village utility pole or by the
lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided the
applicant has made a timely request within 60 days after the issuance of the
permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the additional time to
complete installation does not exceed 360 days after issuance of the permit.
Permits that are not completed within applicable timelines shall be void absent
an extension granted in writing by the Village.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.07 PERMIT DURATION.
   Permits issued for small wireless facilities pursuant to this chapter shall
be for a period of 5 years. Permits are subject to renewal at the end of the 5
year permit period for a successive 5 year term so long as the installation
complies with the applicable code provisions in force at the time of renewal. A
finding by the Village at the time of a request for renewal that an
installation does not comply with the applicable code provisions in force at
the time of the renewal request shall be in writing. If the Act is repealed or
found unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, all permits
granted by the Village under this chapter shall terminate at the end of their
current term.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.08 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Antenna installations. The maximum permitted height of a small
wireless facility is 10 feet above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
   (B)   New poles. The maximum permitted height of new or replacement utility
pole or wireless support structure on which a small wireless facility is
collocated is the higher of:
      (1)   Ten feet in height above the tallest existing utility pole, other
than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place on
the date the application is submitted, and that is located within 300 feet of
the new or replacement utility pole or wireless support structure and that is
in the same right-of-way within the Village. The Village may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within 300 feet of the proposed utility pole or
wireless support structures shall control the height limitation for such
facility; or
      (2)   Forty-five (45) feet above ground level.
   (C)   Waiver process. A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the
Building Director or their designee from the maximum permitted height of a new
pole set forth in this section, if the wireless provider can establish that:
      (1)   Because of a particular unusual condition, a particular hardship or
practical difficulty to the wireless provider would result, as distinguished
from a mere inconvenience, and such hardship or difficulty has not been created
by the wireless provider;
      (2)   Existing utility poles or wireless support structures, or a new
utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new pole allowed by this
section cannot accommodate the wireless facility at a height necessary to
function effectively, under reasonable terms and conditions; and
      (3)   The use of existing utility poles or other wireless support
structures, or a new utility pole at the maximum permitted height for a new
pole allowed by this section, is not technically feasible.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 160.09 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Public safety technology. A wireless provider's operation of a small
wireless facility may not interfere with the frequencies used by a public
safety agency for public safety communications. A wireless provider must
install small wireless facilities of the type and frequency that will not cause
unacceptable interference with a public safety agency's communications
equipment. Unacceptable interference is determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licenses by a public safety agency. If a small wireless facility causes such
interference, and the wireless provider has been given written notice of the
interference by the public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own
expense, shall take all reasonable steps necessary to correct and eliminate the
interference, including, but not limited to, powering down the small wireless
facility and later powering up the small wireless facility for intermittent
testing, if necessary. The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless
facility based on such interference if the wireless provider is not making a
good faith effort to remedy the problem in a manner consistent with the
abatement and resolution procedures for interference with public safety
spectrum established by the FCC, including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973
and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The burden to establish the good faith
effort shall be on the wireless provider, which shall timely deliver to the
Village all information necessary to demonstrate its efforts to resolve the
interference consistent with the Code of Federal Regulations sections cited
above. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a
public nuisance and the small wireless facility may be abated through the
procedures for abatement of such nuisances set forth in this code.
   (B)   A wireless provider shall not construct or maintain any small wireless
facility that:
      (1)   Obstructs, impedes or hinders the usual travel or public safety on
a right-of-way;
      (2)   Obstructs the legal use of right-of-way by utility users;
      (3)   Violates nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
      (4)   Violates or conflicts with Chapter 101 (Standards for Construction
of Utility Facilities on Public Rights-of-Way), or other applicable regulations
set forth in this code or otherwise adopted by the Village, except to the
extent such chapters, sections or regulations may be modified by the provisions
of this chapter; or
      (5)   Violates the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42
U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.)
   (C)   Contractual requirements. Wireless providers shall comply with all
requirements imposed by a contract between the Village and any private property
owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to utility poles
and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   (D)   Ground-mounted equipment. Wireless providers shall comply with the
ground mounted equipment spacing requirements within rights-of-way as set forth
in
Chapter 101 (Standards for Construction of Utility Facilities on Public Rights-
of-Way) or
Chapter 120 (Wireless Communication Towers and Antennas) of this code.
   (E)   Undergrounding.
      (1)   The wireless provider shall comply with Village code provisions or
regulations concerning undergrounding requirements, if any, that prohibit the
installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles or equipment
in the right-of-way.
      (2)    A wireless provider may receive a waiver from the Building
Director or their designee to allow a small wireless facility to be located
above ground in an area where Village ordinances or regulations prohibit or
restrict above ground facilities if the wireless provider can establish that:
         (a)   Underground equipment is not technically feasible and there is
no reasonable alternative or location that is more aesthetically favorable to
adjacent property owners and to effective use and management of the right-of-
way;
         (b)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
is necessary at the proposed location to provide coverage in a specified area;
         (c)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not disrupt traffic or pedestrian circulation or constitute a safety
hazard;
         (d)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not interfere with public safety uses or frequencies;
         (e)   Space exists within the public right-of-way to accommodate the
above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location;
         (f)   An above ground small wireless facility at the proposed location
will not create a safety hazard;
         (g)   The above ground small wireless facility is located and designed
in such a way so as to minimize its visual impact on adjacent properties; and
         (h)   In any historical area, that the above ground small wireless
facility will not detrimentally affect the historical nature of the area.
      (3)   Screening for ground mounted facilities. Where a ground-mounted
facility is allowed, such equipment shall be screened around the perimeter in
accordance with a landscape plan sealed by a professional landscape engineer.
Plant materials shall include a mixture of deciduous and coniferous planting
materials. The owner or wireless provider shall be responsible for maintenance
of all landscaping as provided in the approved landscape plan.
      (4)   Future undergrounding. The Village may, from time to time, make a
decision to eliminate above-ground utility poles of a particular type
generally, such as electric utility poles, in all or a significant portion of
the Village. In the event that such a utility pole has a collocated small
wireless facility in place at the time of such a decision, the Village shall
either:
         (a)   Continue to maintain the utility pole, or install and maintain a
reasonable utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of
the small wireless facility; or
         (b)   Offer to sell the utility pole to the wireless provider at a
reasonable cost, or allow the wireless provider to install its own utility pole
so it can maintain service from that location.
   (F)   Collocation limits.
      (1)   Wireless providers shall not collocate small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or transmission
system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric
supply zone of the pole.
      (2)   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
      (3)   For purposes of this division, the terms COMMUNICATIONS
SPACE, COMMUNICATION WORK SAFETY ZONE, and ELECTRIC SUPPLY ZONE have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
   (G)   Code compliance. Wireless providers shall comply with applicable codes
and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018 ; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021 )
§ 160.10 STEALTH, CONCEALMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   Every small wireless facility installation shall comply with the following
standards:
   (A)   General stealth, concealment and design standards. Installations shall
comply with any stealth, concealment, design and aesthetic standards applicable
to utility installations in the public right-of-way, as set forth in
Chapter 101 (Standards for Construction of Utility Facilities On Public Rights-
of-Way) of this code, as well as any written design standards that are
generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or reasonable stealth,
concealment, design and aesthetic requirements that are otherwise identified by
the Village in an ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village Board of
Trustees, in the Village's comprehensive plan, or in a written design plan that
applies to other occupiers of the rights-of-way, including on a Historic
Landmark or in a Historic District.
   (B)   Historic Districts and Landmarks. For areas designated as Historic
Districts, or on buildings or structures designated as Historic Landmarks
pursuant to
Chapter 158 (Historic Preservation Commission and Designation of Landmarks and
Historic Districts) of this code, in addition to the stealth, concealment and
design requirements referenced above, the following additional restrictions/
conditions apply to the installation of small wireless facilities:
      (1)   Small wireless facilities in the right of way adjacent to
designated Historic Landmarks or within designated Historic Districts shall be
comprised of materials that are consistent with the surrounding elements so as
to blend architecturally with any buildings or structures designated as
Historic Landmarks or located within a designated Historic District, and shall
be designed to blend with the surrounding Historical Landmarks and/or District
in design and color.
      (2)   Small wireless facilities shall not be collocated on private
property with a designated Historic Landmark unless a certificate of
appropriateness is first obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission.
   (C)   Historic District or Landmark limitations.
      (1)   Any stealth, concealment and design standards in a Historic
District or on a Historic Landmark, including restrictions on a specific
category of utility poles, may not have the effect of prohibiting any
provider's technology. Such stealth, concealment and design measures shall not
be considered a part of the small wireless facility for purposes of the size
restrictions of a small wireless facility.
      (2)   This section shall not be construed to limit the Village's
enforcement of historic preservation in conformance with the requirements
adopted pursuant to the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation
Act or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, 54 U.S.C. § 300101 et
seq., and the regulations adopted to implement those laws.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.11 RESERVATION OF VILLAGE UTILITY POLE SPACE.
   The Village may reserve space on Village-owned utility poles for future
public safety uses or for Village electric utility uses. Such reservation may
preclude collocation of small wireless facilities if the Village reasonably
determines that the Village's utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.12 APPLICABILITY OF EXISTING AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Existing installations. Subject to any applicable termination
provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the Village and a
wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall remain in effect
for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted prior to June 1, 2018.
   (B)   Applications received between June 1, 2018 and June 1, 2020. Subject
to any applicable termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in
place between the Village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation
of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such
agreement shall remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated
on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1,
2018, but prior to June 1, 2020, until June 1, 2020 or receipt by the Village
from the wireless provider of a notice that it is opting to accept the rates,
fees and terms of this chapter and the Act received after June 1, 2020,
whichever is later.
   (C)   Applications received After June 1, 2020. Subject to any applicable
termination provisions, where an existing agreement is in place between the
Village and a wireless provider relating to the collocation of small wireless
facilities on Village utility poles on June 1, 2018, such agreement shall
remain in effect for all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted after June 1, 2020, until
receipt by the Village of a notice from the wireless provider that it is
accepting the rates, fees, terms and conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.13 COLLOCATION ON VILLAGE OWNED INFRASTRUCTURE.
   (A)   Fee. The annual fee to collocate a small wireless facility on a
Village-owned utility pole located in a right-of-way shall be the higher of:
      (1)   Two hundred dollars ($200) per year per small wireless facility; or
      (2)   The actual, direct, and reasonable costs related to the wireless
providers use of space on the pole.
   (B)   Exception. Small wireless facilities collocated on Village-owned
utility poles located outside of public right-of-way are not subject to the
rate limitations in this section.
   (C)   Attachment agreement. An attachment agreement in a form approved by
the Village is required for any collocation upon any Village owned utility pole
or wireless support structure.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.14 NOTICE OF SALE OR TRANSFER.
   A wireless provider shall, prior to any sale or transfer of ownership or
control of a small wireless facility located within the jurisdiction of the
Village, provide written notice to the Village of such sale or transfer of
control. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.15 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period
of 12 months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of the facility shall
remove the small wireless facility within 90 days after receipt of written
notice from the Village notifying it of the abandonment. The notice shall be
sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, by the Village
to the owner at its last known address. If the small wireless facility is not
removed within 90 days after receipt of such notice, such wireless facility
shall be deemed to be a nuisance and the Village may remove or cause the
removal of such facility, and recover or place a lien for its costs, pursuant
to the terms of its pole attachment or other agreement for Village utility
poles or through the procedures for abatement of nuisances set forth in this
code.
   (B)   In the event the Village suspects that the wireless provider is no
longer using the small wireless facilities to provide wireless service, it may
send the wireless provider written notice that requires the wireless provider
to remove the small wireless facility or provide proof that the small wireless
facility is operational and still being used within 30 days, and informs the
wireless provider that failure to provide proof or to remove the small wireless
facility will result in the Village removing the small wireless facility at the
wireless provider's cost.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.16 DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
resolve all disputes arising under the Act. Pending resolution of a dispute
concerning rates for collocation of small wireless facilities on Village
utility poles within the right-of-way, the Village shall allow the collocating
person to collocate on its poles at annual rates of no more than $200 per year
per pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.17 INDEMNIFICATION.
   Other than for liabilities and losses due to or caused by the sole
negligence of the Village or its employees or agents, a wireless provider shall
indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any and all liability or loss
from personal injury or property damage resulting from or arising out of, in
whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the Village infrastructure or
improvements, or right-of-way associated with such infrastructure or
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors
arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the
Act. A wireless provider proceeding under this chapter waives any claims it may
have against the Village with respect to consequential, incidental, or special
damages, however caused, based on the theory of liability.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.18 INSURANCE.
   At all times during the period in which a wireless provider's facilities are
located on Village infrastructure, improvements or in right-of-way, the
wireless provider shall, at its own sole cost and expense, carry the following
insurance coverages:
   (A)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   (B)   Workers' Compensation insurance within statutory limits as required by
law; and
   (C)   (1)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its
activities on the Village infrastructure, improvements or rights-of-way,
including coverage for bodily injury and property damage, with limits not less
than:
         (a)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for bodily injury or death to
each person;
         (b)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for property damage resulting
from any 1 accident; and
         (c)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000) for all other types of
liability.
      (2)   The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and shall provide
certificates of insurance and proof of inclusion of the Village in a commercial
general liability policy to the Village prior to the collocation of any small
wireless facility, and shall keep updated certificates and proof of inclusion
on file with the Village at all times that the provider maintains small
wireless facilities within the Village.
   (D)   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance
coverage and limits required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement that the Village be named an additional insured. A wireless
provider that self-insures shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to
demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure the insurance limits required
by the Village.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-17-2018)
§ 160.19 MAINTENANCE OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   A wireless provider shall maintain all small wireless facilities
installed within the Village in a condition that maintains the safety,
integrity and aesthetics of such facilities. Small wireless facilities shall
not appear to be unkempt. In the event of a failure to properly maintain such
facilities, the Village shall notify the wireless provider, in writing, who
shall have 30 days to correct the identified maintenance violation. If not
corrected within such period, the Village reserves the right to take such
action as it deems necessary, including revocation of the permit. Maintenance
and replacement of small wireless facilities shall be performed by the wireless
provider at the wireless provider's sole cost and expense.
   (B)   In the event of an emergency involving an imminent threat to life or
property, the Village may take corrective action to eliminate such emergency at
the wireless provider's expense.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-7-2018)
§ 160.20 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit to collocate a small wireless facility may be revoked for 1
or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   The wireless provider obtained approval by means of fraud or made a
misrepresentation of a material fact with respect to the permit application, or
any required documentation or submittal;
      (2)   The wireless provider failed to construct the small wireless
facility in accordance with the approved plans;
      (3)   The wireless provider failed to comply within any material
condition of a permit issued;
      (4)   The wireless provider substantially expanded or altered the use or
the structure of the small wireless facility beyond what was requested in the
permit application or approved, without the approval of the Village;
      (5)   The wireless provider failed to notify the Village of the
replacement of small wireless facilities as required by this chapter;
      (6)   A substantial change of law has occurred affecting the wireless
provider's authority to occupy or use the property upon which the small
wireless facility is located;
      (7)   The small wireless facility interferes with vehicular or pedestrian
use of the public right of way;
      (8)   The wireless provider has failed to make a safe and timely
restoration of the right-of-way or the property upon which the small wireless
facility is located;
      (9)   The small wireless provider has failed to properly maintain the
wireless facility as required by this chapter;
      (10)   The wireless provider has failed to abate interference with public
safety communications in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675; or
      (11)   The small wireless facility has been abandoned and the wireless
provider has failed to remove the small wireless facility as provided in this
chapter.
   (B)    Written notification of the permit revocation shall be sent by
certified mail or shall be personally delivered to the wireless provider
setting forth the basis for the revocation. The wireless provider shall, within
14 days of the notice of revocation, file a written response with the Building
Director or their designee setting forth the reasons why the permit should not
be revoked along with such evidence in opposition to the revocation as the
wireless provider determines necessary. Failure to file a response with the
Building Director or their designee shall be deemed an admission of the facts
set forth in the notification of written notification and shall result in
automatic revocation of the permit. The Building Director or their designee
shall render findings and a decision within 21 days of the date of receipt of
the wireless provider's response, if any.
   (C)   If the Building Director or their designee revokes the permit, the
wireless provider may file a written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk
within 21 days of notification of the permit revocation. Such notice shall
contain a response to the decision of the Building Director or their designee.
The Village Board shall hear the revocation appeal and render a decision on
such appeal.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-7-2018; Am. Ord. CO-2021-21, passed 8-17-2021)
§ 160.21 EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter authorizes the collocation of small wireless
facilities on:
      (1)   Property owned by a private party without the written consent of
the property owner;
      (2)   Property owned or controlled by a unit of local government that is
not located within rights-of-way without the written consent of the unit of
local government (local governments are, however, required to authorize the
collocation of small wireless facilities on utility poles owned or controlled
by the local government or located within rights-of-way to the same extent the
local government permits access to utility poles for other commercial projects
or uses);
      (3)   A privately-owned utility pole or wireless support structure,
without the consent of the property owner;
      (4)   Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes, without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code (605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.);
or
      (5)   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under § 18C-7201 of the
Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/18C-7201), Metra Commuter Rail or any other
public commuter rail service, or an electric utility as defined in § 16-102 of
the Public Utilities Act (220 ILCS 5/16-102), without the consent of the rail
carrier, public commuter rail service, or electric utility;
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to:
      (1)   Facilities of an electric or gas public utility or such utility's
wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and maintained
consistent with the provisions of subsection (i) of § 16-108.5 of the Public
Utilities Act; or
      (2)   Small wireless facilities owned by the Village.
(Ord. 2018-33, passed 7-7-2018)
CHAPTER 161: COVENANT FUND
Section
   
161.01   Covenant fund established
   
161.02   Covenant fund purpose
§ 161.01 COVENANT FUND ESTABLISHED.
   Pursuant to the Village's home rule authority, there is established a fund
to be known as the Covenant Fund. The Covenant Fund shall be administered by
the Village and shall be funded through the Village's budget process, and
through grants, donations, proceeds from sales of Village property, and through
other means as directed by the
President and Board of Trustees.
(Ord. CO-2024-51, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 161.02 COVENANT FUND PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Covenant Fund is to provide a dedicated source of funds
that may be used as directed by the President and Board of Trustees in pursuit
of a wide-range of interrelated goals relative to increasing property ownership
among Village residents, funding home buyers' programs and other housing-
related programs, funding vacant housing acquisition, rehabilitation,
construction, and sales and for other purposes as directed by the Village Board
of Trustees from time to time.
(Ord. CO-2024-51, passed 12-10-2024)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
Table
   
I.   SALE OF VILLAGE PROPERTY
   
II.   NAMING OF STREETS
   
III.   VACATIONS
   
IV.   SPECIAL USES
TABLE I: SALE OF VILLAGE PROPERTY
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
—   - -    Authorizing the sale of personal property listed in Exhibit A to this
             ordinance with or without advertising the sale of the personal property.
C0-   4-1-   Authorizing the disposal of 9 Police Department motor vehicles by public
02-8  2002   auction.
C0-   11-3-  Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property (Old Ladder Truck 503)
03-27 2003   owned by the Village.
C0-   4-5-   Authorizing the sale of personal property listed in Exhibit A by public
04-12 2004   auction.
C0-   3-28-  Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property (air compressor) owned
06-08 2006   by the Village.
C0-   11-8-  Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property (ambulance, 2 cars)
06-37 2006   owned by the Village.
C0-   11-8-  Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property (police dog named "Daro"
06-38 2006   and police badge number 272) owned by the Village.
R-09- 1-13-  Authorizing sale of real property owned by the Village commonly known as
01    2009   vacant parcel on Warren between 8th and 9th Avenues.
CO-   6-30-  Authorizing the purchase of 1001 St. Charles Road property located in the St.
09-20 2009   Charles Road tax increment financing redevelopment area.
CO-   9-20-  Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property (fire suppression system
2011- 2011   and other equipment) owned by the Village.
15
CO-   2-7-   Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property (various surplus
2012- 2012   vehicles) owned by the Village.
05
CO-   6-5-   Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property (various surplus
2012- 2012   vehicles) owned by the Village.
18
CO-   3-13-  Authorizing the sale of a 50-foot strip of land lying in the Village’s Madison
2013- 2013   Street/5th Avenue TIF District to National Cycle, Inc. for $20,000.
19
CO-   4-16-  Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property (22 automobiles) owned
2013- 2013   by the Village.
26
2017- 11-21- Authorizing the sale of real property commonly known as 800 to 820 S. 5th
41    2017   Avenue to the Interfaith Housing Development Corporation of Chicago.
2017- 12-5-  Approving the offering for sale of certain surplus village-owned real estate
43    2017   referred to as the “2017 Bundled Surplus Properties.”
             Approving the sale of approximately 50-foot wide strip of land running from
2018- 2-20-  western boundary of 19th Avenue right-of-way on the east to the western
06    2018   boundary of the village on the west to National Cycle, Inc.; repealing Ord.
             CO-2013-19.
2018- 3-20-  Authorizing the sale of Fire Department 2002 Ford E-450 ambulance.
14    2018
CO-   5-1-   Authorizing the sale of real property at 1001 St. Charles Road and authorizing
2018- 2018   the execution of a redevelopment agreement between the Village of Maywood and
23           SMC Management, LLC.
CO-   6-5-   Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property owned by the Village,
2018- 2018   said property being a 2006 Audi A8.
27
CO-   7-18-  Approving the sale of real property at 11-13 North 5th Avenue and authorizing
2018- 2018   the execution of a redevelopment agreement between the Village and Danny
32           Hermosillo.
CO-   9-18-  Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property owned by the Village,
2018- 2018   said property being Maywood Fire Department Aerial Ladder Truck 502.
40
2018- 12-4-  Approving the sale of real property at 1001 St. Charles Road and authorizing
53    2018   the execution of a revised redevelopment agreement between the Village and SMC
             Management, LLC.
2018- 12-18- Authorizing the approval and execution of a revised redevelopment agreement
58    2018   between the Village and Maywood Equity Group, LLC, for the sale and
             redevelopment of the northwest corner of 1st Avenue and Lake Street.
2019- 2-19-  Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property owned by the Village,
04    2019   said property being an ambulance (1997 Ford E-350 Chassis/Wheeled Coach).
             Approving the sale and conveyance of certain surplus Village-owned real
CO-   3-19-  property, commonly known as 4 South 20th Avenue, 126 South 13th Avenue, 203/
2019- 2019   205 South 15th Avenue, 711 South 9th Avenue, 431 South 14th Avenue, 1114 South
08           2nd Avenue and 1601 South 5th Avenue, under the Village’s tax reactivation
             program.
             Approving the sale and conveyance of certain surplus Village-owned real
2019- 3-19-  property, commonly known as 1616 South 5th Avenue and 1719 South 5th Avenue,
09    2019   under the Village’s tax reactivation program (Bundle Number 3 of the “2017
             Bundled Surplus Properties”).
CO-   4-9-   Approving the sale and conveyance of certain surplus Village-owned real
2019- 2019   property, commonly known as 239-241 South 12th Avenue and 837 South 17th
13           Avenue, under the Village’s tax reactivation program.
CO-   3-3-   Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property owned by the Village,
2020- 2020   said property being a Police Department vehicle (2009 Ford Escape Hybrid).
05
             Approving the sale and conveyance of certain surplus Village- owned real
CO-   12-1-  property commonly know as 4 South 20th Avenue, 126 South 13th Avenue, 203/205
2020- 2020   South 15th Avenue, 711 South 9th Avenue, 431 South 14th Avenue, 1114 South 2nd
36           Avenue and 1601 South 5th Avenue, under the Village’s tax reactivation
             program.
CO-   7-19-  Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property owned by the Police
2022- 2022   Department (electronic equipment and five vehicles).
14
CO-   6-20-  Approving real estate purchase and sale agreement between Neville Reid, as
2023- 2023   bankruptcy trustee for LLC 1 07CH12487, and the Village for the purchase of
23           315 West Roosevelt Road with TIF District funds.
CO-   1-9-   Authorizing the disposal of surplus personal property and equipment owned by
2024- 2024   the Village as described in Exhibit A to Ord. CO-2024-02.
02
CO-   3-5-   Approving a property sales contract with Artemio Montano and Ana L. Montano
2024- 2024   for the purchase of property located at 1101 South 1st Avenue.
10
CO-   6-4-   Authorizing the disposal of surplus property owned by the Police Department
2024- 2024   (bicycles, mini-bikes, and scooters).
23
            
 
TABLE II: NAMING OF STREETS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
             Honorarily naming and designating that part of St. Charles Road which consists
—   - -    of the 1900, 2000, and 2100 Blocks of St. Charles Road in the Village as
             “Bishop Willie J. Chambliss Road.”
CO-   9-25-  Honorarily naming and designating that part of Twelfth Avenue which consists
97-04 1997   of the 200 Block of Twelfth Avenue in the Village as Joseph D. Brown, Sr.
             Avenue.
C0-   2-23-  Honorarily naming and designating that part of Washington Boulevard lying
04-01 2004   between 1st Avenue and 21st Avenue within the Village as Pastor Wallace W.
             Sykes Boulevard.
           Honorarily naming and designating that part of 8th Avenue within the Village
             as Mayor Joe W. Freelon Avenue.
             Honorarily naming and designating that part of 16th Avenue consisting of the
           1200 block of South 16th Avenue within the Village as Mayor Don Williams
             Avenue.
C0-   3-7-   Honorarily naming and designating Madison Street, between 12th Avenue and 14th
06-04 2006   Avenue as Pastor Marvin E. Wiley Drive.
1     1-16-  Changing the name of Oak Street from the west right-of-way line of First
      2007   Avenue to the east right-of-way line of Fifth Avenue to Fred Hampton Way.
Res.  5-5-   Honorarily naming and designating the portion of N. 3rd Avenue between Chicago
2014- 2014   and Walton, as Gary Woll Way.
01
Res.  10-7-  Honorarily naming and designating the 1800 block through the 2100 block of S.
2014- 2014   13th Ave. in memory of Anthony “Tony” Thomas.
13
CO-   12-6-  Honorary naming and designating that part of 11th Avenue/Road/Street, which
2022- 2022   consists of the south 1400 block(s) as “Eugene “Gene” Moore Avenue/Road/
26           Street.
CO-   12-6-  Honorary naming and designating that part of 5th Avenue/Road/Street, which
2022- 2022   consists of the South 100 Block(s) as Northica Hillery Stone Avenue/Road/
26           Street.
            
 
TABLE III: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
             Vacating the east-west public alley and the north-south public alley, both
             located east of Fourth Avenue and south of Ohio Street in the W.J. Prindle’s
             subdivision of Lots 1 to 5 and the west one-half of the private alley
—   - -    adjoining Lots 1 to 5 in Block 199 in Maywood, a subdivision of the south one-
             half of the southwest 1/4 of Section 2, the west one-half of Section 11, and
             the northwest 1/4 of Section 14, all in Township 39 North, Range 12 East of
             the Third Principal Meridian in Cook County.
             Vacating that part of Eleventh Avenue lying north of the north right-of-way
C0-   12-10- line of St. Charles Road and south of the southwesterly right-of-way line of
98-19 1998   the Chicago and Northwestern Railway in the northeast quarter of Section 10,
             Township 39 North, Range 10 East of the Third Principal Meridian in Cook
             County.
C0-   12-10- Vacating a portion of Seventh Avenue north of St. Charles Road and south of
98-20 1998   the Union Pacific Railroad.
             Vacating the remainder of the 79.2 foot alley right-of-way located between the
C0-   5-13-  properties commonly known as 1000 South Fourth Avenue and 1000 South Fifth
99-07 1999   Avenue, said alley having an entrance on the south side of the 400 Block of
             Madison Street.
C0-   4-5-   Vacating the public right-of-way at Walnut Street from Fifth Avenue East, 139
99-08 1999   feet deep, to the previously vacated right-of- way located at Fourth Avenue
             and Walnut Street.
C0-   11-20- Vacating the public alley between Fifth Avenue and Fourth Avenue, from Walnut
99-22 1999   Street 89 feet north.
C0-   8-5-   Vacating a portion of the unimproved alley right-of-way (west ½ of north/south
22-02 2002   16- foot wide alley) located south of Lake Street between 3rd and 4th Avenues.
C0-   7-19-  Vacating a portion of the north 13.50 feet of the Warren Avenue right-of-way
04-21 2004   lying directly south of the property located at 644 South 15th Avenue.
             Vacating the 12-foot northwest-southeast alley right of way parcel, the Ohio
C0-   7-14-  Street right-of-way parcel, and the Des Plaines right-of-way parcel adjacent
05-23 2005   to and abutting the properties commonly known as 51 Lake Street, 207 North 1st
             Avenue, 211 North 1st Avenue and 221 North 1st Avenue.
C0-   10-18- Vacating the following alley rights-of-way: Blocks 127, 129, 132, 133, 135 -
05-38 2005   139, 131-144, 147 - 152, 154, 156 - 158, 160, 161, 163 - 166, 169, 170, 174,
             180, 182, 183, 188, 189 and 190.
C0-   10-18- Vacating the following alley rights-of-way: Blocks 66, 68-83, 85, 88, 92-97,
05-39 2005   100-105, 108-110, 112, 113, 116-121, 123 and 125.
C0-   10-18- Vacating the following alley rights-of-way: Blocks 55, 56, 59, 61, 203-206,
05-40 2005   208-212, 214-222, and 228-233.
C0-   10-18- Vacating the following alley rights-of-way: Blocks 234-242, 244-257, and 259-
05-41 2005   265.
C0-   10-18- Vacating a 14-foot wide north-south public alley between 1st Avenue and
05-42 2005   Orchard Avenue.
C0-   10-18- Vacating a 16-foot-wide, north-south, public alley between 9th Avenue and
05-43 2005   10the Avenue.
C0-   10-18- Vacating the following alley rights-of-way: East-west alley between Madison
05-44 2005   Street and Maywood Drive; North-south alley between 9th Avenue and 10th
             Avenue;
           East-west alley between Randolph Street and Washington Boulevard; North-south
             alley between 11th Avenue and 12th Avenue.
C0-   7-15-  Vacating a portion of 4th Avenue where crossed by the Union Pacific Railroad
08-28 2008   Company’s track.
CO-   6-2-   Vacating a portion of the north/south, 14-foot-wide alley located north of
09-17 2009   Walnut Street, south of Washington Street, west of 4th Avenue and east of 5th
             Avenue (Maywood Market Development).
CO-   2-5-   Vacating a portion of the north-south, 14-foot-wide, public alley located
2019- 2019   north of Lake Street, south of Ohio Street, west of 2nd Avenue and east of 1st
03           Avenue (Northwest Corner of 1st Avenue and Lake Street Redevelopment Project).
CO-   12-17- Vacating a potion of the north/south 7-foot wide public alley located west of
2019- 2019   and immediately adjacent to Lots 11 and 12 in Block 114 of Maywood Subdivision
39           in Maywood, IL (west of the 820 South 5th Avenue property).
CO-   5-16-  Vacating a 20-foot wide by 337-foot long portion of the 4th Avenue right-of-
2023- 2023   way to create 23 parking spaces for the West 40 Intermediate Service Center
19           (commonly known as 415 Lexington Street).
            
 
TABLE IV: SPECIAL USES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date      Description
         Passed
                   Granting a special use to permit a church to construct an
—      - -       off-street parking facility in an R-2 One Family Residential
                   District.
C0-98-09 7–9-1998Granting a special use permit for a child day care center at
                   615 W. Roosevelt Road.
C0-98-18 9-10-1998 Granting a special use permit for a child day care center at
                   840 South Seventeenth Avenue.
                   Approving a special use to operate a childcare facility in
C0-16-02 6-17-2002 an M-1 Limited Manufacturing District (1701 South 1st
                   Avenue).
                   Approving a special use to operate a private athletic club
C0-02-26 9-23-2002 in a B-3 Service, Automobile and Wholesale Business District
                   (1000 West Madison Street).
                   Granting a special use to use 2,500 square feet above a
C0-03-16 7-7-2003  business in a B-3 Service, Automobile, and Wholesale
                   Business Zoning District for dwelling purposes (511 St.
                   Charles Road).
C0-03-16 9-8-2003  Granting a special use to operate a law office in an M-
                   1 Limited Manufacturing District (1300 Maybrook Drive).
C0-03-26 9-8-2003  Approving a special use to operate a law office in an M-
                   1 Limited Manufacturing District (1300 Maybrook Drive).
C0-05-04 1-18-2005 Approving a special use to operate a childcare center in an
                   M-1 Limited Manufacturing District (35 South 19th Avenue).
C0-05-05 1-18-2005 Approving a special use to operate a childcare center in an
                   M-1 Limited Manufacturing District (35 South 19th Avenue.)
                   Approving a special use to operate a supportive living
C0-05-18 6-7-2005  facility in an R-5 General Residence District (Maywood
                   Supportive Care, LLC - 316 Randolph Street).
C0-05-33 9-20-2005 Approving a special use to operate a childcare center in an
                   M-1 Limited Manufacturing District (35 South 19th Avenue).
         10-17-    Approving a special use to operate an automobile sales
C0-06-33 2006      facility in an M-1 Limited Manufacturing District (701 Lake
                   Street).
                   Approving a special use to continue a single-family
C0-06-40 11-8-2006 residential use in a B-3 Service, Automotive and Wholesale
                   Business District (17 N. 3rd Avenue).
                   Approving a special use to operate locksmith and candy store
C0-07-19 7-2-2007  retail and services uses in a B-4 Office and Residential
                   District (406 S. 5th Avenue - Jackson)
                   Approving a special use to operate a childcare center in a
C0-08-18 5-6-2008  B-1 Local Retail Business District (1405-1407 South 5th
                   Avenue - Cross), d/b/a Train up a Child Christian Academy.
                   Approving a special use to operate a childcare center in a
C0-08-21 6-3-2008  M-1 Limited Manufacturing District (1701 South 1st Avenue -
                   Bullard/Wright), d/b/a Little Cupcakes Daycare Center.
                   Approving a special use to operate a childcare center in a
C0-08-22 6-3-2008  R-2 One-Family Residential District (611 Maple), d/b/a God
                   Loves Little Children Academy.
         11-18-    Approving a special use to operate a childcare center in a
C0-08-47 2008      R-2 One-Family Residential Zoning District (2001-2005 St.
                   Charles Avenue).
                   Approving a special use to operate a childcare center in a
C0-09-04 2-17-2009 R-2 One-Family Residential Zoning District (1001-2005 St.
                   Charles Avenue).
                   Approving a special use to operate a childcare center in a
R-09-09  4-21-2009 B-2 General Retail Business Zoning District (500-518 south
                   5th Avenue - McGhee, D/B/A “He Watches My Child”).
                   Approving a special use to operate a support center public
CO-09-23 8-4-2009  service use in an R-2 One-Family Residence Zoning District
                   (1821 S. 9th Avenue - West Suburban Pads).
                   Approving a special use to operate a supportive living
CO-09-24 8-4-2009  facility in a R-5 General Residence Zoning District (316
                   Randolph Street - Plum Creek Maywood Supportive Care, LLC).
                   Approving a special use to operate a drive through facility
CO-2010- 11-16-    in conjunction with a permitted restaurant use in a C-
19       2010      3 General Commercial Zoning District (1001 - 1009 Roosevelt
                   Road).
CO-2010- 11-16-    Approving a special use to operate child day care centers in
21       2010      a C-2 Pedestrian-Oriented Commercial Zoning District (1401 -
                   1407 S. 5th Avenue).
                   Approving a special use to operate a restaurant with a dual
                   drive-through facility, variations to certain buffer yard,
CO-2011- 10-18-    menu board and signage requirements related to the
17       2011      restaurant, and a zoning code text amendment allowing
                   electronic message board signs in a C-3 General Commercial
                   Zoning District - 501-519 Roosevelt Road.
                   Approving a special use to construct and maintain a 26-
CO-2011- 10-18-    vehicle parking lot for private residential use at 1102 S.
29       2011      4th Avenue in the R-5 multi-family residential zoning
                   district.
CO-2011-           Approving a special use to operate a child care center at
30       12-6-2011 2001- 2005 St. Charles Road in the C-2 pedestrian oriented
                   commercial zoning district.
CO-2012-           Approving a special use to erect an electronic message
09       2-21-2012 display sign at 501-519 Roosevelt Road in a C-3 general
                   commercial zoning district.
CO-2012-           Approving a special use to erect an electronic message
10       4-3-2012  display sign at 1001-1009 Roosevelt Road in a C-3 general
                   commercial zoning district.
CO-2012- 8-21-2012 Approving a special use to allow drive-through facilities in
33                 C-2 pedestrian-oriented commercial zoning districts.
                   Approving a special use for a drive-through facility at a
CO-2012- 8-21-2012 restaurant located at the northwest corner of Lake Street
35                 and 1st Avenue in the C-2 pedestrian-oriented commercial
                   zoning district.
                   Approving a special use to construct and maintain a front
CO-2012- 11-20-    yard parking pad to accommodate two vehicles at the subject
47       2012      property of 618 N. 1st Avenue, in the R-2 single family
                   residential zoning district, subject to certain conditions.
CO-2012- 11-20-    Approving a special use to locate a daycare center at 1401-
49       2012      07 Madison Street, in the R-4 multi-family residential
                   zoning district.
                   Approving a special use for electronic message board signs
CO-2013- 4-30-2013 and additional variations related to signage at 11 N. 1st
32                 Avenue (McDonalds) in a C-3 general commercial zoning
                   district.
                   Approving special uses for electronic message board signs
CO-2014-           and for a drive-thru and additional variations related to
06       1-21-2014 landscape buffer, fence height and signage at 1718 S. 1st
                   Avenue (Vequity, LLC/Checkers Drive-In) in a C-3 general
                   commercial zoning district.
CO-2014-           Approving a special use for a heavy retail use at 50 Madison
24       7-15-2014 (Stockyard Brick, LLC, d/b/a Deconstruction, LLC) in the C-
                   4 Town Center Zoning District.
                   Approving a final plan for a planned unit development
2018-35  8-21-2018 special use, including certain use approvals and variations
                   for Applicant SMC Management, LLC, for development of the
                   property located at 1001 St. Charles Road.
CO-2021- 1-5-2021  Approving a special use relative to parking in a residential
01                 front yard at 1421 South 18th Avenue.
CO-2021- 10-19-    Approving a zoning map amendment and a special use permit
29       2021      for the construction and operation of a car wash on property
                   at 1215 South 1st Ave. (Little Bear Holdings, LLC).
CO-2022- 6-21-2022 Approving a special use for an indoor recreation facility
12                 use at 1007 South 17th Avenue.
CO-2022-           Approving a zoning map amendment and special use for a
16       8-16-2022 daycare center at 1418 Madison Street (Avery & Pryor
                   Construction LLC).
CO-2022- 11-1-2022 Approving a special use for an indoor recreation facility
21                 use at 1115 Madison Street (Garron/Yours Gaming LLC).
CO-2023-           Approving a special use for an electronic message board sign
08       2-7-2023  and various sign variations relative to a car wash at 1215
                   South First Avenue (Little Bear Holdings, LLC)
                   Approving a 90-day extension of a special use permit (Ord.
CO-2024- 1-9-2024  CO- 2022-16) to complete construction of and commence
01                 operations of a daycare center at 1418 Madison Street (Avery
                   & Pryor Construction LLC).
CO-2024-           Approving a special use for an educational facility
08       2-6-2024  (vocational school) at the 1010 Madison Street property
                   (Lumity - 1010 Madison, LLC).
                  
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to 1997 Code of Ordinances
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                                Code Section
5 ILCS 70/1.01                              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.02                              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.03                              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.04                              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.05                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.07                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.08                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.09                              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.10                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.11                              10.04
5 ILCS 70/1.12                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.15                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.16                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.17                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.20                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.24                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.28                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/1.29                              10.02
5 ILCS 70/2                                 10.04
5 ILCS 120/1 et seq.                        30.31,
                                            30.36
5 ILCS 120/1                                30.12
5 ILCS 120/2(c)(13)                         90.10
5 ILCS 120/2.06(g)                          30.37,
                                            31.101
5 ILCS 140/1 et seq.                        157.04
5 ILCS 175/1-101 et seq. (Repealed)         10.02
5 ILCS 430/1-1 et seq.                      38.03
5 ILCS 430/5-15                             38.03
5 ILCS 430/10-10 - 10-40                    38.03
5 ILCS 430/50-5                             38.03
5 ILCS 430/70-5                             38.03
5 ILCS 430/70-5(a)                          38.03
5 ILCS 430/70-5(c)                          38.03
20 ILCS 3305/1 et seq.                      37.05 
20 ILCS 3305/4                              37.05 
20 ILCS 3305/10(i)                          37.05
20 ILCS 3305/10(j)                          37.05
20 ILCS 3305/20                             37.05
30 ILCS 235/2.5                             36.07
30 ILCS 575/2                               36.08
35 ILCS 105/1 et seq.                       111.43
35 ILCS 120                                 117.40
35 ILCS 120/1 et seq.                       36.45
35 ILCS 120/2                               111.38
35 ILCS 120/3                               111.38
35 ILCS 143/10-1 et seq.                    116.08
35 ILCS 200/1-1 et seq.                     150.033
35 ILCS 200/31-25                           111.37
35 ILCS 505/1 et seq.                       111.43
35 ILCS 505/1.13                            111.43
35 ILCS 630/1 et seq.                       36.45
35 ILCS 635/1 et seq.                       36.45
35 ILCS 636/5-50                            36.48
35 ILCS 638/1 et seq.                       36.45
40 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.                     31.25,
                                            32.15
40 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.                     31.24,
                                            33.13
40 ILCS 5/22-301 et seq.                    32.17 -
                                            32.19
40 ILCS 5/22-301 - 22-308                   33.18
40 ILCS 5/22-302                            32.18
40 ILCS 5/22-305                            33.18
50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.                        124.06,
                                            124.07
50 ILCS 220/2                               111.29
50 ILCS 345/1                               38.06
50 ILCS 725/1 et seq.                       30.14
50 ILCS 740/1 et seq.                       33.19
50 ILCS 750/1 et seq.                       31.21,
                                            31.22
50 ILCS 750/15.3                            31.22
50 ILCS 751/1 et seq. (Repealed)            31.22
50 ILCS 753/1 et seq.                       31.22
65 ILCS 5                                   31.21
65 ILCS 5/1-1-1 et seq.                     10.02,
                                            152.01
65 ILCS 5/1-1-2(3)                          10.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1                             10.99,
                                            152.01
                                            10.99,
65 ILCS 5/1-2-1-1                           36.99,
                                            130.02
65 ILCS 5/1-2.1-1 et seq.                   39.02
65 ILCS 5/3.1-15-25                         33.15,
                                            72.02
65 ILCS 5/5-1-1 et seq.                     30.25
65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 - 8-2-9.10                36.09
65 ILCS 5/8-11-1                            36.65,
                                            36.66
                                            36.75,
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2                            36.76,
                                            36.91
65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.3                          111.43
65 ILCS 5/8-11-5                            36.65,
                                            36.66
65 ILCS 5/8-11-7                            111.38
65 ILCS 5/8-11-8                            111.39
65 ILCS 5/8-11-23                           36.130,
                                            36.131
65 ILCS 5/8-11-24                           36.140,
                                            36.141
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1 et seq.                    30.14
65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.                  31.21
65 ILCS 5/11-10-1                           33.16
65 ILCS 5/11-10-2                           33.16
65 ILCS 5/11-12-12                          152.01
65 ILCS 5/11-15.1-2.1                       157.01
65 ILCS 5/11-20-8                           92.25
65 ILCS 5/11-30-2                           152.01
65 ILCS 5/11-30-8                           152.01
65 ILCS 5/11-31 et seq.                     150.029
65 ILCS 5/11-31-2                           152.01
65 ILCS 5/11-42.1-1 et seq.                 36.08
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-3 et seq.                 36.10
65 ILCS 5/11-74.4-4.2                       36.10,
                                            38.01
65 ILCS 5/11-76-4                           36.06
75 ILCS 5/4-1 et seq.                       30.11
105 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.                      130.27
105 ILCS 5/26-1(2)                          130.27
210 ILCS 45                                 113.03
210 ILCS 45/1 et seq.                       113.19
210 ILCS 45/3-119                           113.19
220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.                    36.90
220 ILCS 5/3-105                            36.90,
                                            160.03
220 ILCS 5/9-202                            36.45
220 ILCS 5/9-221                            36.45
220 ILCS 5/9-222                            36.45
220 ILCS 5/9-222.1                          36.45
220 ILCS 5/16-102                           160.21
220 ILCS 5/16-104                           36.76
220 ILCS 5/21-100 et seq.                   101.02
220 ILCS 5/21-201(v)                        101.02
220 ILCS 5/21-301(c)                        124.02
220 ILCS 5/21-401                           101.02,
                                            124.01
220 ILCS 5/21-401(b)(6)                     124.02
220 ILCS 5/21-801                           124.01
220 ILCS 5/21-801(b)                        124.01
220 ILCS 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi)                 124.01
220 ILCS 5/21-801(d)                        124.01
220 ILCS 5/22-501                           123.01
220 ILCS 5/22-501(r)(1)                     123.99
220 ILCS 5/22-501(s)                        123.04
220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.                       101.16
220 ILCS 65/4                               101.05
225 ILCS                                    110.13
225 ILCS 65/50-10                           113.02
225 ILCS 70                                 113.02
225 ILCS 305/1 et seq.                      150.012
225 ILCS 312/1 et seq.                      150.120
225 ILCS 320/0.01 et seq.                   51.69
225 ILCS 320/2.5(g)                         51.72
225 ILCS 320/3                              51.73
225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.                      152.02
225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.                      152.02
225 ILCS 440/6.03                           153.02
                                            92.21,
                                            114.07,
                                            117.23,
230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.                       125.01,
                                            125.03,
                                            130.50,
                                            130.51
235 ILCS 5                                  117.01
235 ILCS 5/1-2 et seq.                      117.02
235 ILCS 5/1-3.02                           36.21,
                                            117.45 
235 ILCS 5/1-3.03                           36.21
235 ILCS 5/1-3.04                           36.21
235 ILCS 5/1-3.05                           36.21
235 ILCS 5/1-3.06                           36.21
235 ILCS 5/1-3.08                           36.21
235 ILCS 5/1-3.18                           36.21
235 ILCS 5/6-16                             150.036
235 ILCS 5/6-20                             150.036
235 ILCS 5/6-21                             117.23,
                                            117.57
235 ILCS 5/6-33                             117.23
235 ILCS 5/7-5                              117.99
235 ILCS 5/7-9                              117.99
310 ILCS 65/1 et seq.                       111.37
405 ILCS 20                                 111.18
410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.                       92.04
                                            36.130,
                                            129A.01,
410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.                      129A.02,
                                            129A.03,
                                            130.90,
                                            130.92
410 ILCS 625/3.6                            95.04
410 ILCS 625/4(a)                           95.04
410 ILCS 650 et seq.                        95.02
410 ILCS 705/1                              99.19,
                                            129A.02
                                            129A.01,
                                            129A.03,
410 ILCS 705/1 et seq.                      130.90,
                                            130.91,
                                            130.92
415 ILCS 5                                  92.21,
                                            152.07
                                            157.04,
415 ILCS 5/1                                157.06,
                                            157.07
415 ILCS 5/1 et seq.                        157.01,
                                            157.04
415 ILCS 5/3                                157.01
415 ILCS 5/14 et seq.                       51.73
415 ILCS 5/22.19a                           157.06
430 ILCS 65/13.1                            130.80
505 ILCS 100/2                              92.21
605 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.                    101.02,
                                            160.21
615 ILCS 5/5 et seq.                        152.02
615 ILCS 5/18g                              152.01
625 ILCS                                    70.03
625 ILCS 5                                  99.01
                                            70.01,
625 ILCS 5/1-100 et seq.                    70.22,
                                            71.11,
                                            72.06
625 ILCS 5/1-146                            72.23,
                                            99.01
625 ILCS 5/1-188                            10.02
625 ILCS 5/1-209                            72.23,
                                            99.01
625 ILCS 5/1-211                            72.23,
                                            99.01
625 ILCS 5/3-112(b)                         70.03
625 ILCS 5/3-401                            72.05
625 ILCS 5/3-401(a)                         70.03
625 ILCS 5/3-413(a), (b)                    70.03
625 ILCS 5/3-413(f)                         70.03
625 ILCS 5/3-414                            72.05
625 ILCS 5/3-414.1                          72.05
625 ILCS 5/3-416                            70.03
625 ILCS 5/3-616                            72.33
625 ILCS 5/3-701(a)(1)                      70.03
625 ILCS 5/4-101 et seq.                    99.17
625 ILCS 5/4-208                            39.39
625 ILCS 5/5-202(e)                         70.03
625 ILCS 5/6-101                            99.24
625 ILCS 5/6-204                            39.02
625 ILCS 5/6-303                            99.22
                                            39.30,
625 ILCS 5/6-306.5 (Repealed)               39.32,
                                            39.40
625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(b) (Repealed)            39.40
625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(c) (Repealed)            39.40
625 ILCS 5/6-306.5(d) (Repealed)            39.40
625 ILCS 5/7-601                            99.23
625 ILCS 5/7-602                            99.23
                                            39.05,
625 ILCS 5/11-208.3                         39.30,
                                            39.31
625 ILCS 5/11-306                           77.02
625 ILCS 5/11-501                           99.21
625 ILCS 5/11-1305                          39.41
625 ILCS 5/11-1306                          39.41,
                                            39.99
625 ILCS 5/11-1406                          70.03
625 ILCS 5/11-1407                          70.03
625 ILCS 5/11-1411                          70.03
625 ILCS 5/11-1419.01                       70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-101                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-201(a)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-201(b)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-202(a),(b)                    70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-204                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-205                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-207(a)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-207(b)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-208                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-209(c)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-211(a)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-211(b)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-212(a)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-212(b)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-215                           70.03,
                                            99.26
625 ILCS 5/12-301                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-401                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-405(d)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-501(a)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-502                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-503                           70.03,
                                            99.01
625 ILCS 5/12-503(e)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-601                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-601(b)                        70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-602                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-603                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-603.1                         70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-604.1                         70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-610                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-611                           70.03,
                                            99.01
625 ILCS 5/12-702                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-710                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-808                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-809                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/12-810                           70.03
625 ILCS 5/15-101 et seq.                   71.13
625 ILCS 5/15-102                           71.13,
                                            71.15
625 ILCS 5/15-103                           71.13
625 ILCS 5/15-107                           71.13,
                                            71.15
625 ILCS 5/15-109(b)                        70.30
625 ILCS 5/15-111                           71.13,
                                            71.15
625 ILCS 5/15-111(f)                        71.15
625 ILCS 5/15-114                           70.30
625 ILCS 5/15-316                           71.13,
                                            71.15
625 ILCS 5/15-317                           71.13
625 ILCS 5/18C-4104(a)                      70.03
625 ILCS 5/18C-4604(3)                      70.03
625 ILCS 5/18C-4604(4)                      70.03
625 ILCS 5/18C-4701(1)                      70.03
625 ILCS 5/18C-7201                         160.21
625 ILCS 25/1 et seq.                       71.09
625 ILCS 57/1 et seq.                       126.04
705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.                    130.27
720 ILCS                                    99.18
720 ILCS 5/2-7                              110.10
720 ILCS 5/8-1 et seq.                      150.036
720 ILCS 5/9-1 et seq.                      150.036
720 ILCS 5/10-1 et seq.                     150.036
720 ILCS 5/11-1.20                          90.34
720 ILCS 5/11-1.30                          90.34,
                                            130.25
720 ILCS 5/11-1.50                          90.34
720 ILCS 5/11-1.60                          90.34
                                            99.18,
720 ILCS 5/11-14                            131.06,
                                            150.036
720 ILCS 5/11-14.1                          131.03,
                                            131.06
720 ILCS 5/11-15 (Repealed)                 150.036
720 ILCS 5/11-16 (Repealed)                 150.036
720 ILCS 5/11-17 (Repealed)                 150.036
                                            99.18,
720 ILCS 5/11-18                            131.03,
                                            131.06
                                            99.18,
720 ILCS 5/11-18.1                          131.03,
                                            131.06
720 ILCS 5/11-20                            150.036
720 ILCS 5/11-20.1                          90.34,
                                            150.036
720 ILCS 5/11-20.1B (Repealed)              150.036
720 ILCS 5/11-21                            150.036
720 ILCS 5/12-0.1 et seq.                   150.036
720 ILCS 5/15-6                             111.27
720 ILCS 5/16-1                             39.39
720 ILCS 5/16-1 et seq.                     150.036
720 ILCS 5/18-1                             130.25
720 ILCS 5/18-2                             130.25
720 ILCS 5/19-1                             130.25
720 ILCS 5/19-3                             130.25
720 ILCS 5/19-5                             130.25
720 ILCS 5/19-6                             130.25
720 ILCS 5/20-1                             130.25
720 ILCS 5/20-1.1                           130.25 
720 ILCS 5/20-2                             99.25,
                                            130.25
720 ILCS 5/20-2 et seq.                     150.036
720 ILCS 5/21-1                             39.39
720 ILCS 5/21-3                             131.06
720 ILCS 5/24-1                             99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-1 et seq.                     150.036
720 ILCS 5/24-1(a)(6),(a)(7),(a)(9),(a)(12) 130.25
720 ILCS 5/24-1.1                           99.25,
                                            130.25
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2                           99.25,
                                            130.25
720 ILCS 5/24-1.2-5                         99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-1.5                           99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-1.6                           99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-2(a)(4)                       130.80
720 ILCS 5/24-2.1                           99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-2.2                           99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-3                             99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-3A                            99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-3.1                           99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-3.2                           99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-3.3                           99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-3.4                           99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-3.5                           99.25
720 ILCS 5/24-6                             99.25
720 ILCS 5/25-1 et seq.                     150.036
720 ILCS 5/25-1(a)                          130.25
720 ILCS 5/26-1 et seq.                     150.036
720 ILCS 5/28-1 et seq.                     150.036
720 ILCS 5/28-1(a)(3) - (a)(11)             117.22
720 ILCS 5/31-1 et seq.                     150.036
720 ILCS 5/33-1                             130.25
720 ILCS 5/33A-2                            99.25,
                                            130.25
720 ILCS 5/33E-3                            36.08
720 ILCS 5/33E-4                            36.08
720 ILCS 5/33E-6                            36.08
720 ILCS 5/47-15(a)                         99.27
720 ILCS 550                                130.26
                                            99.19,
720 ILCS 550/1 et seq.                      130.92,
                                            150.036
720 ILCS 550/5                              130.25
720 ILCS 550/5.1                            130.25
720 ILCS 550/7                              130.25
720 ILCS 550/9                              130.25
720 ILCS 570                                113.02,
                                            130.26
720 ILCS 570/100 et seq.                    99.19,
                                            150.036
720 ILCS 570/302                            113.03
720 ILCS 570/401                            130.25
720 ILCS 570/401.1                          130.25
720 ILCS 570/405                            130.25
720 ILCS 570/406.1                          130.25
720 ILCS 570/407                            130.25
720 ILCS 570/407.1                          130.25
720 ILCS 600/2(d)                           130.90
720 ILCS 600/4                              130.90
720 ILCS 646/1 et seq.                      150.036
725 ILCS 5/100-1 et seq.                    36.99
735 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.                    36.99
735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.                    150.002
735 ILCS 5/12-101 et seq.                   39.16
740 ILCS 147/1 et seq.                      130.02
740 ILCS 175/1 et seq.                      38.04
750 ILCS 5/101 et seq.                      130.27
765 ILCS 205/2                              152.10
765 ILCS 1030/0.01 et seq.                  32.21
775 ILCS 5/2-101 et seq.                    34.06
775 ILCS 5/2-105                            36.08
805 ILCS 105/101.01 et seq.                 117.02
810 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.                    39.16
810 ILCS 5/2-104                            111.27
815 ILCS 515/3                              110.10
815 ILCS 515/5                              110.10
820 ILCS 130/0.01 et seq.                   52.01
820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.                      36.08
820 ILCS 320/1 et seq.                      40.01
                                            
 
REFERENCES TO 1997 CODE OF ORDINANCES
1997 Code Section 2005 Code Section
1997 Code Section 2005 Code Section
1.08              10.99
2.01              30.25
2.02              30.26
2.04              30.27
2.05              30.28
2.06              30.29
2.07              30.30
2.08              30.31
2.09              30.32
2.10              30.33
2.11              30.34
2.12              30.35
3.01              30.01
3.02              30.02
3.02              34.02
3.03              30.03
3.04              30.04
3.05              30.05
3.06              30.06
3.07              30.07
3.08              30.08
3.09              30.09
3.10              31.01
3.11              36.01
3.12              36.02
3.13              36.03
3.14              36.04
3.17              31.03
3.18              31.04
3.19              31.20
3.20              31.21
3.21              30.11
3.23              31.05
3.25              31.37
3.26              36.05
3.28(a)           37.01
3.28(b)           37.02
3.28(c)           37.03
3.28(d)           37.04
4.01              32.01
4.02              32.02
4.04              32.03
4.05              32.04
4.06              32.05
4.07              32.06
4.08              32.07
4.09              32.08
4.10              32.09
4.11              32.10
4.12              32.11
4.13              32.12
4.14              32.13
4.15              32.14
4.16              32.15
4.17              32.16
4.18              32.17
4.19              32.18
5.01              33.01
5.02              33.02
5.03              33.03
5.04              33.04
5.05              33.05
5.06              33.06
5.07              33.07
5.08              33.08
5.09              33.09
5.10              33.10
5.11              33.11
5.12              33.30
5.13              33.31
5.14              33.32
5.15              33.12
5.16              33.13
5.18              33.15
5.19              33.16
5.20              33.17
5.21              33.18
Ch. 5A            31.22
6.01              34.01
6.03              34.03
6.04              34.03
6.05              34.04
6.06              34.05
6.07              34.06
6.08              34.07
6.09              34.08
6.10              34.09
6.11              34.10
6.12              34.11
6.13              34.08
6.14              34.12
6.15              34.99
6.16              34.13
6.17              34.14
8.01              51.01
8.02              51.02
8.03              51.03
8.04              51.04
8.05              51.05
8.06              51.06
8.07              51.50
8.08              51.51
8.09              51.52
8.10              51.53
8.11              51.54
8.12              51.55
8.13              51.56
8.14(a)           51.30
8.14(b)           51.31
8.14(c)           51.32
8.14(d)           51.33
8.14(e)           51.34
8.14(f)           51.35
8.14(g)           51.36
8.15              51.37
8.16              51.57
8.17              51.07
8.18              51.08
8.18A             51.09
8.19              51.58
8.20              51.59
8.21              51.60
8.22              51.38
8.23              51.10
8.24              51.39
8.25              51.11
8.26              51.61
8.27              51.62
8.28              51.63
8.29              51.64
8.30              51.65
8.31              51.66
8.32              51.67
8.33              51.68
8.34              51.69
8.35              51.12
8.36              51.98
8.37              51.13
8.38              51.70.11
8.39              51.71
8.40              51.72
8.41              51.73
9.01              94.01
9.02              94.02
9.03              94.03
9.04              94.04
9.05              94.05
9.06              94.06
9.07              94.07
9.08              94.08
9.09              94.09
9.10              94.10
9.11              94.11
9.12              94.12
9.13              94.13
9.14              94.14
9.15              94.15
9.16              94.16
9.17              94.17
9.18              94.18
9.19              94.19
9.20              94.20
9.21              94.21
11.01             92.01
11.02             92.02
11.04             92.03
12.01             92.20
12.02             92.21
12.03             92.22
12.04             92.23
12.05             92.24
12.08             92.27
12.09             92.28
12.10             92.29
12.11             92.30
12.12             92.31
13.01             93.01
13.02             93.02
13.03             93.03
13.04             93.04
13.05             93.05
13.06             93.06
13.07             93.07
13.08             93.08
13.09             93.20
13.10             93.21
13.11             93.22
13.12             93.23
13.13             93.24
13.14             93.25
13.15             93.26
13.16             93.27
13.17             93.99
14.01             95.01
14.02             95.02
14.03             95.03
15.01             50.01
15.03             50.02
15.04             50.20
15.05             50.41
15.06             50.21
15.08             50.22
15.09             50.23
15.10             50.24
15.12             50.25,
                  50.42
15.13             50.43
15.14             50.44
15.15             50.45
15.16             50.46
15.17             50.04
15.18             50.05
16.01             150.095
16.02             150.096
16.03             150.097
16.12             150.098
16.13             150.099
16.14             150.100
16.15             150.101
16.16             150.102
16.17             150.999
17.01             112.01
17.02             112.02
17.03             112.03
17.04             112.04
17.05             112.05
17.06             112.06
17.08             112.98
18.01             113.01
18.02             113.02
18.03             113.03
18.04             113.04
18.05             113.05
18.06             113.06
18.07             113.07
18.08             113.08
18.09             113.09
18.10             113.10
18.11             113.11
18.12             113.12
18.13             113.13
18.14             113.14
18.15             113.15
18.16             113.16
18.17             113.17
18.18             113.18
18.19             113.19
18.20             113.20
18.21             113.21
18.23             113.23
21.01             151.01
21.02             151.02
21.03             151.03
22.01             154.01
23.01             150.001
23.02             150.002
23.03             150.003
23.04             150.004
23.05             150.005
23.06             150.006
23.07             150.007
23.08             150.008
23.09             150.009
23.10             150.010
23.11             150.011
23.12             150.012
23.13             150.013
23.14             150.014
23.15             150.015
23.16             150.016
23.17             150.017
23.18             150.018
23.19             150.019
23.20             150.020
23.21             150.021
23.22             150.022
23.23             150.023
23.24             150.024
23.25             150.025
23.26             150.026
23.28             150.027
23.50             150.028
24.01             150.030
24.02             150.041
24.03             150.042
24.04             150.043
24.05             150.044
24.06             150.045
24.07             150.046
24.08             150.047
24.09             150.048
24.10             150.049
24.11             150.050
25.01             150.065
25.02             150.066
25.03             150.067
25.04             150.068
25A.01            150.080
26.01             91.01
26.02             91.02
26.03             91.03
26.04             91.04
26.05             91.05
26.06             91.06
26.07             91.07
26.08             91.08
28.01             96.01
28.02             96.02
28.03             96.03
28.04             96.04
28.05             96.05
28.06             96.06
28.07             96.07
28.08             96.08
28.09             96.09
28.10             96.10
28.11             96.11
28.12             96.12
28.13             96.13
28.14             96.14
28.15             96.15
28.16             96.16
28.17             96.17
28.18             96.18
31.01             110.01
31.02             110.02
31.03             110.03
31.04             110.04
31.06             110.06
31.07             110.07
31.08             110.08
31.09             110.09
31.10             110.10
31.11             110.11
31.12             110.12
31.13             110.13
31.14             110.14
31.15             110.15
31.16             110.16
31.17             110.17
31.18             110.18
32.01             111.01
32.02             111.02
32.03             111.03
32.04             111.04
32.05             111.05
32.06             111.06
32.07             111.06
32.08             111.07
32.09             111.08
32.10             111.09
32.11             111.10,
                  111.99
32.12             111.11
32.13             111.12
32.14             111.13
32.15             111.14
32.16             111.15
32.17             111.16
32.18             111.17
32.19             111.18
32.20             111.19
32.21             111.20
32.22             111.21
32.23             111.22
32.24             111.23
32.25             111.24
32.26             111.25
32.27             111.26,
                  111.35
32.28             111.27
32.28A            111.28
32.29             111.29
32.30             111.29
32.31             111.30
32.32             111.31
32.33             111.31
32.34             111.32
32.35             111.33
32.36             111.34
32.39             111.37
32.40             111.38
32.41             111.39
33.01             114.01
33.02             114.02
33.03             114.03
33.04             114.04
33.06             114.05
33.07             114.06
33.08             114.07
33.09             114.08
33.11             114.09
34.01             115.01
34.02             115.02
34.03             115.03
34.04             115.04
34.05             115.05
34.06             115.06
34.07             115.07
35.01             117.01
35.02             117.02
35.03             117.20
35.04             117.21
35.05             117.22
35.06             117.40
35.07             117.23
35.08             117.24
35.09             117.41
35.10             117.25
35.11             117.26
35.13             117.27
35.14             117.42
35.15             117.43
35.16             117.44
35.17             117.45 
35.18             117.46
35.19             117.47
35.20             117.48
35.21             117.49
35.22             117.50
35.23             117.51
35.24             117.52
35.26             117.54
35.27             117.55
35.28             117.56
35.29             117.57
35.30             117.58
35.31             117.03
35.32             117.04
35.33             117.59
35.34             117.99
36.01             118.01
36.02             118.02
36.03             118.03
36.04             118.04
36.05             118.05
36.06             118.06
36.07             118.07
36.08             117.08
36.09             117.09
36.10             118.10
36.11             118.11
36.12             118.12
36A.01            119.01,
                  119.04
36A.02            119.02
36A.03            119.03
36A.05            119.05
36A.06            119.06
36A.07            119.07
36A.08            119.08
36A.09            119.09
37.01             74.01
37.02             74.02
37.03             74.03
37.04             74.04
38.01             73.01
38.02             73.02
38.03             73.03
38.04             73.04
38.05             73.05
38.06             73.06
38.07             73.07
38.08             73.08
38.09             73.09
40.01             70.20
40.02             70.21
40.03             70.22
40.04             70.23
40.05             70.24
41.01             70.01,
                  70.02
41.02             71.01,
                  74.04
41.04             74.04
41.05             71.02
41.06             71.03
41.07             71.04
41.08             71.05
41.09             74.04
41.10             72.20,
                  74.04
41.11             72.21,
                  74.04
41.12             71.06
41.13             74.04
41.14             72.22
41.15             72.23
41.16             72.24
41.17             72.25
41.18             72.26
41.20             72.27
41.21             72.28
41.22             72.29
41.23             72.30
41.24             72.01
41.25             72.31
41.26             72.32
41.27             72.02
41.28             72.03
41.31             71.07
41.32             71.08
41.33             74.04
41.34             72.04
41.36             72.33
41.37             70.03
Ch. 41, Sch. A    74.04
Ch. 41, Sch. B    74.04
Ch. 41, Sch. C    74.04
42.01             130.20
42.02             130.80
42.03             130.81
42.04             130.65
42.05             130.66
42.06             130.01
42.08             130.02
42.09             130.03
42.10             130.67
42.11             130.50
42.12             130.51
42.13             130.52
42.14             130.35
42.15             130.53
42.17             130.04
42.18             130.36
42.19             130.22
42.20             130.05
42.21             97.01 -
                  97.07
43.01             90.01
43.02             90.02
43.03             90.03
43.04             90.04
43.05             90.25
43.06             90.26
43.07             90.32
43.08             90.33
43.09             90.34
43.10             90.35
43.11             90.36
43.12             90.37
43.14             90.05
43.16             90.08
43.17             90.09
43.18             90.99
43.19             90.10
43.20             90.11
43.21             90.99
43.22             90.12
43.23             90.13
44.01             99.01
44.02             99.02
44.03             99.03
44.04             99.04
44.05             99.05
44.06             99.06
44.07             99.07
44.08             99.08
44.09             99.09
44.10             99.10
50.02             50.40
50.11             50.03
51.01             36.20
51.02             36.21
51.03             36.22
51.04             36.23
51.05             36.24
51.06             36.25
51.07             36.26
51.08             36.27
51.09             36.28
51.10             36.29
51.11             36.30
51.12             36.31
51.13             36.99
51.15             36.32
                  
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
R-77-15   - -         31.05
R-09-01   1-13-2009   T.S.O. I
R-09-09   4-21-2009   T.S.O. IV
                      110.13,
                      111.34,
R-2013-08 3-13-2013   111.35,
                      130.80,
                      130.81
R-2014-01 5-5-2014    T.S.O. II
R-2014-13 10-7-2014   T.S.O. II
R-2020-4  6-9-2020    31.23
                     
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.    Date Passed Code Section
—         - -         T.S.O. II
—         - -         T.S.O. I
—         - -         T.S.O. IV
—         - -         T.S.O. III
—         - -         30.03
—         8-14-1952   30.04
—         1-24-1952   94.15
55-3        8-18-1955   71.02
55-9        8-18-1955   72.20
55-13       9-22-1955   111.12
55-14       9-22-1955   94.10
55-15       9-22-1955   111.13
55-16       10-19-1955  111.07
56-1        3-1-1956    32.09
56-6        3-1-1956    92.02
57-1        1-10-1957   117.59
58-8        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
58-9        - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III;
                        Ch. 76, Sch. IV
58-14       3-22-1958   111.03
58-23       7-25-1958   30.30
58-24       11-13-1958  111.34 -
                        111.35
59-3        2-5-1959    Ch. 75, Sch. I
59-9        6-9-1959     
60-2        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
60-5        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
60-7        - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III
60-8        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
60-10       7-28-1960   30.05
60-17       11-17-1960  72.30
60-19       12-8-1960   130.22
61-5        - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III
61-9        12-14-1961  111.06
62-1        1-25-1962   Ch. 75, Sch. IV
62-3        3-29-1962   130.53
                        112.01 -
62-15       12-13-1962  112.06,
                        112.98
63-1        - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III
63-2        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
63-5        6-27-1963   50.45
63-6        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
63-13       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
63-14       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
64-5        6-25-1964   72.02
64-7        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
64-8        10-8-1964   72.28
64-10       10-22-1964  71.06
65-9        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
65-13       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
65-14       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
65-16       - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III
66-1        1-13-1966   72.02
66-2        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
66-4        - -         Ch. 76, Schs. III,
                        IV
66-5        - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III
66-7        2-10-1966   111.11
66-10       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
66-15       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
66-17       6-9-1966    Ch. 75, Sch. V
66-18       6-23-1966   31.37
66-19       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
66-20       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
66-23       - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III
66-28       10-13-1966  Ch. 75, Sch. I
66-34       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
66-35       - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III
66-36       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
67-3        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
67-4        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
67-8        3-9-1967    Ch. 75, Sch. V
67-12       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
67-13       - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III
67-16       - -1967     Ch. 76, Sch. V
67-19       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
67-21       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
67-22       - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III
67-23       8-3-1967    151.02
67-28       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
68-3        4-25-1968   37.01 -
                        37.04
68-7        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
                        51.02 -
                        51.13,
                        51.30 -
68-13       10-24-1968  51.39,
                        51.50 -
                        51.73,
                        51.98
69-4        3-27-1969   71.01
69-6        5-22-1969   92.27
69-7        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
69-14       6-8-1967    96.01 -
                        96.18
69-15       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
69-18       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
69-22       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
70-2        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
70-5        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
70-25       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
70-26       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
71-3        2-11-1971   50.01
71-8        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
71-13       9-23-1971   Ch. 76, Sch. II
71-14       10-14-1971  95.01
72-1        1-13-1972   117.02
72-4        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
72-6        3-23-1972   Ch. 75, Sch. V
72-25       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
73-2        2-22-1973   Ch. 76, Sch. V
73-3        3-8-1973    31.37
73-4        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
73-5        - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III;
                        Ch. 76, Sch. III
73-11       6-14-1973   31.37
73-12       - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III
73-15       8-9-1973    96.09
73-16       7-26-1973   73.01 -
                        73.09
73-17       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
73-28       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
74-5        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
74-6        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
74-7        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
74-8        4-11-1974   Ch. 75, Sch. I
74-9        4-11-1974   Ch. 75, Sch. V
74-10       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
74-28       12-19-1974  72.21,
                        Ch. 76, Sch. I
74-17       7-25-1974   36.05
74-19       7-25-1974   Ch. 75, Sch. II
75-2        4-10-1975   130.22
75-3        5-22-1975   51.62
                        93.01 -
                        93.08,
75-4        6-26-1975   93.20 -
                        93.27,
                        93.99
75-5        7-10-1975   31.04
75-8        8-14-1975   30.06
75-11       8-28-1975   93.08
75-17       11-13-1975  30.06
76-1        1-22-1976   93.26
76-11       10-11-1976  111.08
76-14       12-21-1976  130.51
77-5        4-14-1977   111.99
77-7        - -         33.01
                        110.01,
                        110.03 -
77-9        7-9-1977    110.05,
                        110.07 -
                        110.18
77-13       - -         110.06
77-14       10-27-1977  150.099
77-15       11-22-1977  30.09,
                        130.05
77-17       12-27-1977  30.04,
                        36.04
78-1        1-12-1978   111.29
                        90.01-
                        90.04,
78-3        2-9-1978    90.08 -
                        90.13,
                        90.99
78-7        4-13-1978   92.03
                        113.01 -
                        113.17,
78-8        5-11-1978   113.19 -
                        113.21,
                        113.23
                        117.01 -
                        117.04,
                        117.20 -
                        117.27,
78-10       5-25-1978   117.40,
                        117.42 -
                        117.52,
                        117.54 -
                        117.59,
                        117.99
78-12       7-27-1978   30.07
78-14       9-28-1978   51.10
79-2        3-8-1979    30.02,
                        30.27
79-4        6-28-1979   30.06
79-5        6-28-1979   30.08
79-7        7-12-1979   111.18
79-10       7-31-1979   92.24
79-18       12-13-1979  33.15
79-15       9-27-1979   Ch. 75, Sch. II
80-8        6-12-1980   30.04,
                        34.02
80-9        6-12-1980   111.37
80-10       6-26-1980   130.35
80-13       7-24-1980   114.07
80-18       9-11-1980   33.32
80-20       9-25-1980   94.19
80-23       9-25-1980   113.02
81-1        3-12-1981   150.098
81-2        3-12-1981   111.37
81-3        3-12-1981   111.27
81-8        6-11-1981   93.27
81-10       6-25-1981   10.99
81-16       11-24-1981  72.04
82-1        1-14-1982   111.38
87-2        1-14-1982   111.39
82-5        2-11-1982   10.99
82-7        2-25-1982   117.23
CO-82-12    4-29-1982   119.01 -
                        119.09
82-14       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
83-16       8-26-1982   117.59
82-19       9-23-1982   51.59
82-20       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
82-22       11-23-1982  150.098
82-23       12-23-1982  110.01
82-26       12-23-1982  30.06
                        117.08,
                        117.09,
83-7        4-28-1983   118.01 -
                        118.07,
                        118.10 -
                        118.12
83-8        5-12-1983   111.28
                        110.01,
                        110.03,
                        110.05,
83-9        5-26-1983   110.11,
                        110.12,
                        110.14,
                        110.16 -
                        110.18
83-10       5-26-1983   72.33
                        90.04,
83-17       6-23-1983   90.08 -
                        90.13,
                        90.99
CO-83-22    10-13-1983  150.080
83-25       11-11-1983  70.03
                        117.23,
84-1        1-26-1984   117.25,
                        117.26,
                        117.41
84-2        1-26-1984   150.102,
                        150.999
84-3        1-26-1984   92.30
84-22       3-29-1984   72.22
84-32       5-10-1984   111.10
84-35       7-12-1984   51.08
84-45       11-20-1984  111.28
84-48       12-27-1984  117.21,
                        117.27
—         12-27-1984  70.22
85-7        3-14-1985   51.70.11
85-8        - -         Ch. 76, Sch. III
85-9        4-25-1985   111.27
85-11       4-25-1985   117.23
85-17       5-23-1984   150.095 -
                        150.097
85-20       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
85-25       7-11-1985   117.26
                        70.02,
85-26       7-11-1985   92.29,
                        99.01 -
                        99.10
85-28       7-11-1985   150.097
—         9-10-1985   70.22
85-38       9-12-1985   111.27
85-40       9-26-1985   111.27
85-51       10-24-1985  51.71
85-52       10-24-1985  51.57
85-53       10-24-1985  51.36
86-1        2-13-1986   30.28
86-1A       1-22-1986   51.09
86-2        3-13-1986   118.05
86-6        5-22-1986   32.01,
                        32.02
86-7        6-12-1986   117.45 
86-10       8-14-1986   30.02
                        51.01,
86-17A      11-24-1984  51.03,
                        51.32,
                        51.56
                        110.01,
87-2        1-8-1987    110.13,
                        110.18
87-4        7-9-1987    70.02
88-4        7-14-1988   31.21
88-5        7-28-1988   150.100,
                        150.101
88-12       12-29-1988  92.31
89-1        2-23-1989   33.16
89-2        - -         32.01
89-3        5-11-1989   51.02
89-6        5-11-1989   119.09
89-7        5-25-1989   51.72
89-8        6-22-1989   117.23
89-13       - -         Ch. 76, Sch. IV
90-3        - -         Ch. 75, Sch. III
91-1        5-9-1991    117.23
91-2        5-9-1991    111.37
91-5        5-23-1991   51.08
CO-91-6     5-23-1991   36.20,
                        36.21
91-7        5-23-1991   33.02
91-8        8-8-1991    50.04
91-10       8-22-1991   50.05
91-12       12-19-1991  51.02
CO-92-9     7-23-1992   51.10
CO-92-10    8-13-1992   95.03
                        32.01,
                        32.17,
—         5-13-1993   32.18,
                        33.17,
                        33.18
—         6-10-1993   51.72
—         7-22-1993   111.24,
                        117.44
—         7-25-1994   51.73
—         8-30-1994   32.01,
                        32.02
—         9-8-1994    130.03
CO-94-11    12-27-1994  30.01
CO-94-12    12-27-1994  30.02
CO-94-13    12-27-1994  30.27
CO-95-02    3-9-1995    70.03
CO-07-95    10-12-1995  91.01 -
                        91.08
                        150.001,
                        150.003 -
                        150.028,
CO-08-95    10-12-1995  150.030,
                        150.041 -
                        150.050,
                        150.065 -
                        150.068
CO-96-04    6-13-1996   70.03
CO-96-05    6-13-1996   99.01,
                        99.02
CO-96-06    6-13-1996   130.20
CO-76-07    6-13-1996   130.02
—         - -1997     36.01
CO-97-01    9-11-1997   90.37
CO-97-02    9-11-1997   31.22
CO-97-04    9-25-1997   T.S.O. II
CO-97-05    10-9-1997   72.23
CO-97-06    10-9-1997   99.01
                        117.02,
                        117.03,
                        117.21,
                        117.23,
CO-97-07    10-9-1997   117.40,
                        117.41,
                        117.55,
                        117.57 -
                        117.59
—         - -1998     35.01
CO-98-09    7–9-1998  T.S.O. IV
CO-98-14    9-10-1998   31.21
CO-98-17    9-24-1998   93.28,
                        93.29
CO-98-18    9-10-1998   T.S.O. IV
CO-98-19    12-10-1998  T.S.O. III
                        98.01 -
                        98.03,
                        98.05,
CO-98-20    9-10-1998   98.06,
                        98.08,
                        98.09,
                        98.99,
                        T.S.O. III
CO-98-21    12-10-1998  94.22
—         - -1999     36.07,
                        71.09
CO-99-07    5-13-1999   T.S.O. III
CO-99-08    4-5-1999    T.S.O. III
CO-99-13    6-24-1999   31.20
CO-99-14    6-24-1999   130.65
CO-99-20    11-1-1999   71.10
CO-99-22    11-20-1999  T.S.O. III
                        51.02,
CO-99-25    12-20-1999  51.08,
                        51.10
CO-99-26    12-20-1999  50.05
CO-00-27    12-4-1999   117.99
CO-99-30    11-15-1999  51.74
—         - -2000     51.14,
                        92.30
CO-00-06    9-18-2000   38.01
CO-00-09    11-20-2000  50.05
                        51.03,
                        51.08,
CO-00-10    11-20-2000  51.09,
                        51.55,
                        51.60
CO-00-11    11-20-2000  34.99
CO-00-13    11-20-2000  10.99
CO-00-14    11-20-2000  150.098
CO-00-17    11-20-2000  113.15
CO-00-18    11-20-2000  112.03
CO-00-19    11-20-2000  95.03
                        93.07,
CO-00-21    11-20-2000  93.08,
                        93.99
CO-00-22    11-20-2000  94.17 -
                        94.20
                        110.13,
CO-00-23    12-4-2000   150.004,
                        150.011
CO-00-25    12-4-2000   111.19,
                        111.34
CO-00-25    12-20-1999  51.03
CO-00-26    12-4-2000   115.05
CO-00-28    12-4-2000   118.02 -
                        118.04
CO-00-29    12-4-2000   119.04,
                        119.09
CO-00-30    12-4-2000   70.22
                        70.02,
CO-00-31    12-4-2000   70.03,
                        72.02
CO-00-32    12-4-2000   130.03
CO-00-33    12-4-2000   90.99
CO-00-35    12-4-2000   32.19
CO-00-36    12-4-2000   38.02
CO-00-37    12-4-2000   51.40
CO-00-38    12-4-2000   95.03
CO-00-39    12-4-2000   150.004
CO-00-40    12-4-2000   150.098
CO-00-41    12-4-2000   51.30
CO-01-04    1-11-2001   36.100 -
                        36.117
CO-02-2     1-22-2002   150.029
CO-02-4     1-22-2002   31.21
CO-02-8     4-1-2002    T.S.O. I
CO-02-9     4-1-2002    150.098
CO-02-10    4-15-2002   130.25,
                        130.26
CO-02-12    6-3-2002    32.05
CO-16-02    6-17-2002   T.S.O. IV
CO-02-17    6-17-2002   156.01 -
                        156.08
CO-02-20    8-5-2002    31.21
CO-22-02    8-5-2002    T.S.O. III
CO-02-25    9-23-2002   154.01
CO-02-26    9-23-2002   T.S.O. IV
CO-02-28    9-23-2002   36.45 -
                        36.49
                        99.01,
CO-02-29    10-7-2002   99.03,
                        99.04,
                        99.08
CO-02-33    10-21-2002  31.21
CO-02-34    11-13-2002  157.01 -
                        157.08
                        117.02,
                        117.21 -
                        117.24,
                        117.27,
CO-03-01    1-6-2003    117.29 , 117.30,
                        117.44,
                        117.53,
                        117.56,
                        117.60,
                        117.99
CO-03-02    1-6-2003    36.06
CO-03-05    2-3-2003    130.23
CO-03-06    2-3-2003    30.28,
                        30.32
CO-03-08    2-3-2003    30.28,
                        30.32
CO-03-11    4-21-2003   39.01 -
                        39.16
CO-03-14    4-11-2003   51.03
CO-03-15    7-7-2003    92.21
CO-03-16    7-7-2003    T.S.O. IV
CO-03-17    7-21-2003   30.28,
                        30.32
CO-03-18    9-8-2003    31.21,
                        32.01
CO-03-19    7-21-2003   92.30
CO-03-20    7-21-2003   97.01 -
                        97.07
                        116.06,
CO-03-21    8-20-2003   116.07,
                        116.99
CO-03-22    9-8-2003    130.24
CO-03-26    9-8-2003    T.S.O. IV
CO-03-27    11-3-2003   T.S.O. I
CO-03-28    12-29-2003  150.001,
                        150.002
CO-03-29    12-29-2003  150.050
CO-04-01    2-23-2004   T.S.O. II
CO-04-02    2-23-2004   30.02,
                        30.04
CO-04-03    3-1-2004    36.06
CO-04-04    3-1-2004    30.12
CO-04-05    3-1-2004    150.029
                        121.02,
CO-04-06    3-1-2004    121.04 -
                        121.09,
                        121.99
                        99.01,
                        99.02,
CO-04-7     3-1-2004    99.05,
                        99.06,
                        99.11 -
                        99.17
                        39.14,
CO-04-8     3-1-2004    99.18 -
                        99.24
                        99.03,
CO-04-9     3-1-2004    99.04,
                        99.06,
                        99.08
CO-04-10    3-1-2004    33.14
CO-04-12    4-5-2004    T.S.O. I
CO-04-13    4-5-2004    Ch. 75, Sch. II
CO-04-14    5-3-2004    36.06
CO-04-15    5-17-2004   38.03
—         6-7-2004    121.01
—         6-7-2004    121.03
                        121.01 -
CO-04-16    6-7-2004    121.09,
                        121.99
CO-04-17    6-21-2004   52.01
CO-04-18    6-21-2004   117.23
CO-04-19    6-21-2004   130.22
CO-04-20    7-19-2004   117.59
CO-04-21    7-19-2004   T.S.O. III
CO-04-22    7-19-2004   71.11
CO-04-24    8-2-2004    71.11
CO-04-25    8-2-2004    35.02
CO-04-27    8-16-2004   72.05,
                        72.06
CO-04-28    9-1-2004    37.05,
                        37.07
CO-04-29    9-20-2004   37.05,
                        37.07
                        99.01,
                        99.02,
CO-04-30    9-20-2004   99.05,
                        99.06,
                        99.11 -
                        99.17
CO-04-31    9-20-2004   110.13
CO-04-32    10-4-2004   Ch. 75, Sch. V
                        Ch. 75, Sch. III,
CO-04-34    10-18-2004  V,
                        Ch. 76, Sch. III,
                        IV
CO-04-36    11-15-2004  95.03,
                        150.004
CO-05-04    1-18-2005   T.S.O. IV
CO-05-05    1-18-2005   T.S.O. IV
CO-05-08    2-7-2005    36.07
                        158.01,
                        158.10 -
CO-05-11    3-21-2005   158.12,
                        158.20 -
                        158.24
                        150.095 -
CO-05-12    4-18-2005   150.098,
                        150.100,
                        150.999
                        91.01,
                        91.09,
CO-05-13    4-18-2005   150.002,
                        150.004,
                        150.023
CO-05-14    5-2-2005    30.28
CO-05-15    5-2-2005    92.32
CO-05-16    5-16-2005   30.12
CO-05-17    5-25-2005   152.01
CO-05-18    6-7-2005    T.S.O. IV
CO-05-20    6-21-2005   30.32
CO-05-23    7-14-2005   T.S.O. III
CO-05-31    9-20-2005   111.27
CO-05-32    9-20-2005   38.04
CO-05-33    9-20-2005   T.S.O. IV
                        71.12,
                        Ch. 75, Sch. III,
                        V,
CO-05-34    9-20-2005   VI,
                        Ch. 76, Sch. III,
                        IV,
                        V,
                        VI
                        111.31,
CO-05-35    10-4-2005   116.01 -
                        116.12,
                        116.99
CO-05-36    10-4-2005   30.04
CO-05-37    10-12-2005  117.23
CO-05-38    10-18-2005  T.S.O. III
CO-05-39    10-18-2005  T.S.O. III
CO-05-40    10-18-2005  T.S.O. III
CO-05-41    10-18-2005  T.S.O. III
CO-05-42    10-18-2005  T.S.O. III
CO-05-43    10-18-2005  T.S.O. III
CO-05-44    10-18-2005  T.S.O. III
CO-05-49    12-6-2005   93.08,
                        93.09
CO-05-50    12-4-2005   117.23
CO-05-51    12-20-2005  70.20
CO-05-53    12-20-2005  31.23
CO-05-54    12-20-2005  36.06
CO-06-01    2-7-2006    70.20
CO-06-02    2-7-2006    91.01
CO-06-04    3-7-2006    T.S.O. II
CO-06-08    3-28-2006   T.S.O. I
                        39.14,
CO-06-09    4-18-2006   99.18,
                        99.19,
                        99.25
CO-06-10    4-24-2006   50.05
                        93.03,
CO-06-11    5-2-2006    93.27,
                        93.30,
                        93.99
CO-06-14    6-6-2006    52.01
CO-06-16    6-20-2006   30.32
19          6-20-2006   36.08
CO-06-27    9-7-2006    72.23,
                        111.41
                        30.01,
29          9-19-2006   30.02,
                        30.27
                        39.05,
32          9-19-2006   130.22,
                        130.27
CO-06-33    10-17-2006  T.S.O. IV
CO-06-36    10-17-2006  Ch. 78, Sch. V
CO-06-37    11-8-2006   T.S.O. I
CO-06-38    11-8-2006   T.S.O. I
                        30.04,
CO-06-39    11-8-2006   30.06,
                        30.07
CO-06-40    11-8-2006   T.S.O. IV
CO-06-42    11-8-2006   70.22
CO-06-44    11-8-2006   30.36
                        111.34,
CO-06-45    12-19-2006  111.35,
                        130.81,
                        130.82
1           1-16-2007   T.S.O. II
CO-07-07    2-20-2007   30.26
                        122.01 -
CO-07-08    3-8-2007    122.05,
                        122.99
CO-07-11    4-3-2007    32.20
CO-07-12    4-3-2007    130.90
CO-07-19    7-2-2007    T.S.O. IV
CO-07-20    7-2-2007    72.20
CO-07-23    7-27-2007   52.01
CO-07-24    7-2-2007    99.01,
                        99.02
CO-07-25    6-5-2007    31.05
                        71.13 -
CO-07-26    7-17-2007   71.15,
                        71.99
                        100.01 -
                        100.10,
                        100.99,
CO-07-29    8-21-2007   101.01 -
                        101.23,
                        101.99,
                        159.01,
                        159.02
CO-07-35    8-21-2007   72.27,
                        72.34
CO-07-36    10-10-2007  92.30
CO-07-40    10-16-2007  130.24,
                        130.28
CO-07-42    10-16-2007  150.004
                        123.01 -
CO-07-44    11-6-2007   123.05,
                        123.99
CO-07-45    11-6-2007   124.01 0
                        124.08
                        101.01 -
CO-07-46    11-6-2007   101.23,
                        101.99
CO-07-49    12-7-2007   111.37
CO-07-53    12-18-2007  51.02
                        111.37,
CO-08-01    1-15-2008   150.098,
                        150.103,
                        150.999
CO-08-02    1-15-2008   92.04
CO-08-07    2-19-2008   31.21
                        117.02,
CO-08-08    3-18-2008   117.03,
                        117.22,
                        117.23, 117.29
CO-08-11    2-19-2008   150.004,
                        150.120
CO-08-12    3-4-2008    70.22
CO-08-13    3-4-2008    72.36
CO-08-15    3-18-2008   51.70.1 -
                        51.70.12
CO-08-18    5-6-2008    T.S.O. IV
CO-08-19    5-6-2008    36.01,
                        36.09
CO-08-21    6-3-2008    T.S.O. IV
CO-08-22    6-3-2008    T.S.O. IV
CO-08-23    6-3-2008    35.01,
                        35.02
CO-08-24    6-16-2008   52.01
CO-08-25    6-16-2008   117.23
CO-08-26    6-16-2008   117.23
CO-08-28    7-15-2008   T.S.O. III
                        158.01 -
CO-08-29    7-15-2008   158.24,
                        158.99
                        152.01 -
CO-08-30    7-15-2008   152.14,
                        152.99
CO-08-32    7-15-2008   31.21
                        99.01,
CO-08-33    8-19-2008   99.12,
                        99.14
CO-08-34    8-19-2008   117.23
CO-08-36    8-19-2008   92.24,
                        92.27
CO-08-38    8-19-2008   33.19
CO-08-40    9-16-2008   155.01 -
                        155.08
42          10-7-2008   92.25,
                        98.07
43          10-21-2008  93.07
                        39.30 -
                        39.41,
                        39.99,
44          10-21-2008  71.16,
                        71.17,
                        77.01 -
                        77.07
CO-08-45    11-18-2008  33.14
CO-08-46    11-18-2008  117.23
CO-08-47    11-18-2008  T.S.O. IV
CO-08-48    11-18-2008  117.02
                        130.20,
                        130.52,
CO-07-07    3-3-2009    131.02,
                        131.04,
                        131.05,
                        131.99
CO-09-01    1-13-2009   150.103
CO-09-03    2-3-2009    111.37
CO-09-04    2-17-2009   T.S.O. IV
CO-09-05    2-17-2009   130.02
CO-09-06    2-3-2009    154.01
                        31.37,
                        90.01 -
                        90.05,
CO-09-10    5-5-2009    90.08 -
                        90.13,
                        90.25 -
                        90.34,
                        90.99
CO-09-17    6-2-2009    T.S.O. III
CO-09-18    3-17-2009   150.027, 150.31 -
                        150.033
CO-09-19    6-30-2009   52.01
CO-09-20    6-30-2009   T.S.O. I
CO-09-21    6-30-2009   151.02
CO-09-23    8-4-2009    T.S.O. IV
CO-09-24    8-4-2009    T.S.O. IV
CO-09-25    8-4-2009    51.02
CO-09-26    8-4-2009    150.098
                        30.04,
                        30.12,
                        31.05,
                        32.06,
                        33.09,
                        33.12,
                        50.01,
                        50.03,
                        50.05,
                        50.21,
                        50.43,
                        50.46,
                        72.04,
                        91.01,
                        91.02,
                        92.01,
                        92.02,
                        92.24 -
                        92.25,
                        92.30,
                        93.03,
                        94.01,
                        94.16 -
                        94.20,
                        94.22,
                        96.04,
                        96.14,
                        96.18,
                        97.02 -
                        97.04,
                        98.07,
                        99.01,
                        99.02,
                        99.04,
                        99.05,
                        99.07,
                        99.12,
                        100.06,
                        100.07,
                        100.09,
                        100.10,
                        101.02,
                        101.03,
                        101.05,
                        101.10,
                        101.13,
                        101.15 -
                        101.21,
                        110.01,
                        110.03,
                        110.05,
                        110.11,
                        110.16,
                        110.18,
                        111.04,
                        111.06,
                        111.08,
                        111.10,
                        111.11,
                        111.13,
                        111.15 -
                        111.20,
CO-09-27    10-6-2009   111.25,
                        111.26,
                        111.31,
                        111.33,
                        111.37,
                        111.41,
                        111.99,
                        112.03 -
                        112.05,
                        112.98,
                        113.04,
                        113.06,
                        113.07,
                        113.08,
                        113.14,
                        113.16,
                        113.21,
                        116.03,
                        116.04,
                        116.12,
                        116.99,
                        117.02,
                        118.02 -
                        118.04,
                        118.06,
                        118.08,
                        118.12,
                        119.02,
                        119.06,
                        121.02,
                        130.02,
                        130.65,
                        150.001,
                        150.002,
                        150.005 -
                        150.007,
                        150.009 -
                        150.017,
                        150.019,
                        150.024 -
                        150.028,
                        150.032,
                        150.040 -
                        150.042,
                        150.044,
                        150.046 -
                        150.049,
                        150.065 -
                        150.068,
                        150.080,
                        150.095,
                        150.097 -
                        150.100,
                        150.103,
                        150.120,
                        152.03 -
                        152.08,
                        152.99,
                        158.09,
                        158.11,
                        158.13,
                        158.17,
                        158.20
CO-09-33    11-17-2009  117.27
CO-2010-02  2-16-2010   31.04
CO-2010-03  2-16-2010   30.32
                        31.22,
                        31.23,
CO-2010-04  2-16-2010   31.37,
                        31.99,
                        158.03
                        96.01 -
                        96.03,
                        96.09,
                        111.18,
                        111.42,
                        112.02,
                        112.98,
                        120.01 -
CO-2010-006 4-15-2010   120.23,
                        150.025,
                        150.104,
                        151.01,
                        151.02,
                        151.99,
                        153.01 -
                        153.04,
                        154.01
                        39.99,
CO-2010-07  5-4-2010    70.22,
                        72.02
CO-2010-16  9-29-2010   36.65,
                        36.66
CO-2010-18  10-5-2010   111.27
CO-2010-19  11-16-2010  T.S.O. IV
CO-2010-20  11-16-2010  Ch. 154, App. A: 12.4
CO-2010-21  11-16-2010  T.S.O. IV
                        117.01,
                        117.21 -
                        117.26,
CO-2010-25  12-21-2010  117.28,
                        117.29,
                        117.41,
                        117.57
                        30.02,
                        30.37,
CO-2010-26  12-21-2010  30.38,
                        31.100,
                        31.101
CO-2010-27  9-29-2010   36.75 -
                        36.81
                        Ch. 154, App. A: 1.7,
                        3.3,
                        5.7,
                        7.2,
                        7.3,
                        8.1 -
                        8.5,
CO-2011-01  1-18-2011   9.3,
                        10.2,
                        12.4,
                        13.7,
                        14.9,
                        14.13,
                        15.5,
                        15.8,
                        17.5
CO-2011-02  2-15-2011   111.10
CO-2011-05  3-1-2011    117.23,
                        117.44
CO-2011-13  8-16-2011   117.23
CO-2011-14  8-16-2011   117.23
CO-2011-15  9-20-2011   T.S.O. I
CO-2011-16  9-20-2011   36.07
CO-2011-17  10-18-2011  Ch. 154, App. A: 15.10,
                        T.S.O. IV
CO-2011-18  12-6-2011   51.02
CO-2011-23  12-20-2011  150.036
CO-2011-24  9-20-2011   36.07
CO-2011-28  7-19-2011   117.23
CO-2011-29  10-18-2011  T.S.O. IV
CO-2011-30  12-6-2011   T.S.O. IV
CO-2012-01  1-17-2012   Ch. 76, Sch. VI
CO-2012-02  1-17-2012   130.07
                        150.037,
CO-2012-03  1-17-2012   150.100,
                        150.999
CO-2012-04  2-7-2012    99.01,
                        99.12
CO-2012-05  2-7-2012    T.S.O. I
CO-2012-07  2-21-2012   35.03
                        39.07,
CO-2012-08  2-21-2012   150.027,
                        150.031 -
                        150.035
CO-2012-09  2-21-2012   T.S.O. IV
CO-2012-10  4-3-2012    T.S.O. IV
CO-2012-13  4-30-2012   130.91
CO-2012-14  4-30-2012   111.27
CO-2012-15  8-21-2012   156.01 -
                        156.08
CO-2012-16  4-30-2012   50.05
CO-2012-18  6-5-2012    T.S.O. I
CO-2012-19  6-5-2012    32.05
CO-2012-25  7-17-2012   117.23
CO-2012-28  8-21-2012   36.07
                        92.23 -
                        92.25,
CO-2012-30  8-21-2012   92.27,
                        111.37,
                        150.031
CO-2012-31  8-21-2012   158.25
CO-2012-32  8-21-2012   Ch. 154, App. A: 12.4
CO-2012-33  8-21-2012   Ch. 154, App. A: 8.2,
                        T.S.O. IV
CO-2012-34  8-21-2012   92.30
CO-2012-35  8-21-2012   T.S.O. IV
CO-2012-37  10-2-2012   130.20
CO-2012-38  10-16-2012  36.90 -
                        36.93
CO-2012-39  10-16-2012  36.50 -
                        36.56
                        72.24,
                        72.25,
CO-2012-41  11-5-2012   99.01,
                        150.031,
                        150.032
CO-2012-42  11-5-2012   51.02
CO-2012-43  11-5-2012   51.03
CO-2012-44  11-5-2012   92.30
CO-2012-45  11-5-2012   39.99,
                        72.33
CO-2012-46  11-5-2012   94.23
CO-2012-47  11-20-2012  T.S.O. IV
CO-2012-49  11-20-2012  T.S.O. IV
CO-2012-50  12-18-2012  117.41
                        36.50,
                        36.52 -
CO-2012-52  12-18-2012  36.55,
                        36.90 -
                        36.93
CO-2012-55  7-17-2012   52.01,
                        52.02
CO-2012-56  6-5-2012    Ch. 75, Sch. VI
CO-2013-02  1-15-2013   Ch. 76, Sch. IV
CO-2013-04  2-5-2013    117.23
CO-2013-07  2-5-2013    158.24
CO-2013-09  3-13-2013   32.20
CO-2013-14  3-13-2013   Ch. 154, App. A: 15.8
CO-2013-15  3-13-2013   Ch. 154, App. A: 9.2,
                        11.3
CO-2013-16  3-13-2013   Ch. 154, App. A: 8.4
CO-2013-17  3-13-2013   Ch. 154, App. A: 8.4,
                        9.4
CO-2013-19  3-13-2013   T.S.O. I
CO-2013-21  4-16-2013   150.065
CO-2013-22  3-19-2013   117.27
CO-2013-23  3-19-2013   50.05
CO-2013-24  4-16-2013   30.13,
                        31.05
CO-2013-25  4-16-2013   72.34
CO-2013-26  4-16-2013   T.S.O. I
CO-2013-27  4-16-2013   Ch. 154, App. A: 15.8
CO-2013-32  4-30-2013   T.S.O. IV
CO-2013-33  4-30-2013   32.19,
                        33.33
CO-2013-34  4-30-2013   33.14
CO-2013-35  6-4-2013    33.20
                        92.21,
                        110.13,
                        114.07,
CO-2013-37  6-4-2013    125.01 -
                        125.10,
                        125.99,
                        130.50,
                        130.51
CO-2013-39  6-18-2013   52.01
CO-2013-40  7-2-2013    30.32
CO-2013-41  7-16-2013   30.14
CO-2013-45  12-3-2013   51.02
CO-2013-48  12-17-2013  36.06
CO-2013-49  12-17-2013  38.05
CO-2014-02  1-21-2014   Ch. 154, App. A: 16.3
                        31.05,
CO-2014-04  1-21-2014   117.27,
                        125.09,
                        150.098
CO-2014-05  1-21-2014   36.07
CO-2014-06  1-21-2014   T.S.O. IV
CO-2014-07  1-21-2014   50.05
CO-2014-11  4-1-2014    110.19
                        110.02,
                        110.04,
                        110.09,
                        110.10,
                        110.17,
                        111.05,
                        111.08,
                        111.10,
CO-2014-14  4-1-2014    110.27,
                        111.34,
                        111.99,
                        112.98,
                        113.18 -
                        113.21,
                        116.99,
                        118.12,
                        119.08,
                        125.99
CO-2014-15  4-2-2014    36.07
                        39.31 -
CO-2014-16  4-15-2014   39.36,
                        39.99
CO-2014-17  4-29-2014   117.23,
                        117.41
CO-2014-20  6-18-2014   158.24
CO-2014-21  6-18-2014   158.24
CO-2014-22  6-18-2014   52.01
CO-2014-23  7-15-2014   Ch. 154, App. A: 8.2,
                        17.4
CO-2014-24  7-15-2014   T.S.O. IV
                        Ch. 154, App. A: 8.2,
CO-2014-26  7-15-2014   9.2,
                        11.3,
                        17.4
CO-2014-33  11-5-2014   71.09
CO-2014-34  11-5-2014   51.02
CO-2014-35  11-5-2014   95.03
                        Ch. 154, App. A: 8.2,
CO-2014-41  11-17-2014  13.12,
                        17.4
CO-2014-43  12-10-2014  36.07
CO-2015-04  3-3-2015    31.23
CO-2015-08  3-31-2015   158.24
CO-2015-09  3-31-2015   158.24
CO-2015-10  4-21-2015   36.07
CO-2015-13  5-19-2015   32.21
CO-2015-14  5-19-2015   117.44
CO-2015-15  5-19-2015   117.23
CO-2015-16  5-19-2015   117.21,
                        117.23
CO-2015-19  7-7-2015    36.07
CO-2015-22  8-3-2015    110.13
CO-2015-24  9-16-2015   Ch. 154, App. A: 12.4
                        51.11,
CO-2015-25  9-15-2015   51.72,
                        51.75
CO-2015-26  9-15-2015   130.92
CO-2015-27  9-15-2015   39.08,
                        39.14
CO-2015-29  11-17-2015  51.02
                        117.01,
CO-2015-30  12-15-2015  117.23,
                        117.41
CO-2015-31  12-15-2015  117.26
CO-2015-32  12-15-2015  50.05
CO-2016-01  2-2-2016    51.03
CO-2016-03  3-16-2016   39.14
CO-2016-08  4-19-2016   30.14
CO-2016-11  7-26-2016   Ch. 76, Sch. VII
CO-2016-12  7-26-2016   158.24
CO-2016-13  7-26-2016   158.24
CO-2016-14  7-26-2016   116.06,
                        116.08
                        92.22 -
                        92.28,
CO-2016-15  7-26-2016   150.029,
                        159.030,
                        150.032,
                        150.034
CO-2016-17  8-16-2016   30.15
CO-2016-18  8-16-2016   31.21
CO-2016-20  9-20-2016   117.21,
                        117.23
CO-2016-21  10-5-2016   Ch. 154, App. A: 3.3,
                        4.11
CO-2016-22  10-5-2016   31.21
CO-2016-23  11-3-2016   117.41
CO-2016-24  11-17-2016  38.06
CO-2016-32  12-21-2016  117.01,
                        117.23
CO-2016-35  12-21-2026  Ch. 154, App. A: 9.1,
                        9.2
CO-2017-08  3-9-2017    99.01
CO-2017-11  4-20-2017   51.02
                        126.01 -
CO-2017-13  5-2-2017    126.04,
                        126.99
                        116.01,
CO-2017-15  5-2-2017    116.08 -
                        116.10,
                        116.13
CO-2017-17  5-16-2017   Ch. 76, Sch. VII
CO-2017-18  5-16-2017   72.27
CO-2017-19  5-16-2017   36.08
CO-2017-20  5-16-2017   127.01
CO-2017-28  8-15-2017   Ch. 76, Sch. VII
CO-2017-29  8-15-2017   73.10
CO-2017-30  8-15-2017   36.07
2017-33     9-5-2017    121.05,
                        121.06
2017-34     9-19-2017   36.08
2017-37     10-3-2017   117.21,
                        117.27
2017-40     11-21-2017  158.24
2017-41     11-21-2017  T.S.O. I
2017-42     11-21-2017  36.06
2017-43     12-5-2017   T.S.O. I
2017-46     12-19-2017  35.01
2017-47     12-19-2017  31.22
                        Ch. 76, Schs.
2018-01     1-16-2018   IV,
                        VI
2018-02     1-16-2018   35.01
2018-04     2-6-2018    30.13,
                        31.05
2018-06     2-20-2018   T.S.O. I
CO-2018-09  3-6-2018    36.07
CO-2018-14  3-20-2018   T.S.O. I
CO-2018-17  3-20-2018   30.32
2018-21     5-1-2018    40.01 -
                        40.04
2018-22     5-1-2018    51.02
CO-2018-23  5-1-2018    T.S.O. I
CO-2018-27  6-5-2018    T.S.O. I
CO-2018-32  7-18-2018   T.S.O. I
                        120.03,
2018-33     7-17-2018   160.01 -
                        160.21
2018-35     8-21-2018   T.S.O. IV
2018-38     9-4-2018    117.01,
                        117.23
CO-2018-39  9-18-2018   39.39
CO-2018-40  9-18-2018   T.S.O. I
CO-2018-53  12-4-2018   T.S.O. I
CO-2018-58  12-18-2018  T.S.O. I
CO-2019-03  2-5-2019    T.S.O. III
CO-2019-04  2-19-2019   T.S.O. I
CO-2019-07  3-5-2019    36.07
CO-2019-08  3-19-2019   T.S.O. I
CO-2019-09  3-19-2019   T.S.O. I
CO-2019-13  4-9-2019    T.S.O. I
CO-2019-21  5-21-2019   51.02
                        110.13,
                        111.19,
CO-2019-26  8-20-2019   128.01 -
                        128.06,
                        128.99
CO-2019-30  11-25-2019  72.04
CO-2019-33  12-3-2019   125.05
CO-2019-35  12-17-2019  116.02
CO-2019-37  12-17-2019  36.120 - 36.123
                        110.18,
                        129A.01 -
CO-2019-38  12-17-2019  129A.11,
                        130.90,
                        130.92
CO-2019-39  12-17-2019  T.S.O. III
CO-2020-04  2-19-2020   111.43
CO-2020-05  3-3-2020    T.S.O. I
CO-2020-06  3-3-2020    39.99,
                        72.34
                        114.07,
                        114.08,
                        117.01,
CO-2020-08  3-17-2020   117.23,
                        117.41,
                        117.44,
                        117.51
CO-2020-09  4-21-2020   111.43
CO-2020-16  5-19-2020   30.32
CO-2020-20  6-2-2020    99.19
CO-2020-21  7-14-2020   99.19
                        Ch. 154, App. A: 6.2,
                        6.3,
                        8.1,
CO-2020-22  8-18-2020   9.1,
                        11.3,
                        13.12,
                        17.4
CO-2020-23  8-18-2020   151.02
CO-2020-26  10-6-2020   95.04,
                        111.10
                        117.01,
                        117.23,
                        117.25,
CO-2020-29  10-20-2020  117.27,
                        117.41,
                        117.44,
                        117.59
CO-2020-36  12-1-2020   T.S.O. I
CO-2020-45  12-29-2020  36.10
CO-2021-01  1-5-2021    T.S.O. IV
CO-2021-02  2-16-2021   92.21
CO-2021-03  3-2-2021    71.13,
                        71.14
CO-2021-05  3-16-2021   99.26
CO-2021-09  4-20-2021   70.22
CO-2021-12  7-13-2021   92.21
CO-2021-14  7-13-2021   72.07,
                        150.036
CO-2021-15  7-13-2021   111.10
CO-2021-18  8-17-2021   130.54
                        30.12,
                        31.02,
                        31.05 -
                        31.07,
CO-2021-19  8-17-2021   31.22,
                        31.24 -
                        31.28,
                        31.37,
                        98.05,
                        98.09
CO-2021-20  8-17-2021   36.07
                        30.04,
                        31.02,
                        31.05,
                        32.06,
                        33.09,
                        33.12,
                        50.01,
                        50.03,
                        50.05,
                        50.21,
                        50.43,
                        50.46,
                        91.01,
                        91.02,
                        92.01,
                        92.02,
                        92.30,
                        93.03,
                        94.01,
                        94.16 -
                        94.19,
                        94.22,
                        96.04,
                        96.14,
                        96.18,
                        97.02 -
                        97.04,
                        98.07,
                        99.01,
                        99.02,
                        99.04,
                        99.05,
                        99.07,
                        99.12,
                        100.06,
                        100.07,
                        100.09,
                        100.10,
                        101.02 -
                        101.05,
                        101.13,
                        101.15 -
                        101.21,
                        110.01,
                        110.03,
                        110.05,
                        110.11,
                        110.16,
                        110.18,
                        111.06,
                        111.10,
                        111.11,
                        111.13,
                        111.15 -
                        111.19,
CO-2021-21  8-17-2021   111.25,
                        111.26,
                        111.31,
                        111.33,
                        112.03 -
                        112.05,
                        113.04,
                        113.06,
                        113.07,
                        113.14,
                        116.03,
                        116.04,
                        116.12,
                        116.99,
                        117.02,
                        117.27,
                        118.02 -
                        118.04,
                        118.06,
                        118.08,
                        119.02,
                        119.06,
                        125.09,
                        130.02,
                        130.65,
                        150.001,
                        150.002,
                        150.005 -
                        150.007,
                        150.009 -
                        150.017,
                        150.019,
                        150.024 -
                        150.026,
                        150.028,
                        150.031,
                        150.032,
                        150.035,
                        150.037,
                        150.040 -
                        150.042,
                        150.044,
                        150.046 -
                        150.049,
                        150.065 -
                        150.068,
                        150.080,
                        150.095 -
                        150.100,
                        150.103,
                        150.104,
                        150.120,
                        153.04,
                        157.04,
                        160.08,
                        160.09,
                        160.20
CO-2021-22  8-17-2021   51.03
CO-2021-23  9-21-2021   31.21
CO-2021-24  9-21-2021   Ch. 76, Sch. IV
CO-2021-26  10-19-2021  Ch. 76, Sch. III
CO-2021-29  10-19-2021  T.S.O. IV
CO-2021-31  11-16-2021  30.12,
                        37.05
CO-2021-33  12-14-2021  150.031
CO-2022-01  1-18-2022   31.23
CO-2022-02  1-18-2022   31.23
CO-2022-04  1-18-2022   33.14
CO-2022-07  3-22-2022   151.02
CO-2022-10  5-18-2022   158.24
CO-2022-12  6-21-2022   T.S.O. IV
CO-2022-14  7-19-2022   T.S.O. I
CO-2022-16  8-16-2022   T.S.O. IV
CO-2022-18  9-20-2022   72.35,
                        Ch. 76, Sch.VII
CO-2022-21  11-1-2022   T.S.O. IV
                        110.01,
CO-2022-22  11-1-2022   110.13,
                        110.18
                        116.03,
                        116.04,
                        116.12,
                        116.99,
CO-2022-23  11-1-2022   117.02,
                        117.03,
                        129A.01 -
                        129A.12,
                        129B.01,
                        129B.02
CO-2022-24  12-6-2022   Ch. 76, Sch. III
CO-2022-25  12-6-2022   30.04
CO-2022-26  12-6-2022   94.24,
                        T.S.O. II
CO-2023-08  2-7-2023    T.S.O. IV
CO-2023-09  3-14-2023   Ch. 75, Sch. VI
CO-2023-14  4-18-2023   92.28,
                        99.27
CO-2023-19  5-16-2023   T.S.O. III
CO-2023-23  6-20-2023   T.S.O. I
CO-2023-24  6-20-2023   99.26
CO-2023-29  7-11-2023   117.21,
                        117.27
                        117.01,
CO-2023-31  7-11-2023   117.23,
                        117.44
CO-2023-32  8-8-2023    117.21,
                        117.27
CO-2023-34  8-8-2023    92.22
                        Ch. 154, App. A: 8.2,
                        9.2,
                        10.5,
CO-2023-35  6-20-2023   11.3,
                        13.12,
                        16.3,
                        17.4,
                        17.5
                        110.13,
                        111.36,
                        116.02,
                        116.05,
CO-2023-36  6-20-2023   116.07,
                        116.08,
                        117.01,
                        117.23,
                        117.41,
                        117.44
CO-2023-37  9-12-2023   72.37
CO-2023-38  9-12-2023   30.13
CO-2023-39  9-12-2023   92.30,
                        111.36
CO-2023-40  9-12-2023   117.23,
                        117.41
                        117.01,
CO-2023-43  10-10-2023  117.23,
                        117.41
                        150.001 -
                        150.004,
                        150.011,
                        150.012,
                        150.015,
                        150.018,
                        150.023,
CO-2023-45  11-7-2023   150.024,
                        150.039,
                        150.040,
                        150.050,
                        150.080,
                        150.095,
                        150.097,
                        150.098
CO-2023-46  11-7-2023   153.03,
                        153.04
                        116.02,
CO-2023-49  12-5-2023   116.08 -
                        116.10
CO-2023-51  12-5-2023   72.25
                        51.01,
CO-2023-54  12-5-2023   150.011,
                        150.068,
                        150.098
CO-2023-56  12-5-2023   110.13
CO-2024-01  1-9-2024    T.S.O. IV
CO-2024-02  1-9-2024    T.S.O. I
                        110.13,
CO-2024-05  2-6-2024    117.01,
                        117.23
                        125.01,
CO-2024-06  2-6-2024    125.02,
                        125.11
CO-2024-08  2-6-2024    T.S.O. IV
CO-2024-09  3-5-2024    Ch. 76, Sch. III
CO-2024-10  3-5-2024    T.S.O. I
CO-2024-17  4-15-2024   151.02
CO-2024-23  6-4-2024    T.S.O. I
CO-2024-24  6-4-2024    Ch. 154, App. A: 12.4
CO-2024-28  7-18-2024   Ch. 154, App. A: 11.3
CO-2024-29  8-6-2024    31.21
                        130.02,
CO-2024-37  9-10-2024   130.04,
                        130.05,
                        130.08
CO-2024-41  10-1-2024   116.05
                        30.01,
CO-2024-43  10-1-2024   30.02,
                        30.27
CO-2024-46  11-19-2024  117.22
CO-2024-48  11-19-2024  156.04 -
                        156.07
CO-2024-51  12-10-2024  161.01,
                        161.02
CO-2024-52  12-10-2024  117.23
                        Ch. 154, App. A: 5.5,
                        8.2,
                        8.3,
                        8.4,
                        9.2,
CO-2025-03  1-7-2025    11.3,
                        12.5,
                        13.5,
                        13.6,
                        13.12,
                        17.4,
                        17.5
CO-2025-05  2-4-2025    32.05
                        30.12, 31,05,
                        72.04,
                        90.04,
                        94.21,
                        101.10,
                        111.04,
                        111.20,
                        111.37,
                        111.42,
                        112.03,
                        116.12,
                        120.02,
                        120.04,
                        120.05,
                        120.08 -
                        120.13,
CO-2025-12  6-10-2025   120.15,
                        120.18,
                        120.19,
                        120.22,
                        128.04,
                        150.027,
                        150.034,
                        150.098,
                        152.03 -
                        152.08,
                        152.99,
                        153.04,
                        155.03,
                        156.02,
                        158.03,
                        158.20,
                        158.22
CO-2025-18  7-1-2025    30.36
CO-2025-20  7-1-2025    116.08
CO-2025-24  6-10-2025   36.08
CO-2025-25  8-19-2025   36.140,
                        36.141
                       
 
