CODE OF ORDINANCES
OF THE CITY OF MCHENRY, ILLINOIS
Code current through:
Ord. 25-36, passed 8-18-2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This City Code of the City of McHenry contains ordinances up to and
including Ordinance 25-36, passed August 18, 2025. Ordinances of the City
adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City Code to the
extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the City
office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has
been amended, superseded or repealed.
               American Legal Publishing
               Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
TITLE 1: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1: MCHENRY CITY CODE
Section
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Amendments To Code
1-1-3: Records Of Amendments
1-1-4: Distribution Of Code
1-1-5: Charge For Code
1-1-6: Unauthorized Alteration Or Tampering
1-1-7: Home Rule Authority
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this Code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the Official City Code of the City of McHenry. This
Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the MUNICIPAL CODE, CITY OF
MCHENRY, ILLINOIS, and is hereby published by authority of the City Council and
shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the City as
provided in section
1-1-3  of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this Code by title in any legal documents.
(1987 Code § 1-1; amd. 2019 Code)
1-1-2: AMENDMENTS TO CODE:
All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way
affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of
this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed
chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, by subsequent
ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission
from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent ordinances as numbered
and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of
such subsequent ordinances until such time as this Code and subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the City Council.
(1987 Code § 1-4)
1-1-3: RECORDS OF AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Required: It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep at least one
printed copy of this Code, which includes notation of any and all amendments
thereto.
(1987 Code § 1-9)
   B.   References: Whenever an ordinance which amends or makes an addition,
correction or deletion to this Code is passed and approved, such amendments or
revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the
ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each
copy of this Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and
shall be inserted in each individual copy of this Code.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; amd. 2019 Code)
   C.   Records Additional: The above mentioned records shall be kept in
addition to the record of ordinances which the City Clerk is required to keep
by statute.
(1987 Code § 1-9)
1-1-4: DISTRIBUTION OF CODE:
The City Clerk shall make available for public view one printed copy of the
current Code. This Code shall also be made available on the City’s website.
(1987 Code § 1-10)
1-1-5: CHARGE FOR CODE:
A reasonable charge to defer the cost of printing and handling may be made to
any person who shall desire copies of this Code, and such sum shall be
collected by the City.
(1987 Code § 1-11)
1-1-6: UNAUTHORIZED ALTERATION OR TAMPERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portions of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or
portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever
which will cause the law of the City to be misrepresented thereby.
(1987 Code § 1-5)
1-1-7: HOME RULE AUTHORITY:
This Code and any amendments thereto constitute an exercise of the City’s home
rule powers and functions as granted under article VII, section 6, of the
Constitution of the State of Illinois.
(1987 Code § 1-13)
CHAPTER 2: SAVING CLAUSE
Section
1-2-1: Effect Of Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: EFFECT OF REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the City passed prior
to the adoption of this Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included
in this Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal
(subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: Tax Levy
Ordinances; Appropriation Ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; Franchise Ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; Contract Ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; Salary Ordinances; Fee
Ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; Improvement Ordinances; Bond Ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the City; and all special ordinances.
   B.   Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of the ordinances provided
in subsection A of this section shall not affect any debt or fee which is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office
of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance
heretofore repealed or superseded.
(1987 Code § 1-6; amd. 2019 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this Code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this Code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only.
(2019 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Scope Of Section: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Actions Now Pending: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the City herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions
and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this chapter be
deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or
to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or
as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in
force at the time of the adoption of this Code.
(2019 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid
judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the
remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.
(1987 Code § 1-7)
CHAPTER 3: DEFINITIONS
Section
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the Mayor and City Council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of any provision
of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Where any provision
of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the
general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater
restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
   C.   Additional Interpretations:
      1.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
      2.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other City officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
      3.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
      4.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
      5.   May/Shall: The word “may” is permissive; the word “shall” is
mandatory.
      6.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such
meaning.
      7.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
      8.   Officers Generally: Whenever any officer is referred to by title,
such as “Clerk”, “Comptroller”, “Chief of Police”, etc., such reference shall
be construed as if followed by the words “of the City of McHenry”.
      9.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
(1987 Code § 1-2; amd. 2019 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the rules and
definitions set out in this section shall be observed, unless such construction
would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the City Council. The rules
of construction and definitions set out herein shall not be applied to any
section of this Code which shall contain any express provision excluding such
construction, or where the subject matter of context of such section may be
repugnant thereto.
CITY: The City of McHenry, Illinois.
CITY COUNCIL, COUNCIL OR COUNCIL MEMBER: Whenever the words “Council”, “City
Council” or “Council member” are used, the provisions containing these words
shall apply to the City Council of the City of McHenry, so far as those
provisions are applicable to them.
CORPORATE OR CITY LIMITS: The term “corporate limits” or “City limits” shall
mean the legal boundaries of the City of McHenry.
COUNTY: The words “the County” or “this County” shall mean the County of
McHenry in the State of Illinois.
ELECTRICAL CONTRACTOR: Person engaged in the business of installing or altering
by contract electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity for light,
heat or power; however, the term “electrical contractor” shall not include the
installing or alteration of: a) radio apparatus or equipment for wireless
reception of sounds or signals; or b) apparatus, conductors or other equipment
installed for or by public utilities, including common carriers, which are
under the jurisdiction of the Illinois Commerce Commission for the use in the
operation as public utilities. Nor shall the term include the employees
employed by an electrical contractor to do or supervise his work.
MAYOR: The Mayor of the City.
MONTH: A calendar month.
OATH: An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall
be equivalent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed”.
OWNER: When applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or tenant by the
entirety, of the whole or of part of such building or land.
PERSON: Shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Every species of property, except real property, as defined
in this section.
PROPERTY: Real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY: Shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
SIDEWALK: Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
SIGNATURE OR SUBSCRIPTION: Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE: The words “the State” or “this State” shall be construed to mean the
State of Illinois.
STREET: Construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys,
lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the City, and shall include all
areas thereof embraced between the property lines and dedicated to the public
use.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT: When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of
such buildings or land, either alone or with others.
WHOLESALE, WHOLESALER, ETC.: In all cases where the words “wholesale”,
“wholesaler”, or “wholesale dealer” are used in this Code, unless otherwise
specifically defined, they shall be understood and held to relate to the sale
of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who purchase
for purposes of resale, as distinguished from a retail dealer who sells in
smaller quantities direct to the consumer.
WRITTEN OR IN WRITING: Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether
by printing or otherwise.
YEAR: Calendar year.
(1987 Code § 1-2; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; 2019 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(1987 Code § 1-3; amd. 2019 Code)
CHAPTER 4: CODE PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE A: GENERAL PENALTY
Section
1-4A-1: General Penalty For Violation Of Code; Continuing Violations
1-4A-2: Settlement Of Offenses
1-4A-1: GENERAL PENALTY FOR VIOLATION OF CODE; CONTINUING VIOLATIONS:
   A.   General Penalty: Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City
any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor,
or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or a misdemeanor, where no
specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of
this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each
day any violation of any provisions of this Code or of any ordinance shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   Enforcement And Collection: In the event that the City brings an action
in either its Office of Administrative Adjudication or in the Circuit Court to
enforce any provision in this Code or prosecute a violation of any ordinance in
the City and the offender is adjudicated liable or found guilty of the charge
or violation, then the City is entitled to a judgment against the offender for
the amount of attorney fees and costs expended in the enforcement. In the event
any charge, fee or judgment, including, but not limited to, those relating to
water and sewer service charges, recording, retained personnel, fines,
penalties, repair, abatement that is due the City and is not paid, the cost of
collecting said fee shall be added to the charge, fee or judgment. Collection
costs shall include, but not be limited to, attorney fees and/or collection
agency fees.
   C.   Fee For Returned Check: A fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be
due and payable to the City for each check written or endorsed to the City
which is dishonored and returned by the payor bank for any reason.
(1987 Code § 1-8)
1-4A-2: SETTLEMENT OF OFFENSES:
Offenses may be settled according to the fines and penalties found in Chapter
15-1, Fines And Penalties. (1987 Code § 1-12) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
ARTICLE B: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION
Section
1-4B-1: Adoption Of State Statutes
1-4B-2: Office Of Administrative Adjudication
1-4B-3: Director
1-4B-4: Compliance Administrators
1-4B-5: Administrative Law Judge
1-4B-6: Notice Of Violation (Nonvehicular)
1-4B-7: Service (Nonvehicular)
1-4B-8: Administrative Hearings
1-4B-9: Defenses To Building Code Violation
1-4B-10: Sanctions Applicable To Owner, Property
1-4B-11: Subpoenas
1-4B-12: Default; Motion To Set Aside Judgment
1-4B-13: Judicial Review
1-4B-14: Enforcement Of Judgment
1-4B-15: Demolition, Repair, Enclosure Or Remediation
1-4B-16: Parking And Standing Of Vehicles And Condition And Use Of Vehicle
Equipment
1-4B-17: Election Of Remedies
1-4B-18: Fines Applicable To All Offenses
1-4B-1: ADOPTION OF STATE STATUTES:
The City adopts 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1 et seq., which
authorizes a home rule municipality to create and implement a system of
administrative adjudications for Code violations and 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-208.3 et seq., which authorizes a municipality to create and
implement a system of administrative adjudication of violations of traffic
regulations concerning the standing, parking and condition of vehicles. The
adoption of these statutes shall not preclude the City from using other methods
to enforce City ordinances.
(1987 Code § 2.25-1)
1-4B-2: OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION:
   A.   Creation: An Office of Administrative Adjudication is established
pursuant to the authority of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.1-1 et seq.,
and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 et seq., the function of which is
to administer a system of administrative adjudication provided for in this
article. The Office of Administrative Adjudication shall administer, manage and
conduct administrative adjudication proceedings in the manner provided for in
this article. The creation of the Office of Administrative Adjudication shall
not preclude the City from using other methods to enforce City ordinances. The
Office of Administrative Adjudication shall be comprised of the following
individuals appointed by the City Administrator:
      1.   Hearing Officer, who may also be referred to as an Administrative
Law Judge;
      2.   The Chief of Police or designee;
      3.   A Code Administrator; and
      4.   Any City staff deemed necessary for the efficient administration of
the Office of Administrative Adjudication.
   B.   Jurisdiction: The Office of Administrative Adjudication shall have the
authority to conduct the administrative adjudication of charges of all Code
violations of this Code, as amended, and vehicular standing, parking and
compliance violations, except the following:
      1.   Any offense under the Illinois Vehicle Code or this Code governing
the movement of vehicles;
      2.   Any reportable offense under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-204
of the Illinois Vehicle Code;
      3.   Violations punishable by a penalty of incarceration; and
      4.   Violations punishable by a fine in excess of fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) per violation, excluding allowable costs; provided, however, that
the maximum fine amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) does not apply
to cases brought to enforce the collection of any tax imposed and collected by
the City.
   C.   Adjudication Of Matters: Charges of violations of this Code, as amended
from time to time, and any other matter falling within the jurisdiction of the
Office of Administrative Adjudication, shall be heard and adjudicated by an
Administrative Law Judge.
(1987 Code § 2.25-2; amd. 2019 Code)
1-4B-3: DIRECTOR:
The Director of the Office of Administrative Adjudication shall be the City
Administrator or their designee, or an independent contractor or agency
contracted by the City to perform such duties as enumerated herein. The
Director is authorized, empowered and directed to:
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   A.   Operate, Manage Systems: Operate and manage the system of
administrative adjudication of vehicular standing and parking regulation
violations, vehicle compliance violations, vehicle license or sticker
requirement violations, Building, Fire and Health Code violations, and all
other City ordinance violations as may be permitted by law and directed by
ordinance or this Code.
   B.   Notices: Adopt, distribute and process all notices as may be required
under this article or Code, or as may reasonably be required to carry out the
purpose of this article.
   C.   Collection: Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed
after a final determination of liability.
   D.   Final Determinations Of Building, Fire, Health Code Violations: Certify
copies of final determinations of Building, Fire and Health Code violations, or
any other ordinance violation adjudicated pursuant to this article and Code.
   E.   Final Determinations Of Vehicle Code Compliance: If also appointed as
Traffic Compliance Administrator pursuant to section 1-4B-16 of this article,
certify copies of final determinations of vehicular standing and parking
regulation violation liability, vehicle compliance violations, vehicle license
or sticker requirement violations, and any factual reports verifying the final
determination of any violation liability which were issued in accordance with
this article or the laws of the State, including 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-208.3, as from time to time amended; and also certify reports to the
Secretary of State concerning initiation of suspension of driving privileges in
accordance with the provisions of this article and those of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5.
   F.   Promulgate Rules, Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations
reasonably required to operate and maintain the system of administrative
adjudication hereby established.
   G.   Collect Fines And Penalties: Collect unpaid fines and penalties through
private collection agencies that may be retained by the City or by filing
citations in the 22nd Judicial Circuit Court, or by selecting or appointing an
individual or agency to act on behalf of the City in filing citations, seeking
judgments for unpaid fines or penalties and pursuing all post-judgment remedies
available under current law.
   H.   Computer Programs: Operate and maintain, or delegate the operation and
maintenance of, any computer program(s) for the system of administrative
adjudication hereby established, on a day to day basis, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Inputting of violation notice information;
      2.   Establishing hearing dates and notice dates;
      3.   Recording fine and penalty assessment and payments;
      4.   Issuing payment receipts;
      5.   Issuing succeeding notices of hearing dates and/or final
determination of liability, issuing notices of immobilization, issuing notices
of impending impoundment, and issuing notices of impending driver’s license
suspension as may be required, in accordance with the Illinois Vehicle Code;
and
      6.   Keeping accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered and fines and other penalties assessed
and paid.
(1987 Code § 2.25-3)
1-4B-4: COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATORS:
The City Administrator, or designee, shall appoint Compliance Administrators
who are authorized to issue Code violation notices and citations. Compliance
Administrators are any and all police and community service officers, Director
of Community Development, Building Code and property maintenance inspectors,
Public Works Director, supervisors in the Public Works Department and any other
person appointed to issue Code violation notices and citations.
(1987 Code § 2.25-4)
1-4B-5: ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE:
   A.   Appointment: The City Administrator, with advice and consent of the
City Council, shall appoint an Administrative Law Judge to hear all matters
under this article. The Administrative Law Judge must be an attorney licensed
to practice law in this State for at least three (3) years. In the event the
Administrative Law Judge is unavailable for any regular or special court date,
the City Administrator shall appoint a temporary Administrative Law Judge. The
temporary appointee must be an attorney licensed to practice law in this State
for at least three (3) years.
   B.   Training: Prior to conducting proceedings under this article,
Administrative Law Judges shall successfully complete a formal training program
that includes the following:
      1.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearings which they
will conduct;
      2.   Orientation to each subject area of the Code violations they will
adjudicate;
      3.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
      4.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including ruling on evidence
and issuing final orders.
   C.   Powers And Duties: The powers and duties of the Administrative Law
Judge shall include:
      1.   Hearing testimony and accepting evidence that is relevant to the
existence of the Code violation;
      2.   Administering oaths and affirmations to witnesses;
      3.   Issuing subpoenas, at the request of any party or on the
Administrative Law Judge’s own motion for the appearance of witnesses or for
the production of relevant books, records or other information, subject to
section 1-4B-11 of this article;
      4.   Regulating the course of the hearing in accordance with this
article, the rules and regulations adopted by the Office of Administrative
Adjudication or other applicable law;
      5.   Preserving and authenticating the record of the hearing and all
exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
      6.   Holding conferences for the settlement or simplifications of issues;
      7.   Issuing a determination, based on the evidence presented at the
hearing, of whether a Code violation exists. The determination shall be in
writing and shall include the fine, penalty or action with which the respondent
must comply;
      8.   Imposing penalties consistent with applicable Code provisions and
assessing costs upon finding a party liable for the charged violation. However,
in no event shall the Administrative Law Judge have authority to: a) impose a
penalty of incarceration; or b) impose a fine in excess of fifty thousand
dollars ($50,000.00), or at the option of the City, such other amount not to
exceed the maximum amount established by the Mandatory Arbitration System as
prescribed by the Rules of the Illinois Supreme Court from time to time for the
22nd Judicial Circuit. The maximum monetary fine under this section shall be
exclusive of costs of enforcement or costs imposed to secure compliance with
the City’s ordinances and shall not be applicable to cases to enforce the
collection of any tax imposed and collected by the City;
      9.   Ordering a respondent to comply with the appropriate relevant Code
section(s) that the respondent has been found liable of violating during the
course of the administrative hearing;
      10.   Imposing, in addition to fines and costs assessed, costs related to
the enforcement of this Code’s provisions for which the respondent has been
found liable; and
      11.   Granting equitable relief as otherwise authorized by law or local
ordinance.
(1987 Code § 2.25-5)
1-4B-6: NOTICE OF VIOLATION (NONVEHICULAR):
The form and manner of notice for a vehicular parking, standing and compliance
violation shall be as provided in section 1-4B-16 of this article. All matters,
excepting vehicular parking, standing and compliance violations, to be
adjudicated by the Office of Administrative Adjudication shall be commenced
against the party alleged to have violated one or more Code provisions by
issuing and serving upon that party a charging document in accordance with the
following procedures:
   A.   Issuance Of Citation: The charging document for a violation of any
provision of this Code subject to the system of administrative adjudication
provided in this article, other than vehicular parking, standing and compliance
violations, shall be issued by a City officer or employee as authorized in
section 1-4B-4 of this article, and served as provided for in section 1-4B-7 of
this article.
   B.   Contents: The charging document shall contain the following
information:
      1.   The name, City department and identification number, if applicable,
of the person issuing the charging instrument;
      2.   The name and address of the person or entity being charged with the
violation;
      3.   The name and address of the person to whom the charging document is
served upon if that person is not the respondent;
      4.   The section(s) of the Code alleged to have been violated;
      5.   The date, time and place of the alleged violation(s);
      6.   A legally sufficient description of the activity or conduct alleged
to constitute a violation of each Code section set forth in the charging
document; and
      7.   The name of the complaining witness(es) if the violation was not
witnessed by the City officer or employee issuing the charging document.
(1987 Code § 2.25-6)
   C.   Certification: The City officer or employee issuing the charging
document shall certify the correctness of the information required by this
section by signing their name to the charging document.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   D.   Prima Facie Evidence: Charging documents which comply with this section
will be sufficient to establish a prima facie case of liability for the Code
violation charged.
   E.   Hearing Information: A charging document issued pursuant to this
section shall also set forth:
      1.   The date, time and place of the adjudication hearing to be held with
respect to the violation;
      2.   The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing will be
held;
      3.   The penalties for failure to appear at the hearing; and
      4.   The fine to be paid within the time frame set forth in section
1-4A-2, “Settlement Of Offenses”, of this chapter, and/or noting that
appearance is required on the hearing date.
(1987 Code § 2.25-6)
1-4B-7: SERVICE (NONVEHICULAR):
   A.   Filing: The form and manner of service for a vehicular parking,
standing and compliance violation shall be as provided in section 1-4B-16 of
this article. A proceeding before the Administrative Law Judge shall be
instituted upon the filing of a written sworn pleading or citation by any
authorized official of the City, including police officers, Code enforcement
officers and such other employees as authorized with the Office of
Administrative Adjudication.
   B.   Service: Respondents shall be served with a copy of the written sworn
pleading or citation along with a notice of the hearing in any manner
reasonably calculated to give them actual notice of the proceeding instituted
against them, including:
      1.   Personal service upon a party or its employees or agents;
      2.   Service by first class mail, certified mail return receipt
requested, or express mail at the party’s last known address; or
      3.   Service by posting a copy of the sworn pleading or citation upon the
property when a structure is involved where the violation is found if service
on the owner cannot be made by mail. Posting shall be on the front door of the
structure not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is scheduled.
However, notice by posting shall not be effective notice if the property at
issue is a vacant lot or a vacant building.
(1987 Code § 2.25-7)
1-4B-8: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
   A.   Scheduling: Hearings shall be scheduled with reasonable promptness;
provided, that for hearings scheduled in all nonemergency situations, if
requested by the respondent, the respondent shall have at least fifteen (15)
days after service of process to prepare for a hearing. For purposes of this
section, “nonemergency situation” means any situation that does not reasonably
constitute a threat to the public interest, safety, health or welfare. If
service is provided by mail, the fifteen (15) day period shall begin to run on
the day the notice is deposited in the mail.
   B.   Open Hearings; Recording: All hearings shall be open to the public, may
be recorded, and shall be conducted before an Administrative Law Judge.
   C.   Evidence: Documentary evidence, including the notice of violation,
citation and attached exhibits, may be presented to the Administrative Law
Judge.
   D.   Written Appearance: Respondents appearing at the hearing and their
authorized agent or counsel shall file with the Office of Administrative
Adjudication a written appearance on a form provided by the Office of
Administrative Adjudication.
   E.   Testimony: All testimony shall be given under oath or affirmation.
   F.   Formal, Technical Rules Not Applicable: The formal and technical rules
of evidence shall not apply in an adjudicatory hearing authorized under this
article. Evidence, including hearsay, may be admitted only if it is of a type
commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their
affairs.
   G.   Representation, Cross Examination, Subpoenas: Parties shall be provided
with an opportunity for a hearing during which they may be represented by
counsel, present witnesses and cross examine opposing witnesses. Parties may
request the Administrative Law Judge to issue subpoenas to direct the
attendance and testimony of relevant witnesses and the production of relevant
documents; however issuance of the subpoena shall be at the discretion of the
Administrative Law Judge where it is determined the witness or documents are
material and do not constitute a needless presentation of cumulative or
repetitive evidence.
   H.   Continuances: Continuances may be granted at the discretion of the
Administrative Law Judge upon a finding of good cause.
   I.   Final Determination: Upon the conclusion of a hearing, the
Administrative Law Judge shall issue a final determination of liability or no
liability. No violation may be established except by proof by a preponderance
of the evidence.
   J.   Penalties, Fines Imposed: Upon issuing a determination of liability,
the Administrative Law Judge may impose penalties and/or fines that are
consistent with applicable provisions of this Code, impose a term of community
service, assess costs reasonably related to instituting the administrative
adjudication proceeding, if applicable, order the respondent to immediately
correct the violation, and impose any other penalties or remedies available at
law. Court costs associated with administrative hearings shall be not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   K.   Payment: Payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from a
violation shall constitute a final disposition of that violation.
(1987 Code § 2.25-8) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
1-4B-9: DEFENSES TO BUILDING CODE VIOLATION:
Except for violations of title 10, chapter 8, “Property Maintenance Code”, of
this Code, as amended, it shall be a defense to a Building Code violation
charged if the owner, their attorney or any other agent or representative
proves to the Administrative Law Judge’s satisfaction that:
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   A.   Current Occupants Continuing Violation: The Building Code violation has
been caused by the current property occupants and, in spite of reasonable
attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling free of such violation,
including filing civil action to evict current occupants, the current occupants
continue to cause the violation;
   B.   Entry By Owner Refused: An occupant or resident of the dwelling has
refused entry to the owner or their agent to all or part of the dwelling for
the purpose of correcting the Building Code violation.
(1987 Code § 2.25-9)
1-4B-10: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER, PROPERTY:
The order to correct a Building Code violation and the sanction imposed by the
City as the result of a finding of a Building Code violation under this
article, shall attach to the property as well as to the owner of the property
so that a finding of a Building Code violation against one owner cannot be
avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any
subsequent transferee or owner of the subject structure or property shall be
subject to the findings, decision and order of a Hearing Officer. (1987 Code §
2.25-10)
1-4B-11: SUBPOENAS:
   A.   Issuance: Issuance of a subpoena shall be at the discretion of the
Administrative Law Judge and shall only be enforceable for the attendance of
persons or the production of books, records or other documents that have a
relevant evidentiary connection with the: 1) subject matter; and 2) facts which
are relevant to the case and relate to a contested issue in the case. A party’s
request to an Administrative Law Judge for a subpoena must be timely. Service
of subpoenas shall be made in the same manner as summons in a civil action.
Issuance shall be based upon whether the evidence sought is relevant and
necessary to the defense of a violation, where without the issuance of the
subpoena, the defense could not otherwise be established by the requesting
party.
   B.   Content: A subpoena issued under this article shall identify:
      1.   The person to whom it is directed;
      2.   The documents or other items sought by the subpoena, if any; and
      3.   The date, time and place for the appearance of the witnesses and the
production of the documents or other items described in the subpoena.
   C.   Appearance: The date identified for the appearance of the witnesses or
the production of the documents or other items shall not be less than seven (7)
days after service of the subpoena.
   D.   Contesting A Subpoena: Within five (5) business days of being served
with a subpoena issued in accordance with this article, the person or entity to
whom the subpoena is directed may contest the issuance of the subpoena by
filing a written motion with the Office of Administrative Adjudication, and
with proper notice to all parties. The motion shall specify the grounds
therefor, and shall be heard by an Administrative Law Judge on the return date
indicated on the subpoena, or at the next hearing date scheduled for the case,
whichever occurs earlier.
(1987 Code § 2.25-11)
1-4B-12: DEFAULT; MOTION TO SET ASIDE JUDGMENT:
   A.   Default: The Administrative Law Judge may find a respondent in default
if the respondent, their attorney or authorized representative fails to appear
at a hearing where proper service of notice of the hearing has been provided to
the respondent, in accordance with this article, and where there is not a
finding of good cause by the Administrative Law Judge for the respondent’s
absence. Upon a finding of default, the hearing shall then proceed in absence
of the respondent and evidence may be accepted relevant to the Code violation.
A copy of the findings, decision and order resulting from the hearing shall be
served on the respondent within five (5) days after it is issued.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   B.   Motion To Set Aside Default Judgment: The Administrative Law Judge may
set aside any judgment entered by default and set a new hearing date, upon a
petition filed by the respondent within twenty one (21) days after the issuance
of the order of default, if the Administrative Law Judge determines that the
respondent’s failure to appear at the hearing was for good cause, or at any
time if the respondent establishes, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
the City did not provide proper service of process. If any judgment is set
aside pursuant to this section, the Administrative Law Judge shall have
authority to enter an order extinguishing any lien which has been recorded for
any debt due and owing the City as a result of the vacated default judgment.
When a judgment is vacated, the Administrative Law Judge shall proceed
immediately with a new hearing on the underlying violation(s) as soon as
practical.
(1987 Code § 2.25-12)
1-4B-13: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Any final decision by an Administrative Law Judge that a Code violation does or
does not exist shall constitute a final determination for purposes of judicial
review and shall be subject to review under the Illinois Administrative Review
Law (735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.)
(1987 Code § 2.25-13)
1-4B-14: ENFORCEMENT OF JUDGMENT:
Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other sanction,
or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of or the failure to
exhaust judicial review procedures under the Illinois Administrative Review Law
are a debt due and owing the City and may be collected in accordance with
applicable law. Additionally, after expiration of the period in which judicial
review under the Illinois Administrative Review Law may be sought for a final
determination of a Code violation, unless stayed by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the findings, decision and order of the Administrative Law Judge
may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment entered by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   A.   Failure To Comply; Costs Of Enforcement: In any case in which a
respondent has failed to comply with a judgment ordering that respondent to
correct a Code violation or imposing any fine or other sanction as a result of
a Code violation, any expenses incurred by the City to enforce the judgment
entered against that respondent, including, but not limited to, attorney fees,
court costs and costs related to property demolition or foreclosure, repair
and/or enclosure of dangerous or unsafe buildings or uncompleted and abandoned
buildings, costs for the removal of garbage, debris and other hazardous,
noxious or unhealthy substances or materials from buildings or other real
property after they are fixed by a court of competent jurisdiction or an
Administrative Law Judge, shall be a debt due and owing the City and may be
collected in accordance with applicable law. Prior to any expenses being fixed
by the Administrative Law Judge pursuant to this section, the City shall
provide a notice to the respondent that states the respondent shall appear at a
hearing before the Administrative Law Judge to determine whether the respondent
has failed to comply with the judgment. The notice shall set the date for such
hearing, which shall not be less than seven (7) days from the date that notice
is served. If notice is served by mail, the seven (7) day period shall begin to
run on the date the notice was deposited in the mail.
   B.   Lien: Upon being recorded in the manner required by 735 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-101 of the Illinois Code of Civil Procedure, or by 810
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101 et seq., of the Uniform Commercial Code, a
lien shall be imposed on the real estate or personal estate, or both, of the
respondent in the amount of any debt due and owing the City under this Code.
The lien may be enforced in the same manner as a judgment lien pursuant to a
judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   Denial Of Services: If the respondent fails to pay any debt due and
owing the City as described in this section within fourteen (14) days after
service of the notice of debt, the City may take the following actions in
addition to any debt collection authorized by law:
      1.   Decline to issue, renew or provide any license, permit, zoning
variance or permission applied for or requested by respondent under any Code or
ordinance of the City until the respondent pays such debt; or
      2.   Decline to issue or renew residential parking permits, temporary
residential parking permits or passes, or any other permit required and applied
for by the respondent under any Code or ordinance of the City, until the
respondent pays such debt.
(1987 Code § 2.25-14)
1-4B-15: DEMOLITION, REPAIR, ENCLOSURE OR REMEDIATION:
   A.   Authority: Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-1, the
City has the authority to demolish, repair or enclose or cause the demolition,
repair or enclosure of dangerous and unsafe buildings or uncompleted and
abandoned buildings within the City and may remove or cause the removal of
garbage, debris and other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances or
materials from those buildings. When such action is warranted, the Director is
authorized, empowered and directed to:
      1.   Apply to the Hearing Officer:
         a.   For an order authorizing action to be taken with respect to a
building if the owner or owners of the building, including the lienholders of
record, after at least fifteen (15) days’ written notice by mail to do so, have
failed to put the building in a safe condition or to demolish it; or
         b.   For an order requiring the owner or owners of record to demolish,
repair or enclose the building or to remove garbage, debris and other
hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances or materials from the building. It
is not a defense to the cause of action that the building is boarded up or
otherwise enclosed, although the Hearing Officer may order the defendant to
have the building boarded up or otherwise enclosed. Where, upon diligent
search, the identity or whereabouts of the owner or owners of the building,
including the lienholders of record, is not ascertainable, notice mailed to the
person or persons in whose name the real estate was last assessed is sufficient
notice under this section.
      2.   The hearing upon the application shall be expedited by the Hearing
Officer and shall be given precedence over all other suits.
      3.   The cost of the demolition, repair, enclosure or removal incurred by
the City, by an intervenor, or by a lienholder of record, including hearing
costs, attorney fees and other costs related to the enforcement of this
section, is recoverable from the owner or owners of the real estate or the
previous owner or both if the property was transferred during the fifteen (15)
day notice period and is a lien on the real estate; the lien is superior to all
prior existing liens and encumbrances, except taxes, if, within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the repair, demolition, enclosure or removal, the City,
the lienholder of record or the intervenor who incurred the cost and expense,
shall file a notice of lien for the cost and expense incurred in the Office of
the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds.
      4.   The notice must consist of a sworn statement setting out:
         a.   A description of the real estate sufficient for its
identification;
         b.   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred;
and
         c.   The date or dates when the cost and expense was incurred by the
City, the lienholder of record or the intervenor.
Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons interested in
the property after the notice of lien has been filed, the lien shall be
released by the City, the person in whose name the lien has been filed, or the
assignee of the lien, and the release may be filed of record as in the case of
filing notice of lien.
      5.   Unless the lien is enforced under subsection C of this section, the
lien may be enforced by foreclosure proceedings as in the case of mortgage
foreclosures under 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-1101 et seq., or
mechanics’ lien foreclosures. An action to foreclose this lien may be commenced
at any time after the date of filing of the notice of lien. The costs of
foreclosure incurred by the City, including hearing costs, reasonable attorney
fees, advances to preserve the property, and other costs related to the
enforcement of this section, plus statutory interest, are a lien on the real
estate and are recoverable by the City from the owner or owners of the real
estate.
      6.   All liens arising under this section shall be assignable. The
assignee of the lien shall have the same power to enforce the lien as the
assigning party, except that the lien may not be enforced under subsection B of
this section.
      7.   If the City determines that any dangerous and unsafe building or
uncompleted and abandoned building within the City fulfills the requirements
for an action by the City under 310 Illinois Compiled Statutes 50/1 et seq.,
the City may petition under that act in a proceeding brought under this
section.
   B.   Lien Enforcement: In any case where the City has obtained a lien, it
may enforce the lien pursuant to section
1-4B-14 of this article.
   C.   Petition For Abandonment:
      1.   In addition to any other remedy provided by law, the City may
petition the 22nd Judicial Circuit Court to have property declared abandoned
under this section if:
         a.   The property has been tax delinquent for two (2) or more years or
bills for water service for the property have been outstanding for two (2) or
more years;
         b.   The property is unoccupied by persons legally in possession; and
         c.   The property contains a dangerous or unsafe building for reasons
specified in the petition.
      2.   All persons having an interest of record in the property, including
tax purchasers and beneficial owners of any Illinois land trust having title to
the property, shall be named as defendants in the petition and shall be served
with process. In addition, service shall be had under 735 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/2-206 as in other cases affecting property.
      3.   The City, however, may proceed under this section in a proceeding
brought under subsection A of this section. Notice of the petition shall be
served in person or by certified or registered mail on all persons who were
served notice under subsection A of this section.
(1987 Code § 2.25-15)
      4.   If the City proves that the conditions described in this section
exist and: a) the owner of record of the property does not enter an appearance
in the action, or, if title to the property is held by an Illinois land trust,
if neither the owner of record nor the owner of the beneficial interest of the
trust enters an appearance; or b) if the owner of record or the beneficiary of
a land trust, if title to the property is held by an Illinois land trust,
enters an appearance and specifically waives their rights under this section,
the court shall declare the property abandoned. Notwithstanding any waiver, the
City may move to dismiss its petition at any time. In addition, any waiver in a
proceeding under this section does not serve as a waiver for any other
proceeding under law or equity.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      5.   If that determination is made, notice shall be sent in person or by
certified or registered mail to all persons having an interest of record in the
property, including tax purchasers and beneficial owners of any Illinois land
trust having title to the property, stating that title to the property will be
transferred to the City unless, within thirty (30) days of the notice, the
owner of record or any other person having an interest in the property files
with the court a request to demolish the dangerous or unsafe building or to put
the building in safe condition, or unless the owner of record enters an
appearance and proves that the owner does not intend to abandon the property.
(1987 Code § 2.25-15)
      6.   If the owner of record enters an appearance in the action within the
thirty (30) day period, but does not at that time file with the court a request
to demolish the dangerous or unsafe building or to put the building in safe
condition, or specifically waive their rights under this section, the court
shall vacate its order declaring the property abandoned if it determines that
the owner of record does not intend to abandon the property. In that case, the
City may amend its complaint in order to initiate proceedings under subsection
A of this section, or it may request that the court order the owner to demolish
the building or repair the dangerous or unsafe conditions of the building
alleged in the petition or seek the appointment of a receiver or other
equitable relief to correct the conditions at the property. The powers and
rights of a receiver appointed under this section shall include all of the
powers and rights of a receiver appointed under 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-31-2.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      7.   If a request to demolish or repair the building is filed within the
thirty (30) day period, the court shall grant permission to the requesting
party to demolish the building within thirty (30) days or to restore the
building to safe condition within sixty (60) days after the request is granted.
An extension of that period for up to sixty (60) additional days may be given
for good cause. If more than one person with an interest in the property files
a timely request, preference shall be given to the owner of record if the owner
filed a request or, if the owner did not, the person with the lien or other
interest of the highest priority.
      8.   If the requesting party (other than the owner of record) proves to
the court that the building has been demolished or put in a safe condition in
accordance with the local Safety Codes within the period of time granted by the
court, the court shall issue a quitclaim judicial deed for the property to the
requesting party, conveying only the interest of the owner of record, upon
proof of payment to the City of all costs incurred by the City in connection
with the action, including, but not limited to, court costs, attorney fees,
administrative costs, the costs, if any, associated with building enclosure or
removal and receiver’s certificates. The interest in the property so conveyed
shall be subject to all liens and encumbrances on the property. In addition, if
the interest is conveyed to a person holding a certificate of purchase for the
property under 35 Illinois Compiled Statutes 200/1-1 et seq., the conveyance
shall be subject to the rights of redemption of all persons entitled to redeem
under that Act, including the original owner of record. If the requesting party
is the owner of record and proves to the court that the building has been
demolished or put in a safe condition in accordance with the local Safety Codes
within the period of time granted by the court, the court shall dismiss the
proceeding under this section.
      9.   If the owner of record has not entered an appearance and proven that
the owner did not intend to abandon the property, and if no person with an
interest in the property files a timely request or if the requesting party
fails to demolish the building or put the building in safe condition within the
time specified by the court, the City may petition the court to issue a
judicial deed for the property to the City. A conveyance by judicial deed shall
operate to extinguish all existing ownership interests in, liens on, and other
interest in the property, including tax liens, and shall extinguish the rights
and interests of any and all holders of a bona fide certificate of purchase of
the property for delinquent taxes. Any such bona fide certificate of purchase
holder shall be entitled to a sale in error as prescribed under 35 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 200/1-1 et seq.
   D.   Expedited Removal: The City may use the provisions of this subsection
to expedite the removal of certain buildings that are a continuing hazard in
the City.
      1.   If a residential or commercial building is three (3) stories or less
in height as defined by the City’s Building Code, and the Director of Community
Development determines that the building is open and vacant and an immediate
and continuing hazard to the City, then the Director of Community Development
shall be authorized to post a notice not less than two feet by two feet (2' x
2') in size on the front of the building. The notice shall be dated as of the
date of the posting and shall state that unless the building is demolished,
repaired or enclosed, and unless any garbage, debris and other hazardous,
noxious or unhealthy substances or materials are removed so that an immediate
and continuing hazard to the City no longer exists, then the building may be
demolished, repaired or enclosed, or any garbage, debris and other hazardous,
noxious or unhealthy substances or materials may be removed, by the City.
      2.   Not later than thirty (30) days following the posting of the notice,
the City shall do all of the following:
         a.   Cause to be sent, by certified mail, return receipt requested, a
notice to remediate to all owners of record of the property, the beneficial
owners of any Illinois land trust having title to the property, and all
lienholders of record in the property, stating the intent of the City to
demolish, repair or enclose the building or remove any garbage, debris or other
hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances or materials if that action is not
taken by the owner or owners.
         b.   Cause to be published, in a newspaper published or circulated in
the City, a notice setting forth: 1) the permanent tax index number and the
address of the building; 2) a statement that the property is open and vacant
and constitutes an immediate and continuing hazard to the community; and 3) a
statement that the City intends to demolish, repair or enclose the building or
remove any garbage, debris or other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances
or materials if the owner or owners or lienholders of record fail to do so.
This notice shall be published for three (3) consecutive days.
         c.   Cause to be recorded the notice to remediate mailed in the Office
of the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds.
(1987 Code § 2.25-15)
      3.   Any person or persons with a current legal or equitable interest in
the property objecting to the proposed actions of the Director of Community
Development may file their objection in an appropriate form in the Office of
Administrative Adjudication.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      4.   If the building is not demolished, repaired or enclosed or the
garbage, debris or other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances or
materials are not removed, within thirty (30) days of mailing the notice to the
owners of record, the beneficial owners of any Illinois land trust having title
to the property, and all lienholders of record in the property, or within
thirty (30) days of the last day of publication of the notice, whichever is
later, the Director of Community Development shall have the power to demolish,
repair or enclose the building or to remove any garbage, debris or other
hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances or materials.
      5.   The City may proceed to demolish, repair or enclose a building or
remove any garbage, debris or other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances
or materials under this subsection D within a one hundred twenty (120) day
period following the date of the mailing of the notice if the Director of
Community Development determines that the demolition, repair, enclosure or
removal of any garbage, debris or other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy
substances or materials is necessary to remedy the immediate and continuing
hazard. If, however, before the City proceeds with any of the actions
authorized by this subsection D, any person with a legal or equitable interest
in the property has sought a hearing under this section before the Office of
Administrative Adjudication and has served a copy of the complaint on the City
Administrator, then the City shall not proceed with the demolition, repair or
enclosure or removal of garbage, debris or other substances until the Hearing
Officer determines that action is necessary to remedy the hazard and issues an
order authorizing the City to do so. If the Hearing Officer dismisses the
action for want of prosecution, the City must send the objector a copy of the
dismissal order and a letter stating that the demolition, repair, enclosure or
removal of garbage, debris or other substances will proceed unless, within
thirty (30) days after the copy of the order and the letter are mailed, the
objector moves to vacate the dismissal and serves a copy of the motion on the
City Administrator. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, if the
objector does not file a motion and give the required notice, if the motion is
denied by the Hearing Officer, or if the action is again dismissed for want of
prosecution, then the dismissal is with prejudice and the demolition, repair,
enclosure or removal may proceed forthwith.
      6.   Following the demolition, repair or enclosure of a building, or the
removal of garbage, debris or other hazardous, noxious or unhealthy substances
or materials under this section, the City may file a notice of lien against the
real estate for the cost of the demolition, repair, enclosure or removal within
one hundred eighty (180) days after the repair, demolition, enclosure or
removal occurred, for the cost and expense incurred, in the Office of the
McHenry County Recorder of Deeds. This lien has priority over the interests of
those parties named in the notice to remediate mailed under subsection D2a of
this section, but not over the interests of third party purchasers or
encumbrancer for value who obtained their interests in the property before
obtaining actual or constructive notice of the lien.
      7.   The notice of lien shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth:
         a.   A description of the real estate, such as the address or other
description of the property, sufficient for its identification;
         b.   The expenses incurred by the City in undertaking the remedial
actions authorized under this section;
         c.   The date or dates the expenses were incurred by the City;
         d.   A statement by the Director of Community Development that the
building was open and vacant and constituted an immediate and continuing hazard
to the community;
         e.   A statement by the Director of Community Development that the
required sign was posted on the building, that notice was sent by certified
mail to the owners of record, and that notice was published in accordance with
this section; and
         f.   A statement as to when and where the notice was published.
      8.   The lien authorized by this section may thereafter be released or
enforced by the City as provided in subsection A of this section.
   E.   Hazardous Substances, Petroleum Products:
      1.   The City may remove or cause the removal of, or otherwise
environmentally remediate hazardous substances and petroleum products on, in or
under any abandoned and unsafe property within the City. In addition, where
preliminary evidence indicates the presence or likely presence of a hazardous
substance or a petroleum product or a release or a substantial threat of a
release of a hazardous substance or a petroleum product on, in or under the
property, the City may inspect the property and test for the presence or
release of hazardous substances and petroleum products.
      2.   For purposes of this section:
      ABANDONED:
         a.   The property has been tax delinquent for two (2) or more years;
         b.   The property is unoccupied by persons legally in possession.
      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES: Means the same as in 415 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/3.215.
      PROPERTY OR REAL ESTATE: All real property, whether or not improved by a
structure.
      UNSAFE: Property that presents an actual or imminent threat to public
health and safety caused by the release of hazardous substances.
      3.   The Code Administrator shall apply to the Hearing Officer: a) for an
order allowing the entry to the property and inspect and test substances on, in
or under the property; or b) for an order authorizing the Code Administrator to
take action with respect to remediation of the property if conditions on the
property, based on the inspection and testing authorized in item a of this
subsection, indicate the presence of hazardous substances or petroleum
products. Remediation shall be deemed complete for purposes of item b of this
subsection when the property satisfies tier I, II or III remediation objectives
for the property’s most recent usage, as established by 415 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/1 et seq., and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
Where, upon diligent search, the identity or whereabouts of the owner or owners
of the property, including the lienholders of record, is not ascertainable,
notice mailed to the person or persons in whose name the real estate was last
assessed is sufficient notice under this section.
      4.   The Hearing Officer shall grant an order authorizing testing under
item a of subsection E3 of this section upon a showing of preliminary evidence
indicating the presence or likely presence of a hazardous substance or a
petroleum product, or a release of or a substantial threat of a release of a
hazardous substance or a petroleum product on, in or under abandoned property.
The preliminary evidence may include, but is not limited to, evidence of prior
use, visual site inspection or records of prior environmental investigations.
The testing authorized by item a of subsection E3 of this section shall include
any type of investigation which is necessary for an environmental professional
to determine the environmental condition of the property, including, but not
limited to, performance of soil borings and groundwater monitoring. The Hearing
Officer shall grant a remediation order under item b of subsection E3 of this
section where testing of the property indicates that it fails to meet the
applicable remediation objectives. The hearing upon the application to the
Hearing Officer shall be expedited and shall be given precedence over all other
suits.
      5.   The cost of the inspection, testing or remediation incurred by the
City or by a lienholder of record, including court costs, attorney fees, and
other costs related to the enforcement of this section, is a lien on the real
estate; except that in any instances where the City incurs costs of inspection
and testing but finds no hazardous substances or petroleum products on the
property that present an actual or imminent threat to public health and safety,
such costs are not recoverable from the owners nor are such costs a lien on the
real estate. The lien is superior to all prior existing liens and encumbrances,
except taxes and any lien obtained under subsection A or D of this section, if,
within one hundred eighty (180) days after the completion of the inspection,
testing or remediation, the City or the lienholder of record who incurred the
cost and expense shall file a notice of lien for the cost and expense incurred
in the Office of the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds.
      6.   The notice must consist of a sworn statement setting out: a) a
description of the real estate sufficient for its identification; b) the amount
of money representing the cost and expense incurred; and c) the date or dates
when the cost and expense was incurred by the City or the lienholder of record.
Upon payment of the lien amount by the owner of or persons interested in the
property after the notice of lien has been filed, a release of lien shall be
issued by the City, the person in whose name the lien has been filed, or the
assignee of the lien, and the release may be filed of record as in the case of
filing notice of lien.
      7.   The lien may be enforced under subsection B of this section or by
foreclosure proceedings as in the case of mortgage foreclosures under 735
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-1101 et seq., or mechanics’ lien foreclosures;
provided, that where the lien is enforced by foreclosure under subsection B of
this section or under either statute, the City may not proceed against the
other assets of the owner or owners of the real estate for any costs that
otherwise would be recoverable under this section but that remain unsatisfied
after foreclosure except where such additional recovery is authorized by
separate Environmental Laws. An action to foreclose this lien may be commenced
at any time after the date of filing of the notice of lien. The costs of
foreclosure incurred by the City, including court costs, reasonable attorney
fees, advances to preserve the property, and other costs related to the
enforcement of this section, plus statutory interest, are a lien on the real
estate.
      8.   All liens arising under this section shall be assignable. The
assignee of the lien shall have the same power to enforce the lien as the
assigning party, except that the lien may not be enforced under subsection B of
this section.
   F.   Money Judgment: In any case where the City has obtained a lien under
subsection A of this section, the City may also bring an action for a money
judgment against the owner or owners of the real estate in the amount of the
lien in the same manner as provided for bringing causes of action in 735
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-101 and, upon obtaining a judgment, file a
judgment lien against all of the real estate of the owner or owners and enforce
that lien as provided for in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-101.
(1987 Code § 2.25-15)
1-4B-16: PARKING AND STANDING OF VEHICLES AND CONDITION AND USE OF VEHICLE
EQUIPMENT:
   A.   Applicability: This section shall be applicable to violations of City
ordinances regulating the parking and standing of vehicles and the condition
and use of vehicle equipment.
   B.   Definitions: In addition to the definitions found in section
7-1-2 of this Code, terms used in this section, shall have the following
meanings:
   COMPLIANCE VIOLATION: A violation of a City ordinance or Code governing the
condition or use of equipment on a vehicle.
   TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR: The City Administrator or designee.
   VEHICLE CODE: The Illinois Vehicle Code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
100 et seq.
   VIOLATION NOTICE: A violation notice issued pursuant to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 and the provisions of this section.
   C.   Traffic Compliance Administrator: Unless otherwise designated by the
City Administrator, the Director of the Office of Administrative Adjudication
shall serve as the Traffic Compliance Administrator. The Traffic Compliance
Administrator shall:
      1.   Operate an administrative adjudication system for the adjudication
of violations of City ordinances regulating the parking and standing of
vehicles and the condition and use of vehicle equipment;
      2.   Adopt, distribute and process violations of City ordinances
regulating the parking and standing of vehicles and the condition and use of
vehicle equipment and other notices required by 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-208.3;
      3.   Collect money paid as fines and penalties for violations of City
ordinances regulating the parking and standing of vehicles and the condition
and use of vehicle equipment; and
      4.   Make a certified report to the Secretary of State pursuant to 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5. Any such certified report shall contain
the information required under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5(c).
   D.   Administrative Law Judge: The adjudication of all notices of violation
of City ordinances regulating the parking and standing of vehicles and the
condition and use of vehicle equipment shall be conducted by an Administrative
Law Judge conforming to all provisions of this article.
   E.   Issuance Of Citation: Police and community service officers shall have
the authority to issue notices of violation for any vehicular parking, standing
or compliance violation.
   F.   Notice Requirements: A violation notice shall include:
      1.   The date, time and place of the violation;
      2.   The particular regulation violated;
      3.   The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment;
      4.   The vehicle make and State registration number;
      5.   The identification number of the person issuing the notice;
      6.   That the payment of the indicated fine, and any applicable penalty
for late payment, shall operate as a final disposition of the violation;
      7.   Information on the availability of a hearing in which the violation
may be contested on its merits; and
      8.   The time and manner in which a hearing will be held.
   G.   Service:
      1.   Notice Affixed To Vehicle: The original or a facsimile of the notice
shall be affixed to the vehicle or by handing the notice to the operator of a
vehicle if present.
      2.   Signing Name To Notice: When Traffic Compliance Administrators issue
violation notices, they shall certify to the correctness of the facts on the
violation notice by signing their name to the notice at the time of service.
The original or a facsimile of the violation notice shall be retained by the
Traffic Compliance Administrator. A record of the proceeding shall be kept in
the ordinary course of business.
      3.   Prima Facie Correct: A violation notice issued, signed and served in
accordance with this section, or a copy of the notice, shall be prima facie
correct and shall be prima facie evidence of the correctness of the facts shown
on the notice. The notice shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative
or legal proceedings.
      4.   Address As Recorded: Service of additional notices may be sent by
first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address of the
registered owner of the cited vehicle as recorded with the Secretary of State
or, under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306, to the lessee of the cited
vehicle at the last address known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the
time of lease. If notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, service
shall be to the last known address recorded in a United States postal service
database. The service shall be deemed complete as of the date of deposit with
the United States postal service.
      5.   Second Violation Notice: A second notice of violation shall include:
         a.   The date and location of the violation cited in the violation
notice;
         b.   The particular regulation violated;
         c.   The vehicle make and State registration number;
         d.   The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment;
         e.   The method in which a hearing to contest the violation on its
merits may be obtained by the respondent, and the time and manner in which the
hearing may be requested;
         f.   A statement that failure either to pay the fine and any
applicable penalty or to appear at the scheduled hearing will result in a final
determination of violation liability for the cited violation in the amount of
the fine and penalty indicated; and
         g.   A statement that, upon the occurrence of a final determination of
violation liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or failure to
exhaust, available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid
fine or penalty will constitute a debt due and owing the City.
      6.   Final Notice Of Determination: A notice of final determination of
parking, standing and compliance violation liability shall be issued following
a final determination of parking, standing and compliance violation liability
and the conclusion of the judicial review procedures taken pursuant to this
section. The notice shall:
         a.   State the unpaid fine or penalty is a debt due and owing the
City; and
         b.   Contain warnings that failure to pay any fine or penalty due and
owing the City within the time specified may result in the City filing a
petition in the 22nd Judicial Circuit Court to have the unpaid fine or penalty
rendered a judgment as provided by this section, or may result in suspension of
the person’s driver’s license for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten
(10) or more parking violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5.
      7.   Driver’s License Suspension: A notice of impending driver’s license
suspension shall:
         a.   Be sent to the person liable for any fine or penalty that remains
due and owing on ten (10) or more parking violations;
         b.   State that failure to pay the fine or penalty owing within forty
five (45) days of the notice’s date will result in the City notifying the
Secretary of State that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension
proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5;
         c.   State that the person may obtain a photostatic copy of an
original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed, stamped
envelope to the City with a request for a copy; and
         d.   Be sent by first class United States mail, postage prepaid, to
the address recorded with the Secretary of State or, if any notice to that
address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a
United States postal service approved database.
   H.   Evidence Rules: An opportunity for a hearing for the registered owner
of the vehicle cited in the violation notice in which the owner may contest the
merits of the alleged violation, and during which formal or technical rules of
evidence shall not apply; provided, however, that under 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1306, the lessee of a vehicle cited in the violation notice shall
be provided an opportunity for a hearing as afforded the registered owner.
   I.   Defenses: For matters relating to parking and standing of vehicles and
the condition and use of vehicle equipment, the Administrative Law Judge may
consider in defense of a violation:
      1.   The motor vehicle, or registration plates of the motor vehicle, was
stolen before the violation occurred and not under the control of or in the
possession of the owner at the time of the violation;
      2.   The relevant required signs prohibiting or restricting parking were
missing or obscured;
      3.   The facts alleged in the parking, standing or compliance violation
notice are not correct, are materially inconsistent or do not support a finding
that the specified regulation was violated; and
      4.   Any other evidence or issues provided by City ordinance.
To demonstrate that the motor vehicle, or the registration plates, was stolen
before the violation occurred and was not under the control or possession of
the owner at the time of the violation, the owner must submit proof that a
report concerning the stolen motor vehicle or registration plates was filed
with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner.
(1987 Code § 2.25-16)
   J.   Final Determination Of Violation Liability: A final determination of
violation liability shall occur following failure to pay the fine and any
applicable penalty, or to appear at a hearing on the merits, and upon the
exhaustion of the administrative review procedures. When a person fails to
appear at their scheduled hearing to contest an alleged violation, the
Administrative Law Judge’s determination of violation liability shall become
final: 1) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination; or
2) upon expiration of the period for filing the petition without a filing
having been made.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   K.   Appeals: A petition to void a determination may be filed by a person
owing an unpaid fine or penalty and shall be filed within thirty (30) days of
the finding of liability and shall be ruled upon by the Administrative Law
Judge. The grounds for such a petition are limited to:
      1.   The person was not the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle on the
date the violation notice was issued; or
      2.   The person had paid the fine or penalty for the violation in
question; or
      3.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a date for a hearing.
When it has been determined there is just cause, the registered owner shall be
provided with a hearing on the merits for the violation.
(1987 Code § 2.25-16)
   L.   Procedures For Nonresidents: If an alleged violator does not reside
within the City, the violation may be contested in writing pursuant to the
notice of violation. In such circumstances, the nonresident may submit their
position, in writing, signed and under oath, to the Administrative Law Judge,
setting forth the reasons why a finding of liability should not be entered and
why the issuance of the violation was improper. Said written challenge must be
submitted not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the hearing as noted on the
notice of violation.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
1-4B-17: ELECTION OF REMEDIES:
In no case may the Office of Administrative Adjudication conduct an
administrative adjudication proceeding for an alleged violation of this Code
where the remedy provided is a punishment of imprisonment; provided, however,
where a violation of this Code is punishable by fines and other penalties in
addition to imprisonment, the City may elect to institute an action with the
Office of Administrative Adjudication and waive any imprisonment for the Code
violation. Nothing in this section, however, shall preclude the City from
seeking the remedy of imprisonment in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(1987 Code § 2.25-17)
1-4B-18: FINES APPLICABLE TO ALL OFFENSES:
Ordinance and Code violations that may be heard in an administrative
adjudication as set forth in this article, shall carry the fines listed in this
Code, with the maximum fines being one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or as
provided for in the State Statutes, whichever is greater.
(1987 Code § 2.25-18)
CHAPTER 5: OFFICIAL AND CORPORATE PROVISIONS
Section
1-5-1: Seal Described
1-5-2: Fiscal Year
1-5-3:    Surplus Property
1-5-1: SEAL DESCRIBED:
The Corporate Seal of the City shall be as follows: a circular disc with the
words “Incorporated May 15, 1923" inscribed in the inner circle and “City of
McHenry, Illinois” inscribed in the outer circle thereof.
(1987 Code § 2-1)
1-5-2: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on May 1 of each year and end on April
30 of the year following.
(1987 Code § 2-2)
1-5-3: SURPLUS PROPERTY:
   A.   When it is no longer necessary or useful to or for the best interests
of the City to retain personal property owned by the City, as determined by the
Chief of Police, in consultation with the City Administrator (collectively,
“authorized agents”), the authorized agents of the City are hereby authorized
and directed to take the following actions: to sell personal property in such
manner as the authorized agents may designate, with or without advertising for
sale; to convert personal property into some other form that is useful to the
City by using the material in the personal property; convey or turn in any of
the personal property as partial payment on a new purchase of any similar
article; donate personal property with a value of less than three hundred
dollars ($300.00) to a certified non-profit organization; or dispose of
property by destruction for items that have no relevant value.
   B.   A disposition log for all surplus property owned by the City will be
maintained by the Deputy Clerk and will consist of information provided by the
authorized agents, including the manner of disposition, date of disposition,
approval authority, all outside parties involved the acquisition of the
property and all sale paperwork associated with the transaction.
(Ord. MC-19-1215, 12-16-2019)
CHAPTER 6: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Section
1-6-1: Mayor
1-6-2: City Council
1-6-3: Meetings
1-6-4: When Resolutions To Be Written
1-6-5: Meeting Attendance By Audio Or Video Conferencing When A Quorum Is
Physically Present
1-6-1: MAYOR:
   A.   Election; Term: The Mayor shall be elected for a four (4) year term and
shall serve until a successor is elected and qualified as is provided by
statute.
   B.   Bond: Before entering upon the duties of the office, the Mayor shall
execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be required by the
Council, conditioned by faithful performance of the duties of the office,
provided the amount of such bond shall not be less than the amount specified by
statute.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   C.   Salary:
      1.   The Mayor shall receive fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) as an
annual salary. The Mayor herein designated as the City’s Liquor Control
Commissioner (reference section 4-2-2 of this Code) shall receive compensation
in that capacity as follows:
One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per year annual flat fee; plus
Two hundred dollar ($200.00) stipend per Liquor License Ordinance violation
hearing held.
      2.   The aforesaid salary, fee and stipend shall be payable to said
Municipal officer who is elected in the 2005 and subsequent Municipal
elections.
(1987 Code § 2-19.1)
   D.   General Administrative Duties: The Mayor shall be the Chief Executive
of the City, shall preside over the meetings of the Council, and shall perform
such duties as may be required of the Mayor by statute or ordinance. The Mayor
shall have supervision over all of the executive officers and employees of the
City, and shall have the power and authority to inspect all books and records
pertaining to City affairs and kept by any officer and employee of the City at
any reasonable time.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   E.   Appointment Of Officers: The Mayor shall appoint, by and with the
advice and consent of the City Council, all officers of the City whose election
or appointment is not otherwise provided for herein. Any vacancies occurring in
an appointed office shall be filled in the same manner. ‘
(1987 Code § 2-21)
   F.   Designation Of Officers’ Duties: Whenever there is a dispute as to the
respective duties or powers of any appointed officer of the City, this dispute
shall be settled by the Mayor after consultation with the City Attorney; and
the Mayor shall have the power to delegate to any appointed officer any duty
which is to be performed when no specific officer has been directed to perform
that duty. ‘
(1987 Code § 2-22)
   G.   Ceremonial Duties: The Mayor shall act for and on behalf of the City on
formal occasions and receptions; but in the Mayor’s absence or inability to
attend any such function, the Council may select any other City officer to so
act.
   H.   Mayor Pro Tem: During a temporary absence or disability of the Mayor,
the City Council shall elect one of its members to act as Mayor pro tem, and
during such absence or disability said person shall possess the powers of the
Mayor, as is provided by statute.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   I.   Acting Mayor: In the event of a vacancy in the Office of Mayor, the
Council may appoint one of its members as acting Mayor to serve until the
vacancy is filled at a regular or special election as provided by law.
(1987 Code § 2-25)
1-6-2: CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Election; Term; General Powers And Duties: The members of the City
Council shall be elected and serve for four (4) year terms. The Council shall
be the legislative division of the City government and shall perform such
duties and have such powers as may be authorized by statute.
(1987 Code § 2-37)
   B.   Compensation: Effective May 1, 2015, each Council member shall be
compensated the sum of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per month, payable
monthly, inclusive of attendance at all regular and special meetings of the
City Council, City Council Committee of the Whole meetings, as well as for
attendance at any committee to which they have been formally appointed.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
1-6-3: MEETINGS:
   A.   Time, Place For Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the Council
shall be held at such date and hour as the Council may, from time to time,
determine. Generally, the meetings will occur in the Council Chambers on the
first and third Mondays of each month. In addition, a regular annual meeting
shall be held in the Council Chambers on the last Monday in April of each year,
or other date scheduled by Council, at which any and all business may be
conducted. If a regular meeting date falls on a legal holiday, the meeting
shall not take place but shall be rescheduled by Council.
(1987 Code § 2-38)
   B.   Adjourned Meetings: Adjourned meetings may be held at such times as the
Council may determine.
(1987 Code § 2-39)
   C.   Special Meetings: Special meetings of the Council may be called by the
Mayor or three (3) Council members; provided, that a written notice of such
meeting shall be delivered to each Council member at least twenty four (24)
hours before the time set for the meeting or mailed to each Council member at
least seventy two (72) hours before the time set for the meeting. Provided,
further, that in case all Council members are present at any special meeting,
then the requirement of notice shall be unnecessary and shall be deemed waived.
Provided, further, that if the call of any special meeting is announced at any
regular or special meeting of the Council, written notice thereof shall be
given in the above manner only to such Council members who are absent from the
meeting at which such call was made.
   D.   Presiding Officer: The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the
Council at all regular or special meetings and at such times as the Council
meets as a Committee of the Whole.
(1987 Code § 2-42)
   E.   Quorum: A majority of the elected members of the Council shall
constitute a quorum thereof, but no ordinance or measure for the expenditure of
money shall be passed except upon the favorable vote of the majority of the
elected members as provided by statute.
(1987 Code § 2-47)
   F.   Order Of Business: The order of business for the Council shall be as
prescribed from time to time by the Council.
(1987 Code § 2-48)
   G.   Council Vote: The vote of the City Council upon any question shall be
taken and entered in the minute book. Every Council member who shall be present
when a question is stated from the Chairperson shall vote thereon unless
precluded from doing so by a conflict of interest, in which case the member
shall request the Clerk to record them as “Not Voting”. Except in the case
where a member has been recorded as “Not Voting” for reasons of conflict of
interest, the failure of a member to vote either “Yea” or “Nay” shall be
interpreted to have the same legal effect as the vote cast by those members of
the majority who did vote “Yea” or “Nay” on the question involved.
   H.   Rescinding Action: No vote or action of the City Council shall be
rescinded at any special meeting unless there is present at such special
meeting as many members of the Council as were present at the meeting when such
vote or action was taken, as provided by statute.
(1987 Code § 2-49)
   I.   Meetings To Be Public: Members of the public are invited and permitted
to speak at any public, open meeting of the City Council and any other
commission, committee, board or other public entity created by or subject to
the City’s ordinances (collectively, "subcommittee"), subject to the following
rules:
(1987 Code § 2-41)
      1.   Individuals wishing to be heard shall be recognized by the Mayor, or
Chairperson of the subcommittee, during the public comment portion of each
meeting which will generally be held as one of the initial items of business on
the agenda but may be moved to a different point on the agenda for that
meeting. Further public comment will not be allowed during specific meeting
agenda items unless allowed by the Mayor or Chairperson of the subcommittee.
      2.   Public comment may be restricted to no more than three (3) minutes
for each individual speaker. The Mayor or Chairperson of the subcommittee may
permit additional comment in his or her discretion taking into account the
number of persons wishing to be heard on a matter and the amount of business
requiring attention.
      3.   Members of the public may be asked to avoid repeating comments that
have already been made, although they may be given the opportunity to indicate
that they agree or disagree with an earlier speaker.
      4.   Members of the public will be required to step forward to the podium
and to identify themselves for the record. Members may be asked but are not
required to provide an address for the record. (1987 Code § 2-41)
      5.   Order and decorum shall be maintained at public meetings. This
includes prohibiting outbursts from the public or other behavior that is
threatening, disorderly or disruptive to the public business. The Mayor or
Chairperson of the subcommittee may eject from a public meeting any person who,
in the sole opinion of the Mayor or Chairperson, disrupts the order and decorum
of the meeting or otherwise violates the rules of this section.
      6.   Public comment shall be restricted to the portions of meetings which
are required to be open to the public under the Open Meetings Act. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to allow public access to or public comment at
closed sessions or any other meeting of public officials which is not required
to be open to the public under the Open Meetings Act.
(1987 Code § 2-41)
   J.   Robert’s Rules Of Order Adopted: Except when in conflict with the
foregoing provisions, Robert’s Rules of Order shall govern the deliberations of
the City Council.
(1987 Code § 2-52)
   K.   Suspension Of Rules: The rules of order as herein set forth may be
suspended at any time by the consent of a majority of members present at any
meeting, except where such suspension shall conflict with the rules of order
prescribed by statute.
(1987 Code § 2-53)
   L.   Records Of Proceedings: The City Clerk shall keep the minutes and
records of the Council proceedings.
(1987 Code § 2-46) (amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; Ord. 21-9, 2-16-2021)
1-6-4: WHEN RESOLUTIONS TO BE WRITTEN:
Any resolution submitted to the City Council shall be reduced to writing before
being voted upon, at the request of any three (3) members of the Council.
(1987 Code § 2-50)
1-6-5: MEETING ATTENDANCE BY AUDIO OR VIDEO CONFERENCING WHEN A QUORUM IS
PHYSICALLY PRESENT:
In addition to holding meetings pursuant to the Open Meetings Act, meetings
held by any board or commission of the City shall be subject to the following
rules:
   A.   Remote Attendance By Individual Members:
      1.   A quorum of the board/commission shall be physically present at the
location of an open or closed meeting.
      2.   Provided a quorum is physically present, a member may be allowed to
attend the meeting by audio or video conferencing.
      3.   Any member who wished to be considered present at a meeting via
audio or video conference may make such a request to the board/commission by
notifying the City Administrator prior to the meeting, unless advance notice is
impractical, that the member cannot physically attend the meeting for one of
the following reasons:
         a.   Personal illness or disability;
         b.   Employment purposes or City business; or
         c.   A family or other emergency.
      4.   An affirmative vote by a majority of the board/commission physically
present may allow a member to attend a meeting as provided herein.
      5.   The Secretary shall record in the minutes of every meeting the
members physically present, absent and present by audio or video conference.
   B.   Remote Attendance Without A Quorum Physically Present In The Event Of A
Disaster Declaration: Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A above, any
open or closed meeting of any City body subject to the requirements of the
Illinois Open Meetings Act (5 ILCS 120) may be conducted by audio or video
conference, without the physical presence of a quorum of the members, so long
as the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act (as may be amended) for
such meetings have been met.
(1987 Code § 2-8; amd. Ord. 21-9, 2-16-2021; Ord. 21-45, 8-30-2021)
CHAPTER 7: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
1-7-1: General Provisions
1-7-2: City Administrator
1-7-3: City Clerk
1-7-4: Deputy Clerk
1-7-5: City Treasurer
1-7-6: City Attorney
1-7-7: Finance Director
1-7-8: Director Of Public Works
1-7-9: City Engineer
1-7-10: Budget Officer
1-7-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Applicability To Future Personnel: Any officer whose office and duties
shall be created subsequent to adoption, passage and promulgation of this Code,
shall be subject to the same rules, regulations, obligations, liabilities and
tenure as are established in this chapter, unless a deviation from the
provisions as are stated herein shall be authorized by the Mayor and City
Council.
(1987 Code § 2-65)
   B.   Term: All officers appointed by the Mayor and City Council listed in
this chapter, and such other officers as may from time to time be appointed by
the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, shall serve for a term
of one year, and such one year term shall coincide with the fiscal year of the
City.
(1987 Code § 2-66)
   C.   Removal From Office: Except where otherwise provided by statute, the
Mayor may remove any officer appointed by the Mayor, on any formal charge,
whenever the Mayor is of the opinion that the interests of the City demand
removal, but the Mayor shall report the reasons for removal to the City Council
at a meeting to be held not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days
after such removal. If the Mayor fails or refuses to report to the City Council
the reasons for the removal, or if the Council by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
all of its members authorized by law to be elected, disapproves of the removal,
the officer thereupon shall be restored to the office from which they were
removed. Upon restoration, the officer shall give a new bond and take a new
oath of office. No officer shall be removed a second time for the same offense.
   D.   Resignation; Vacancies: Any officer appointed hereunder may resign from
their office; provided, that, they shall continue in office until their
successor has been chosen and is qualified. If there is a failure to appoint a
City officer, or a person appointed fails to qualify, the person filling the
office shall continue in office until a successor has been chosen and is
qualified. If an officer ceases to perform the duties of, or to hold his office
by, reason of death, permanent physical or mental disability, conviction of a
disqualifying crime or dismissal from or abandonment of office, the Mayor may
appoint a temporary successor to the office.
   E.   Oath Required: Every officer of the City shall, before entering upon
their duties, make such oaths or affirmations as shall be prescribed by the law
of the State of Illinois, at the time of their taking such office.
   F.   Bond Required: Every officer and employee shall, if required by the
Council, upon entering upon the duties of their office, give a bond in such
amount as may be determined by the Council and with such sureties as it may
approve, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of their
office or position. The bond premium for all employees and City officials shall
be paid by the City.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; amd. 2019 Code)
   G.   Work Tours And Overtime Provisions For Law Enforcement Personnel:
Pursuant to the authority of the Fair Labor Standards Act and regulations of
the United States Department of Labor, there is hereby established, effective
May 1, 1985, a twenty eight (28) consecutive day work period with regard to
overtime compensation of law enforcement personnel of the City (not covered by
this term are dispatchers, community service officers, health inspectors,
clerical employees, etc.); overtime compensation will be only paid for those
hours worked by such law enforcement personnel in excess of one hundred seventy
one (171) hours during any twenty eight (28) day work period.
(1987 Code § 2-71)
   H.   Duty To Turn Over Monies Received: Every officer or employee shall at
least once each day turn over all monies received by them in their official
capacity to the Finance Director with statements showing the source from which
the same was received.
   I.   Availability Of Records For Inspection: All records kept by any officer
of the City in the course of their duty shall be open to inspection by the
Mayor or any member of the Council at all reasonable times, whether or not such
records are required to be kept by statute or ordinance.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
1-7-2: CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the Office of City
Administrator, an executive office of the City, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(1987 Code § 2-133)
   B.   Powers, Duties And Responsibilities:
      1.   Chief Administrative Official: The City Administrator is the chief
administrative official of the Municipal government and accountable for the
overall planning, organizing, assembling resources, supervising and control
activities necessary to implement the policies and programs established by the
City Council. The City Administrator shall supervise the department heads on a
daily basis and coordinate the activities of City departments, advisory boards
and other public and private agencies. The City Administrator is accountable
directly to the Mayor and City Council for implementing the policies, programs
and budgets as enacted by the City Council.
      2.   Specific Duties And Responsibilities: Subject to the foregoing, the
City Administrator has the following duties and responsibilities:
         a.   Attend all City Council and Council committee meetings.
         b.   Develop policies and procedures necessary for the operation of
the City and present them to the Mayor and City Council for approval. Provide
the City Council with adequate information to help it reach sound decisions and
establish policies.
         c.   Review all City services, assess the City’s needs and provide on
a regularly scheduled basis, a report of the current needs and recommendations
to the Mayor and City Council.
         d.   Management of the department heads in their daily assignments and
duties. Recommend to the Mayor and City Council the creating, combining or
consolidation of offices, positions and departments, as needed.
         e.   Preparation of the annual budget in conjunction with the Finance
Committee and submit to City Council for approval, and responsibility for
compliance with all statutes and ordinances pertaining to finances,
appropriations and levies.
         f.   Establish and coordinate a system of purchasing within the
approved budgets, policies and procedures established by the City Council.
         g.   Evaluate all department heads and conduct performance reviews
with the Mayor, and responsibility for all personnel matters and employee
benefits, including recommendations for hiring, promotions, demotions,
discipline and suspensions of all employees pursuant to the personnel policy.
         h.   Participate with City Council in the development and
establishment of short and long range goals and objectives.
         i.   Report regularly to the City Council about progress toward
organizational objectives, financial status of the organization, and other
issues of concern to the City Council.
         j.   Such other and further duties and assignments as may be specified
from time to time by the Mayor and City Council.
(1987 Code § 2-134)
1-7-3: CITY CLERK:
   A.   Election; Term: The City Clerk shall be elected and serve for a four
(4) year term and until a successor is appointed and qualified as provided by
statute.
   B.   Bond Required: Before entering upon the duties of the City Clerk, the
City Clerk shall execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be
required by the City Council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the
Clerk’s duties; provided, that such bond shall be in an amount not less than
ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00).
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   C.   Salary: The City Clerk shall receive four hundred dollars ($400.00) per
month as salary, plus seventy five dollars ($75.00) per meeting attended.
(1987 Code § 2-87.1; amd. 2019 Code)
   D.   Duties:
      1.   City Seal; Signature; Attest: The City Clerk shall be the keeper of
the City Seal and shall affix its impression on documents whenever required,
and shall sign and attest all contracts of the City, licenses, permits and such
other documents as shall be required by this formality and for which no
provisions are made in this Code for the signature of approval of others in
specific instances.
      2.   Other Required Duties: The City Clerk shall perform such other
duties as shall be required by the Council.
      3.   Recordkeeping: The City Clerk shall be responsible for recording,
filing and safekeeping as required of all proceedings of the Council.
      4.   Ordinance Recording: The City Clerk shall record in full, uniformly
and permanently, all ordinances and shall authenticate same.
      5.   Publications, Notices: The City Clerk shall publish all adopted
ordinances and resolutions as required by the Statutes of the State of
Illinois, and all legal notices as shall be required by the statutes or
ordinances.
      6.   Election Records: The City Clerk shall keep and maintain all
election records and have custody of all property used in connection with the
elections, as required by law.
      7.   Vital Statistics: The City Clerk shall prepare, attest and keep
reports on the vital statistics of the City.
      8.   Expiring Terms Of Office: The City Clerk shall notify the appointive
authority and the City Council of the pending expiration of a term of office of
a member of any board or commission or of any employee and said notices are to
be given at least thirty (30) days before such expiration.
(1987 Code § 2-88)
   E.   Duty To Turn Over Money Collected; Accounts: The City Clerk shall turn
over all money received on behalf of the City, to the Finance Director promptly
upon receipt of the same, and with such money the Clerk shall give a statement
as to the source thereof. Further, the Clerk shall keep complete accounts
showing all monies received by, the source and disposition thereof, and such
other accounts as may by statute or ordinance be required.
   F.   Index Records; Access: The City Clerk shall keep and maintain a proper
index to all documents or records kept by the Clerk and shall allow ready
access to such documents or records during regular business hours, to any
qualified person.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   G.   Additional Duties: In addition to the duties herein provided, the City
Clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by
statute or ordinance.
(1987 Code § 2-92)
1-7-4: DEPUTY CLERK:
The City Council may appoint one Deputy Clerk from among the existing City
staff for such term as the City Council may, from time to time, determine;
provided, however, that no compensation shall be paid to the person filling the
position of Deputy Clerk in excess of the compensation that is paid to such
person for the staff position for which such person was hired. The Deputy Clerk
shall:
(Ord. 18-1162, 2-5-2018; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   A.   Execute Documents; Seal: Execute all documents required by law to be
executed by the City Clerk and may affix the seal of the Clerk wherever
required. In signing any document, the Deputy Clerk shall sign the name of the
Clerk followed with the word “By” and the Deputy Clerk’s own name and the words
“Deputy Clerk”.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The powers and duties of the Deputy Clerk shall be
exercised only: 1) in the absence of the Clerk from the place where the Clerk’s
Office is maintained; 2) when written direction has been given by the Clerk to
the Deputy Clerk to exercise a power; 3) the Corporate Authorities have
determined by resolution that the Clerk is temporarily or permanently
incapacitated to perform that function; or 4) there exists a vacancy in the
Office of the City Clerk.
   C.   Authority Of Signature: When the Deputy Clerk’s signature is duly
authorized as provided in this section and is affixed by the Deputy in the
manner prescribed in this section on any document (including, but not limited
to, contracts, bonds or other obligations of the City), the document shall have
the same effect as if the document had been signed by the Clerk in person.
(Ord. 18-1162, 2-5-2018)
1-7-5: CITY TREASURER:
   A.   Creation Of Office; Appointment: There is hereby created the Office of
the City Treasurer, an executive office of the City, who shall be appointed by
the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council.
(1987 Code § 2-99)
   B.   Bond Required: The City Treasurer shall give bond in such sum as may be
required by the City Council, with sureties to be approved by the City Council.
This bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the Treasurer
of the Treasurer’s Office and to indemnify the City of any loss due to neglect
of duty or wrongful act on the part of the Treasurer; provided, that such bond
shall be not less than three (3) times the latest Federal census figure.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; amd. 2019 Code)
   C.   Salary: The salary for the City Treasurer shall be determined from time
to time by the Mayor and City Council.
(1987 Code § 2-100.1)
   D.   General Duties:
      1.   The City Treasurer shall be under the supervision of the City
Administrator and perform such duties as may be prescribed by statute or
ordinance and shall receive money paid in to the City, either from the person
paying it or from such other officer as may receive it on behalf of the City,
in addition to such monies as may be turned over to the City Treasurer directly
by County, State or Federal agencies as by statute provided.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      2.   The City Treasurer shall pay out money only on vouchers or purchase
orders properly signed by the City Administrator and/or the Mayor as
appropriate.
(1987 Code § 2-101)
   E.   Deposit Of Funds; Intermingling: The City Treasurer shall deposit the
City funds in such depositories as may be selected from time to time as
provided by law, and shall keep City money separate and distinct from their
own, shall not intermingle City funds with their own money or make private or
personal use thereof.
   F.   Records, Monthly Reports: The City Treasurer shall keep records showing
all monies received by them, the source from which it was received, and the
purpose for which it was paid out, and shall keep a record showing at all times
the financial status of the City. The City Treasurer shall keep such books and
accounts as may be required by the City Council and in a manner as required by
the City Council, and shall make monthly reports showing the state of finance,
together with records substantiating same.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   G.   Annual Report: The City Treasurer shall make an annual report to the
Council prior to November 1, which report shall show the total amount of all
receipts and expenditures of the City and shall reflect all transactions of the
Treasurer during the preceding year.
(1987 Code § 2-104; amd. 2019 Code)
   H.   Register Of Payments: The City Treasurer shall keep a register of all
warrants, bonds or orders filed or paid to the City Treasurer, and all vouchers
and purchase orders, as is required by statute.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
1-7-6: CITY ATTORNEY:
   A.   Annual Retention: The City Attorney shall not hold an office of the
City but shall be subject to annual retention by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
(1987 Code § 2-112)
   B.   Duty To Give Advice: The City Attorney shall be the legal advisor to
the City, and shall render advice on all legal questions affecting the City,
whenever requested to do so by any City official. Such opinion shall be reduced
to writing upon the request of the Mayor or the Council.
(1987 Code § 2-114)
   C.   Drafting Of Documents: It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to
draft, supervise or approve the phraseology of any contract, document or
instrument to which the City may be a party; upon request of the Council, the
City Attorney shall draft ordinances covering any subject within the power of
the City.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
1-7-7: FINANCE DIRECTOR:
   A.   Finance Department Established: There is hereby established the Finance
Department for the City, consisting of the Finance Director and such other
employees as may be provided for by the City Council.
(1987 Code § 2-121)
   B.   Created: There is hereby created the position of Finance Director, who
shall be the head of the Finance Department and who shall have the management,
control and supervision over all employees assigned to the Finance Department,
subject to the supervision of the City Administrator. The Finance Director
shall have full authority to develop policies and procedures for the Finance
Department to ensure adequate internal controls are in place and in compliance
with applicable laws and City ordinances. The Finance Director shall be an at-
will employee, hired by the City Administrator and be under the direct
supervision of the City Administrator.
(1987 Code § 2-122)
   C.   Duties And Functions, Generally: The Finance Director shall perform all
such duties as enumerated in this Code and other City ordinances, and such
other duties as may be assigned or required by the City Council and the City
Administrator from time to time. In addition, the Finance Director shall:
      1.   Be charged with preparing and safely keeping all financial records
of the City.
      2.   Subject to the supervision of the City Administrator, shall be the
purchasing agent of the City and shall make or cause to be made all purchases
of materials, supplies or equipment for the City in the manner provided by law,
ordinance and rules and regulations of the City. The Finance Director shall
develop appropriate purchasing procedures for the proper functioning of the
purchasing system.
      3.   Assist the City Treasurer in the receipt, collection, accounting,
disbursement and financial reporting of City revenues and all funds required to
be in the custody of the City Treasury, and shall exercise general supervision
over all officers and employees of the City charged in any manner with the
receipt, collection, accounting, disbursement and financial reporting of City
revenues and all funds required to be in the custody of the City Treasury.
      4.   Keep accounts showing at all times the fiscal condition of the City,
including the current and anticipated revenues and expenses of all Municipal
funds and accounts.
      5.   Prepare and keep for the City Treasurer all records required by law
to be kept by the City Treasurer and shall prepare for signature and
publication the annual City Treasurer’s report, and any other report required
by law.
      6.   Prepare each month warrants of the City Treasurer for the payment of
all sums due from the City, listing each invoice and the account number out of
which it is payable; which warrant, when properly approved by the City Council,
shall authorize the issuance of a voucher or check as provided by law or
ordinance for the payment of each item. Approval of such list of invoices to be
paid by the City Council on a roll call vote shall constitute the City
Council’s approval of the payment of all expenses listed thereon; provided,
that the City Council may, in a motion to approve payment, except specific
invoices from such approval, in which case such invoices shall not be paid.
      7.   Receive and collect all license fees, permit fees, charges for
Municipal utility services or special services rendered by the City, sums due
the City on any contracts, and all other sums due the City, other than those
which are by law paid directly to the City Treasurer, and to provide the
appropriate receipts and accounting therefor.
      8.   Keep the City Council and the City Administrator informed as to all
sums due on taxes and all other revenues to which the City is entitled.
      9.   In cooperation with other City department heads, prepare preliminary
budget drafts for each fiscal year and submit them to the City Administrator
and the City Council for review and further action.
(1987 Code § 2-123)
      10.   Prepare the annual Budget and Tax Levy Ordinance for the City.
(Ord. 19-1192, 5-6-2019)
      11.   Supervise the annual audit of all City funds and fully cooperate
with the City Auditors so designated as prescribed by law and City ordinances.
      12.   Collect all special assessments due and payable to the City and
keep proper and appropriate books and records wherein the records of such
special assessments may be transcribed for preservation and reference.
      13.   Make such other and further reports concerning the office and
business transactions as may be required by the City Council from time to time.
(1987 Code § 2-123)
   D.   Attendance At Council Meetings; Reports: The Finance Director shall
attend all regular meetings of, and shall report to, the City Council at each
meeting, in relation to the work performed as Director of Finance.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   E.   Bond Required: Before entering the duties of the office, the Finance
Director shall execute a bond in such amount and with such sureties as may be
required by law and by ordinance, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the duties of the office, and to indemnify the City against any loss due to any
neglect of duty or wrongful act on the part of the Finance Director.
(1987 Code § 2-125; amd. 2019 Code)
1-7-8: DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS:
   A.   Office Created; Appointment: There is hereby created the Office of
Director of Public Works, an executive office of the City, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council.
(1987 Code § 2-129)
   B.   Supervision Of Sewer, Water Systems:
      1.   The Director of Public Works shall be the operating head of the
sewer system and waterworks and water distribution system of the City, and
shall be responsible for the efficient management thereof. The Director of
Public Works shall have the care and custody of the sewer plants and all
mechanical lifts and sewage removal pipes and tiles connected therewith, and
shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of all the component units of
the sewage system.
      2.   The Director of Public Works shall be the head of the Water
Department and shall have in their care, custody and control, the water towers,
pumping stations, hydrants, and all other and component units of the water
pumping and distribution system of the City, and shall be responsible for the
care and maintenance of all such components of the system.
   C.   Authority Over Streets, Sidewalks, Storm Sewers, Public Property: The
Director of Public Works shall be charged with the duty of superintending the
care of the streets generally, to assist the City Engineer in laying out,
widening and repair of streets, and to keep all streets and alleys clean and
free from obstructions; the Public Works Director shall be charged with the
duty of supervising the maintenance and repair of all storm sewer installations
and to assist in the laying out of new storm sewer installations; it shall be
the Director’s duty to maintain and repair all sidewalks in the City and to
inspect the same regularly as to condition; the Director shall supervise
installation of new sidewalks and shall be responsible for securing engineering
data relative to all such new installations; the Director shall be charged with
the duty of maintaining all public property of the City and of making such
repairs to said property as shall be directed from time to time by the Mayor
and the City Council; the Director shall be the administrative official who is
charged with the enforcement of the Subdivision Control and Development
Ordinance.
   D.   Attendance At Council Meetings; Reports: The Director of Public Works
shall attend all regular meetings of, and shall report to, the City Council at
each meeting, in relation to the work performed as Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
1-7-9: CITY ENGINEER:
The City Engineer shall not hold an office of the City, but shall be subject to
annual retention by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(1987 Code § 2-140)
1-7-10: BUDGET OFFICER:
   A.   Appointment And Term: A Budget Officer shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council and shall serve at the pleasure
of the Mayor. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may
remove the appointed Budget Officer from the appointed office, for any reason
or no reason at all. The Budget Officer may concurrently hold another
nonconflicting appointed Municipal office.
   B.   Bond And Oath:
      1.   Bond: Before entering upon the duties of office, the Budget Officer
shall furnish a surety bond in the amount to be approved by the Mayor and
Council members. The bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of
the Budget Officer’s duties. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the City.
The bond shall be filed with the City Clerk.
      2.   Oath: Before entering upon the duties of office, the Budget Officer
shall take and subscribe the oath required by the Illinois Constitution. The
subscribed oath shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk.
   C.   Powers And Duties: The Budget Officer shall have the following powers
and duties:
      1.   Permit, encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting accounting, and other fiscal management
procedures in all City departments, commissions and boards;
      2.   Compile an annual budget in accordance with State law;
      3.   Examine all books and records of all City departments, commissions
and boards which relate to the finances of the City and any of its departments,
commissions or boards;
      4.   Obtain such additional information from the City, together with its
Municipal departments, commissions and boards as may be useful to the Budget
Officer for purposes of compiling departments, commissions and boards in the
form required by the Budget Officer. Any department, commission or board which
refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the Budget
Officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any subsequent budget
for the City until such department, commission or board shall comply in full
with the request of the Budget Officer;
      5.   Transfer funds within any fund or any department. The Corporate
Authorities, by vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members then holding office,
may revise the budget, and/or transfer monies within a fund or from one fund to
another. No revision of the annual budget shall be made increasing the budget
in the event monies are not available to do so;
      6.   Establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no
expenditures are made by the City, its departments, commissions or boards,
except as authorized by the budget;
      7.   Present the annual budget to the Corporate Authorities with
sufficient time to allow them to consider and approve the budget prior to the
fiscal year to which it applies, as required by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes
section 5/8-2-9.4;
      8.   Perform such other powers and duties as may be provided from time to
time by law.
   D.   Vacancy: Subject to the Mayor’s authority to make temporary
appointments, if the Budget Officer is unable to serve, has been removed from
office, or if there is a vacancy in the Office of Budget Officer for any
reason, then the acting Director of Finance shall serve as the acting Budget
Officer until a new Budget Officer has been designated by the Mayor and
approved by the City Council.
   E.   Compensation: Any compensation to be paid to the Budget Officer,
including any temporary Budget Officer, shall be as determined from time to
time by the City Council. This shall only relate to the compensation payable to
the Budget Officer in his or her capacity as Budget Officer, and shall not
affect other compensation which the Budget Officer may receive by virtue of
holding another position with the City or performing other tasks for the City.
   F.   Illinois Municipal Code Provisions Adopted: The City hereby
incorporates into this section the terms and provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes sections 5/8-2-9.1 through 5/8-2-9.10, as now in effect and as from
time to time hereafter amended, providing for the adoption of an annual
Municipal budget in lieu of passage of an annual Appropriation Ordinance. To
the extent that any amendments of those statutes may conflict with the
provisions of this section, the explicit provisions of this section take
precedence.
   G.   Contingency Fund: The annual budget may contain money set aside for
contingency purposes not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the total budget,
unless approved by vote of the City Council, which monies may be expended for
contingencies upon a majority vote of the City Council.
   H.   Public Inspection, Notice And Hearing: The Corporate Authorities shall
make the proposed budget available to public inspection for at least ten (10)
days prior to the passage of the annual budget. Not less than one week after
this publication, and prior to final action on the budget, the Corporate
Authorities shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget, after which the
proposed budget may be revised and passed without further public involvement.
Notice of this hearing shall be published in the Northwest Herald at least
seven (7) days in advance.
(Ord. 19-1192, 5-6-2019)
CHAPTER 8: ELECTIONS
Section
1-8-1: Election Procedure, Time
1-8-2: Calling Special Elections
1-8-3: Wards
1-8-4: Term Of Elected Officials
1-8-1: ELECTION PROCEDURE, TIME:
Elections for Municipal offices shall be held as is provided by statute and at
the times prescribed by statute.
(1987 Code § 2-3)
1-8-2: CALLING SPECIAL ELECTIONS:
Special elections shall be called when deemed necessary by the Council, as
provided by statute.
(1987 Code § 2-4)
1-8-3: WARDS:
The wards of the City shall be as described by ordinance, and nothing contained
in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal
or otherwise affect any ordinance prescribing ward boundaries.
(1987 Code § 2-5)
1-8-4: TERM OF ELECTED OFFICIALS:
The term of elected City officials shall begin at the first regular meeting
held after the receipt of election results from the local election authority.
(1987 Code § 2-7)
CHAPTER 9: CODE OF ETHICS
Section
1-9-1: Declaration Of Policy
1-9-2: Scope Of Code Of Ethics
1-9-3: Definitions
1-9-4: Prohibited Political Activities
1-9-5: Gift Ban
1-9-6: Ethics Advisor
1-9-7: Ethics Commission
1-9-8: Distribution To Officers And Employees
1-9-9: Penalties
1-9-1: DECLARATION OF POLICY:
   A.   Scope: The proper operation of democratic government requires that
officers and employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people;
that government decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the
governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and
that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In
recognition of these goals, a Code of Ethics for all City officers and
employees is adopted. The purpose of this chapter is to establish guidelines
for ethical standards of conduct for all City officers and employees by setting
forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the
City and by directing disclosure by such officers and employees of private
financial or other interests in matters affecting City life.
   B.   Existing Provisions: This chapter does not repeal or otherwise amend or
modify existing provisions of this Code or any other departmental rule or
regulation which regulates the conduct of City officials and employees. To the
extent that this Code or any departmental rule or regulation is less
restrictive or conflicts with this chapter, then the provisions of this chapter
shall prevail, but to the extent those provisions are more restrictive, they
shall prevail.
(1987 Code § 2-55)
1-9-2: SCOPE OF CODE OF ETHICS:
The requirements set forth herein shall constitute a Code of Ethics
establishing reasonable standards and guidelines for the ethical conduct of
officers and employees of the City.
(1987 Code § 2-55)
1-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election or appointment of any individual
to any Federal, State or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination or election of Presidential or Vice-
Presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative or administrative action;
b) relating to collective bargaining; or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person’s official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in 10 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/9-1.3
of the Election Code.
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in 5
Illinois Compiled Statutes section 315/3 of the Illinois Public Labor Relations
Act.
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of their employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does not
include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time, compensatory
time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence. With respect
to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, COMPENSATED TIME includes
any period of time when the officer or employee is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing their official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of their employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in 10 Illinois
Compiled Statutes section 5/9-1.4 of the Election Code.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the City of McHenry, whether on a full time or
part time basis, or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how
the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The City of McHenry.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value, including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
INTER-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT: Any gift given to an officer or employee of the City
from a member or employee of the legislative branch of the government of the
State of Illinois, a judge or employee of the judicial branch of the government
of the State of Illinois, an officer or employee of the executive branch of the
government of the State of Illinois, an officer or employee of a unit of local
government, home rule unit, or school district, or an officer or employee of
any other governmental entity.
INTRA-GOVERNMENTAL GIFT: Any gift given to an officer or employee of the City
from another officer or employee of the City.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment; b) service credit towards pension benefits; and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in their official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office, or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative or administrative action; b) relating to collective bargaining; or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person’s official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the State Board of Elections or a County Clerk under 10
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-3 of the Election Code, but only with regard to
those activities that require filing with the State Board of Elections or a
County Clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
   A.   Preparing for, organizing or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration or other political event.
   B.   Soliciting contributions, including but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting or other political event.
   C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   D.   Planning, conducting or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective officer or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing or filing
any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
   I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or against
any referendum question.
   N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party
convention.
   O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   A.   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer; or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   B.   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer; or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   C.   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer; or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
RELATIVE: Those people related to the officer or employee as father, mother,
son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt, great uncle, first
cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather, grandmother, grandson,
granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother, stepson, stepdaughter,
stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and including the father,
mother, grandfather or grandmother of the officer’s or employee’s spouse and
the officer’s or employee’s fiancé or fiancee.
(1987 Code § 2-55; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
1-9-4: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   During Compensated Time: No officer or employee shall intentionally
perform any prohibited political activity during any compensated time, as
defined in section
1-9-3 of this chapter. No officer or employee shall intentionally use any
property or resources of the City in connection with any prohibited political
activity.
   B.   Intentionally Requiring Performance: At no time shall any officer or
employee intentionally require any other officer or employee to perform any
prohibited political activity: 1) as part of that officer or employee’s duties;
2) as a condition of employment; or 3) during any compensated time off (such as
holidays, vacation or personal time off).
(1987 Code § 2-55)
   C.   Required Participation; Award: No officer or employee shall be required
at any time to participate in any prohibited political activity in
consideration for that officer or employee being awarded additional
compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a salary adjustment, bonus,
compensatory time off, continued employment or otherwise, nor shall any officer
or employee be awarded additional compensation or any benefit in consideration
for their participation in any prohibited political activity.
   D.   Exception For Permissible Activities: Nothing in this section prohibits
activities that are permissible for an officer or employee to engage in as part
of their official duties, or activities that are undertaken by an officer or
employee on a voluntary basis which are not prohibited by this section.
   E.   Denial Of Employment Prohibited: No person either: 1) in a position
that is subject to recognized merit principles of public employment; or 2) in a
position the salary for which is paid in whole or in part by Federal funds and
that is subject to the Federal Standards for a Merit System of Personnel
Administration applicable to grant-in-aid programs, shall be denied or deprived
of employment or tenure solely because they are a member or an officer of a
political committee, of a political party or of a political organization or
club.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
1-9-5: GIFT BAN:
   A.   Prohibitions: Except as permitted by this section, no officer or
employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer
or employee (collectively referred to herein as “recipients”), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any prohibited source, as defined
in section
1-9-3 of this chapter, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No
prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this
section.
   B.   Exceptions: Subsection A of this section is not applicable to the
following:
      1.   Opportunities, benefits and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
(1987 Code § 2-55)
      2.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or their spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      3.   Any: a) contribution that is lawfully made under the Election Code;
or b) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
      4.   Educational materials and missions.
      5.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
      6.   A gift from a relative.
(1987 Code § 2-55)
      7.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship, unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or their spouse or immediate family member and not
because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is provided
on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: a) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; b)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and c) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      8.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided, that the food or
refreshments are: a) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared; or b) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
      9.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
      10.   Intra-governmental and inter-governmental gifts.
      11.   Bequests, inheritances and other transfers at death.
      12.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any
calendar year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this subsection is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other.
(1987 Code § 2-55)
   C.   Disposition Of Gifts: An officer or employee, their spouse or an
immediate family member living with the officer or employee, does not violate
this section if the recipient promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift
from a prohibited source to its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to
its value to an appropriate charity that is exempt from income taxation under
section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as now or hereafter amended,
renumbered or succeeded.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
1-9-6: ETHICS ADVISOR:
   A.   Designated: The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council,
shall designate an Ethics Advisor for the City.
   B.   Provide Guidance: The Ethics Advisor shall provide guidance to the
officers and employees of the City concerning the interpretation of and
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and State Ethics Laws. The
Ethics Advisor shall perform such other duties as may be delegated by the City
Council.
(1987 Code § 2-55)
1-9-7: ETHICS COMMISSION:
   A.   Created: There is hereby created a commission to be known as the Ethics
Commission of the City of McHenry. The commission shall be comprised of three
(3) members appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council. No person shall be appointed as a member of the commission who is
related, either by blood or marriage up to the degree of first cousin, to any
elected officer of the City.
   B.   Terms: At the first meeting of the commission, the initial appointees
shall draw lots to determine their initial terms. Two (2) Commissioners shall
serve two (2) year terms, and the third Commissioner shall serve a one year
term. Thereafter, all Commissioners shall be appointed to two (2) year terms.
Commissioners may be reappointed to serve subsequent terms.
   C.   Officers; Meetings: At the first meeting of the commission, the
Commissioners shall choose a Chairperson from their number. Meetings shall be
held at the call of the Chairperson or any two (2) Commissioners. A quorum
shall consist of two (2) Commissioners, and official action by the commission
shall require the affirmative vote of two (2) members.
   D.   Removal; Vacancies: The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, may remove a Commissioner in case of incompetency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office after service on the Commissioner by certified mail,
return receipt requested, of a copy of the written charges against the
Commissioner and after providing an opportunity to be heard in person or by
counsel upon not less than ten (10) days’ notice. Vacancies shall be filled in
the same manner as original appointments.
   E.   Powers And Duties: The commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
      1.   To promulgate procedures and rules governing the performance of its
duties and the exercise of its powers.
      2.   Upon receipt of a signed, notarized, written complaint, to
investigate, conduct hearings and deliberations, issue recommendations for
disciplinary actions, impose fines in accordance with this section and refer
violations of sections 1-9-4 and 1-9-5 of this chapter to the City Attorney for
prosecution. The commission shall, however, act only upon the receipt of a
written complaint alleging a violation of this section and not upon its own
prerogative.
      3.   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   To compel the attendance of witnesses and to compel the production
of books and papers pertinent to an investigation. It is the obligation of all
officers and employees of the City to cooperate with the commission during the
course of its investigations. Failure or refusal to cooperate with requests by
the commission shall constitute grounds for discipline or discharge.
      5.   To prepare and publish such manuals and guides as the commission
deems appropriate to facilitate compliance with the terms of this section.
      6.   The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters
clearly within the purview of this chapter.
   F.   Complaints:
      1.   Complaints alleging a violation of this chapter shall be filed with
the Ethics Commission.
(1987 Code § 2-55)
      2.   Within three (3) business days after the receipt of a complaint, the
commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice to
the respondent that a complaint has been filed against them and a copy of the
complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within three (3) business days after receipt by the commission. The notices to
the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time and
place of the meeting to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to
establish whether probable cause exists to proceed.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      3.   Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours’ public notice, the
commission shall meet to review the sufficiency of the complaint and, if the
complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of this section, to
determine whether there is probable cause, based on the evidence presented by
the complainant, to proceed. The meeting may be closed to the public to the
extent authorized by the Open Meetings Act. Within seven (7) business days
after receiving the complaint, the commission shall issue notice to the
complainant and the respondent of the commission’s ruling on the sufficiency of
the complaint and, if necessary, on probable cause to proceed. If the complaint
is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or if there is no determination
of probable cause, then the commission shall send by certified mail, return
receipt requested, a notice to the parties of the decision to dismiss the
complaint, and that notice shall be made public.
      4.   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of
section 1-9-5 of this chapter and there is a determination of probable cause,
then the commission’s notice to the parties shall include a hearing date
scheduled within four (4) weeks after the complaint’s receipt. Alternatively,
the commission may elect to notify in writing the City Attorney to prosecute
such actions and request that the complaint be adjudicated judicially and the
commission’s notice to the parties shall indicate this fact.
      5.   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation of
section 1-9-4 of this chapter, then the commission shall notify in writing the
City Attorney to prosecute such actions and shall transmit to the City Attorney
the complaint and all additional documents in the custody of the commission
concerning the alleged violation. The commission’s notice to the parties shall
indicate these facts.
      6.   If the commission elects to hear a case brought under section 1-9-
5 of this chapter, on the scheduled date and upon at least forty eight (48)
hours’ public notice of the meeting, the commission shall conduct a hearing on
the complaint and shall allow both parties the opportunity to present testimony
and evidence. The hearing may be closed to the public only if authorized by the
Open Meetings Act.
      7.   Within thirty (30) days after the date the hearing or any recessed
hearing of a case brought under section 1-9-5 of this chapter is concluded, the
commission shall either: a) dismiss the complaint; or b) issue a recommendation
for discipline to the alleged violator and to the City Administrator or other
officer having authority to discipline the officer or employee, or impose a
fine upon the violator, or both. The particular findings in the case, any
recommendation for discipline, and any fine imposed shall be a matter of public
information.
      8.   If the hearing on a case brought under section 1-9-5 of this chapter
was closed to the public, the respondent may file a written demand for a public
hearing on the complaint within seven (7) business days after the issuance of
the recommendation for discipline or imposition of a fine, or both. The filing
of the demand shall stay the enforcement of the recommendation or fine. Within
fourteen (14) days after receiving the demand, the commission shall conduct a
public hearing on the complaint upon at least forty eight (48) hours’ public
notice of the hearing and allow both parties the opportunity to present
testimony and evidence. Within seven (7) days thereafter, the commission shall
publicly issue a final recommendation to the alleged violator and to the City
Administrator or other officer having authority to discipline the officer or
employee or impose a fine upon the violator, or both.
      9.   If a complaint is filed during the sixty (60) days preceding the
date of any election at which the respondent is a candidate, the commission
shall render its decision as required under subsection F7 of this section
within seven (7) days after the complaint is filed, and during the seven (7)
days preceding that election, the commission shall render such decision before
the date of that election, if possible.
      10.   A complaint alleging the violation of this chapter must be filed
within one year after the alleged violation.
(1987 Code § 2-55)
      11.   In the event a member of the commission is the subject of an
alleged violation of this section, such commissioner shall immediately recuse
themselves from the investigation of such alleged violation, and shall take no
part in the final action of the commission regarding such alleged violation. A
substitute commissioner shall be appointed pursuant to the terms of subsection
1-9-7A of this chapter for purposes relating to this matter only.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
1-9-8: DISTRIBUTION TO OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES:
The City Administrator shall cause a copy of this chapter to be distributed to
every officer and employee of the City within thirty (30) days after enactment
of this chapter. Each officer and employee elected, appointed or engaged
hereafter shall be furnished a copy before entering upon the duties of their
office or employment.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
1-9-9: PENALTIES:
   A.   Prohibited Political Activities Violation: A person who intentionally
violates any provision of section
1-9-4 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution, other than a penitentiary, for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   B.   Gift Ban Violation: A person who intentionally violates any provision
of section
1-9-5 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
   C.   Administrative Fine: The commission may levy an administrative fine of
up to five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) against any person who violates this
chapter or who intentionally makes a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.
   D.   False Allegations: In addition to any administrative fines imposed
pursuant to subsection C of this section, any person who intentionally makes a
false report alleging a violation of any provision of this chapter to the
Ethics Commission, the State’s Attorney or any other law enforcement official
may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   E.   Criminal Offense: A violation of section
1-9-4 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by the City
Attorney by filing in the Circuit Court an information, or sworn complaint,
charging such offense. The prosecution shall be under and conform to the rules
of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt
of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
   F.   Quasi-Criminal Offense: A violation of section
1-9-5 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a quasi- criminal offense by an
attorney for the City, or the Ethics Commission, through the designated
administrative procedure.
   G.   Discipline, Discharge: In addition to any other penalty that may be
applicable, whether criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally
violates any provision of this section is subject to discipline or discharge.
(1987 Code § 2-55)
CHAPTER 10: REIMBURSEMENT FOR COSTS OR DAMAGES
INCURRED BY CITY OFFICERS, OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
1-10-1: Definitions
1-10-2: Reimbursement, Exceptions And Procedures
1-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be given these
definitions:
EMPLOYEE: A present or former officer, member of a board, commission or
committee, agent, volunteer, servant or employee, whether or not compensated,
but does not include an independent contractor.
ENACTMENT: A constitutional provision, statute, ordinance or regulation.
INJURY: Death, injury to a person, or damage to or loss of property. It
includes any other injury that a person may suffer to his person, reputation,
character or estate which does not result from circumstances in which a
privilege is otherwise conferred by law and which is of such a nature that it
would be actionable if inflicted by a private person. INJURY includes any
injury alleged in a civil action, whether based upon the Constitution of the
United States or the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the statutes or
common law of Illinois or of the United States.
LAW: Not only enactments but also the case law applicable within this State as
determined and declared from time to time by the courts of review of this State
and of the United States.
REGULATION: A rule, regulation, order or standard, having the force of law,
adopted by an employee or agency of the United States, of the State of
Illinois, or of a local public entity pursuant to authority vested by
constitution, statute or ordinance in such employee or agency to implement,
interpret, or make specific the law enforced or administered by the employee or
agency.
STATUTE: An act adopted by the General Assembly of this State or by the
Congress of the United States.
WILLFUL AND WANTON CONDUCT: A course of action which shows an actual or
deliberate intention to cause harm or which, if not intentional, shows an utter
indifference to or conscious disregard for the safety of others or their
property. This definition shall apply in any case where a “willful and wanton”
exception is incorporated into any defense or reimbursement under this chapter.
(Ord. 20-7, 2-3-2020)
1-10-2: REIMBURSEMENT, EXCEPTIONS AND PROCEDURES:
   A.   Reimbursement: If any claim or action is instituted against an employee
of the City based on an injury allegedly arising out of an act or omission
occurring within the scope of his or her employment as such employee, the City
shall do one or more of the following:
      1.   Appear and defend against the claim or action; and/or
      2.   Reimburse the employee for his or her court costs or reasonable
attorney’s fees, or both, incurred in the defense of such claim or action; a
judgment based on such claim or action; and/or a compromise or settlement of
such a claim or action.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   The City shall not defend or reimburse an employee for any claim or
action instituted against the employee pursuant to this section if any of the
exceptions set forth below apply.
         a.   The City shall not defend or reimburse an employee for any
portion of a judgment representing an award of punitive or exemplary damages.
         b.   The City shall not defend or reimburse an employee if the injury
arose out of an act or omission occurring outside the scope of his or her
employment or if the act or omission was willful and wanton conduct by such
employee. The City shall not defend if it is unclear to the City if the injury
arose out of an act or omission occurring outside the scope of his or her
employment or if the act or omission was willful and wanton conduct by such
employee. This determination shall be made by the City in its sole discretion
and shall be a final determination.
         c.   The City may elect not to defend or reimburse an employee if it
is determined that there exists a current insurance policy or a contract, by
virtue of which the employee is entitled to an indemnity and/or defense of the
action in question.
      2.   Nothing herein relieves the City of its duty to indemnify or insure
its employees as set forth in the Local Governmental and Governmental Employees
Tort Immunity Act, 745 ILCS 10, as amended. Further, nothing herein relieves
the City of its duty to indemnify or insure its employees as provided in
sections 1-4-5 and 1-4-6 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
   C.   Procedures:
      1.   If any claim or action is instituted against an employee of the City
pursuant to subsection A of this section, the employee shall, as soon as
practicable, notify the City of receipt of notice of such a claim or action.
The City shall, as soon as practicable, following receipt of notice of such a
claim or action to determine whether the City shall defend and shall notify the
employee in writing of its determination. Any prejudice caused by the
employee’s failure to timely give notice to the City may be considered as a
factor in the City’s determination of defense hereunder. The City shall not be
responsible for any adverse actions taken against the employee prior to the
City’s determination of whether to defend.
      2.   Should the City decide not to defend, upon the potential for
compromise or settlement of the claim or action (but prior to the compromise or
settlement) or upon the completion of the claim or action, the employee shall
notify the City of his or her court costs or reasonable attorney’s fees, or
both, incurred in the defense of such claim or action; any judgment based on
such claim or action; and/or the potential compromise or settlement or the
actual compromise or settlement of the claim or action. The City shall have
fourteen (14) days from receipt of such notice or until the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting following receipt of such notice upon which a
matter may be placed on the agenda, whichever is later, to determine whether
the City shall reimburse the employee for his or her court costs or reasonable
attorney’s fees, or both, incurred in the defense of such claim or action; any
judgment based on such claim or action; and/or the potential compromise or
settlement or the actual compromise or settlement of the claim or action and
shall notify the employee in writing of its determination. The City may elect
not to reimburse an employee for a compromise or settlement of a claim or
action for which the City did not approve prior to such compromise or
settlement. Any prejudice caused by the employee’s failure to timely give
notice to the City may be considered as a factor in the City’s determination.
The City shall not be responsible for any adverse actions taken against the
employee prior to the City’s determination of whether to reimburse.
      3.   This chapter shall apply to all claims or actions previously
existing, now existing, or hereinafter existing; however, it shall not include
any criminal matters.
(Ord. 20-7, 2-3-2020)
CHAPTER 11:
MISCELLANEOUS
Section
1-11-1: Paid Leave Rights
1-11-1: PAID LEAVE RIGHTS:
   A.   All regular, full-time employees of the City will, at all times, be
provided no less than forty (40) hours of any form of paid leave for every
consecutive twelve (12) month period of their employment.
   B.   All part-time, temporary, and seasonal employees of the City will, at
all times, be provided no less than one (1) hour of any form of paid leave for
every forty (40) hours worked, up to a minimum of forty (40) hours.
   C.   The City through its Personnel Policies may make adjustments to
eligibility and accrual rates for various forms of paid leave, including sick
leave, on an ongoing basis without impacting, affecting, or altering this
ordinance, but in no event shall the rights to paid leave provided to employees
be less than what is provided herein.
   D.   The rights of employees working for non-municipal employers within the
City shall be as stated in the Paid Leave for All Workers Act, 820 ILCS 192/
1 et seq., as may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 23-60, 11-20-2023)
TITLE 2: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Section
2-1-1: Organization
2-1-2: References To Plan Commission, Zoning Board Of Appeals
2-1-3: Duties Of Commission
2-1-4: Special Zoning Commission For Zoning Text Amendments
2-1-5: Meetings
2-1-1: ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Creation: There is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Commission for
the City to carry out the duties of a Plan Commission and Zoning Board of
Appeals. When used in this article “commission” shall be construed to mean the
Planning and Zoning Commission and “Commissioners” shall be construed to mean
the members of the commission.
(1987 Code § 2-200)
   B.   Membership: The commission shall consist of seven (7) Commissioners to
be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. A
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall be appointed on an annual basis by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   C.   Vacancy: Any vacancy on the commission shall be filled in the same
manner as the original appointment.
(1987 Code § 2-200)
   D.   Compensation: Commissioners shall receive compensation quarterly for
each meeting attended at the rate of fifty dollars ($50.00) per meeting for the
Chairperson and forty dollars ($40.00) for all other Commissioners, or at such
other rates as the City Council may hereafter establish.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
2-1-2: REFERENCES TO PLAN COMMISSION, ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
Any ordinance, code, regulation, etc., of the City or State Statute that
references the Plan Commission and/or Zoning Board of Appeals shall mean the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
(1987 Code § 2-201)
2-1-3: DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
The duties of the commission are as follows:
   A.   Preparation, Recommendation Of Comprehensive Plan:
      1.   To prepare and recommend to the City Council a Comprehensive Plan
for the present and future development or redevelopment of the City. After its
adoption by the City Council, this plan shall be known as the City of McHenry
Comprehensive Plan (“Comprehensive Plan”). Thereafter, from time to time, the
commission may recommend changes in the Comprehensive Plan. This Comprehensive
Plan may include reasonable requirements with reference to the streets, alleys,
public grounds, and other improvements in unsubdivided land situated within the
corporate limits or in contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (1-
12) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality.
      2.   These requirements shall be effective whenever this unsubdivided
land is subdivided after the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan. Following the
adoption of the Comprehensive Plan, no map or plat of any subdivision presented
for record affecting land within the corporate limits of the City or in
contiguous territory outside of and not more than one and one-half (1-1/2)
miles from those limits and not included in any other municipality, shall be
entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon shall
provide for streets, alleys, public grounds and other public improvements in
conformity with the Comprehensive Plan.
   B.   Changes To Comprehensive Plan: From time to time, prepare and recommend
changes in the Comprehensive Plan, or plans for specific improvements in the
pursuance of the Comprehensive Plan to the City Council.
   C.   Assistance To City For Projects: To provide assistance to the City
officials charged with the direction of projects for improvements embraced
within the Comprehensive Plan and to further the making of these projects, and
generally promote the Comprehensive Plan.
   D.   Other Lawful Powers: To exercise such other powers, germane to the
powers granted by this Code as may be conferred by the City and are granted a
City under the Illinois Municipal Code.
(1987 Code § 2-202)
   E.   Appeals:
      1.   To hear appeals from any order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Director of Community Development relating to the Zoning
Ordinance by any person, firm or corporation aggrieved thereby, or by any
officer, department, council or commission of the City.
      2.   The appeal shall be taken within forty five (45) days of the action
complained of by filing a notice of appeal, in duplicate, specifying the
grounds thereof, in the Office of the City Clerk, who shall transmit forthwith
one copy to the Director of Community Development and one copy to the
Chairperson of the commission. The Director of Community Development shall
forthwith transmit to the Chairperson of the commission all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      3.   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Director of Community Development certifies to the
commission that, by reason of facts stated in the certification, a stay would
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall
not be stayed except by a restraining order issued by the commission or a court
of record after notice to the Director of Community Development and on due
cause shown.
      4.   The commission shall select a reasonable time and place for the
hearing of the appeal, give a minimum of ten (10) days’ notice thereof to all
interested parties, and shall render a written decision on the appeal without
unreasonable delay.
      5.   Any person may appear at the hearing and present testimony in person
or by a duly authorized agent or attorney. The commission may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination of the Director of Community Development.
   F.   Variations: To recommend to the City Council, after holding a public
hearing, on application for variations from the strict enforcement of any
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, in accordance with the rules and standards
set forth therein.
   G.   Conditional Uses: To recommend to the City Council, after holding a
public hearing, on applications for conditional uses listed in each of the
several zoning districts.
   H.   Integrated Design Developments; Other Matters: To recommend to the City
Council, after holding a public hearing, on applications for integrated design
developments referred to it by the City Council and to hear and decide other
matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
   I.   Petitions For Amendments: To recommend to the City Council, after
holding a public hearing, on petitions for amendment of the provisions of the
City of McHenry Zoning Ordinance and the boundary lines of zoning districts
established therein.
   J.   Findings Of Fact With Recommendations: To transmit to the City Council,
with every recommendation, findings of fact and to refer to any exhibits
containing plans and specifications relating to its recommendation, which plans
and specifications shall remain a part of the permanent records of the
commission. The findings of facts shall specify the reason or reasons for its
recommendation. The terms of the relief recommended shall be specifically set
forth in a conclusion or statement separate from the findings of fact of the
commission.
   K.   Maintain Written Minutes: To keep written minutes of its proceedings,
which shall be a public record.
   L.   File Records: To file immediately in the Office of the City Clerk every
rule, order, requirement, decision or determination of the commission after any
meeting or hearing, which shall be a public record.
   M.   Limited Authority: Nothing contained herein shall be construed to
authorize the commission to change any of the provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance or district boundary lines established hereby. The concurring vote of
four (4) members shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision
or determination of the Director of Community Development, or to decide in
favor of the applicant any matter upon which the commission is authorized to
act.
   N.   Annual Report: File an annual report with the Mayor and City Council
setting forth its transactions and recommendations.
   O.   Bylaws, Procedural Rules: Adopt bylaws and any other procedural rules
consistent with this and other City ordinances and State Statutes.
   P.   Cooperation: Cooperate with County and regional Planning Commissions
and other groups to promote coordinated planning.
   Q.   Recommend Employment Assistance: Recommend to the City Council the
employment of such professional planning, legal, engineering or administrative
assistance as is necessary to fulfill its responsibilities.
   R.   Other Required Duties: Carry out any other function concerning land
subdivision or other matters that may be conferred upon it by the Subdivision
Control and Development Ordinance, City of McHenry Zoning Ordinance, this Code,
or any other City ordinance, and the Illinois Municipal Code, and discharge any
other duties referred or assigned to it by the City Council.
(1987 Code § 2-202)
2-1-4: SPECIAL ZONING COMMISSION FOR ZONING TEXT AMENDMENTS:
The commission shall serve as a special Zoning Commission whenever a text
amendment is proposed to the Zoning Ordinance.
(1987 Code § 2-203)
2-1-5: MEETINGS:
All meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and
at such other times as the commission and/or City Council may determine. The
presence of four (4) members shall be necessary for a quorum. All meetings
shall be open to the public. The Chairperson, or Vice Chairperson, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The commission shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, keep record of its examinations and other
official actions, prepare findings of fact and record the individual votes upon
every question. Expenses incurred by the commission in the performance of
official duties are to be itemized and shall be borne by the City.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
TITLE 3: FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 1: HOTEL OPERATORS OCCUPATION TAX
Section
3-1-1: Definitions
3-1-2: Tax Imposed
3-1-3: Payment And Collection
3-1-4: Administration And Enforcement
3-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
HOTEL: Any building or buildings, in which the public may, for a consideration,
obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term
includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses
and apartment houses with more than five (5) guest units for rent.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any
rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or possession of the
furnishings, or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and
possession of the room or rooms.
OPERATOR: Any person operating a hotel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who has occupied or has the right to occupy any
room or rooms, regardless to whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a
hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability
company or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court.
RENT OR RENTAL: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits,
property or services of any kind or nature.
ROOM OR ROOMS: Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
(1987 Code § 23-1)
3-1-2: TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is imposed upon persons engaged in the business of renting, letting or
leasing rooms in a hotel at the rate of five percent (5.0%) of the gross rental
receipts from such renting, leasing or letting, excluding, however, from gross
rental receipts, the proceeds of such renting, leasing or letting to permanent
residents of that hotel.
(1987 Code § 23-2)
3-1-3: PAYMENT AND COLLECTION:
   A.   Payment, Collection Required: The tax levied herein shall be paid in
addition to any and all other taxes. It shall be the duty of the operator of
every hotel to collect said tax from the guest or lodger, and to pay over to
the City Administrator or their designee said tax on a monthly basis as
provided herein.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   B.   Receipt: Every person required to collect the tax levied by this
chapter shall receive said tax from the guest or lodger at the time the room
charge is paid. A receipt, invoice or other statement or memorandum showing the
itemized rental and all taxes shall be issued to the user, lessee or tenant.
(1987 Code § 23-3)
3-1-4: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Inspections: The City Administrator or their designee may enter the
premises of any hotel for inspection and examination of books and records for
the proper administration of this chapter and enforcement and collection of the
tax imposed. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder or
interfere with the City Administrator or his/her designee in enforcing this
chapter.
   B.   Records Required: It shall be the duty of every person operating a
hotel in the City to keep accurate and complete books and records to which the
City Administrator or their designee shall, at all times, have full access,
which records shall include a daily sheet showing:
      1.   The number of hotel rooms rented during the twenty four (24) hour
period, including multiple rentals of the same hotel when such occurs; and
      2.   The actual Hotel Room Tax receipts collected from the date in
question.
(1987 Code § 23-4)
   C.   Monthly Tax Returns: Every person operating a hotel shall file tax
returns showing tax receipts received with respect to each hotel during each
month of each year, within thirty (30) days after the end of the respective
date, upon forms prescribed by the rules and regulations of the City
Administrator or their designee. At the time of filing said tax returns, the
operator shall pay to the City Administrator or their designee all taxes due
for the period to which the tax return applies. Each return shall be
accompanied by payment to the City of all taxes due and owing for the quarter
covered by the return.
   D.   1.   Failure To Pay Tax: Any violation of this Chapter 3-1 will be
punishable or enforced in the manner prescribed by the City's Local Government
Taxpayer Bill of Rights provisions of Chapter 3-9. It will be deemed a
violation of this Chapter 3-1 for any person knowingly to furnish false or
inaccurate information as required herein.
      2.   Revocation Of License: If the City Manager, after conducting a
hearing pursuant to Chapter 3-9, finds that any person has willfully avoided
payment of the tax imposed herein, the City Manager may suspend or revoke all
City licenses held by the hotel. Prior to any implementation of an order to
suspend or revoke a license, the operator shall have an opportunity to be heard
at a hearing before the City Manager, held not less than five (5) days after
notice of the time and place of the hearing, with said notice addressed to the
operator at the last known place of business, has been delivered to the
operator.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
CHAPTER 2: RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
Section
3-2-1: Imposed
3-2-2: Report Required
3-2-3: Payment
3-2-1: IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in this City at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business,
in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/8-
11-1 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(1987 Code § 23-16)
3-2-2: REPORT REQUIRED:
Every such person engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property
at retail in the City shall file on or before the last day of each calendar
month, the report to the State Department of Revenue required by law.
(1987 Code § 23-17)
3-2-3: PAYMENT:
At the time the report required by section
3-2-2 of this chapter is filed, there shall be paid to the State Department of
Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipt from sales
of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
(1987 Code § 23-18)
CHAPTER 3: SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
Section
3-3-1: Imposed
3-3-2: Report Required
3-3-3: Payment
3-3-1: IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this Municipality in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of one percent (1%) of the cost
price of all tangible personal property transferred by said servicemen either
in the form of tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an
incident to a sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/8-11-5 of the Illinois Municipal Code.
(1987 Code § 23-31)
3-3-2: REPORT REQUIRED:
Every supplier or serviceman required to account for Municipal Service
Occupation Tax for the benefit of this Municipality shall file, on or before
the last day of each calendar month, the report to the State Department of
Revenue required by law.
(1987 Code § 23-32)
3-3-3: PAYMENT:
At the time the report required by section 3-3-2 of this chapter is filed,
there shall be paid to the State Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby
imposed.
(1987 Code § 23-33)
CHAPTER 4: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX AND HOME RULE SERVICE
OCCUPATION TAX
Section
3-4-1: Home Rule Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax
3-4-2: Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax
3-4-3: Collection And Enforcement
3-4-4: Effective Date
3-4-1: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property (other than an item of tangible personal property
titled and registered with an agency of this State's government) at retail in
the City at the rate of three-fourths (3/4) of one percent of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business. Such “Home Rule
Municipal Retailers’ Occupation Tax” shall not be applicable to the sale of
food for human consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is
sold (other than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been
prepared for immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription
medicines, drugs, medical appliances, and insulin, urine testing materials,
syringes and needles used by diabetics.
(Ord. 19-1184, 1-21-2019)
3-4-2: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons in the City engaged in the City in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of three-fourths (3/4) of one
percent of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred by
such servicemen either in the form of tangible personal property or in the form
of real estate as an incident to a sale of service. Such “Home Rule Municipal
Service Occupation Tax” shall not be applicable to the sale of food for human
consumption that is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances, and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics.
(Ord. 19-1184, 1-21-2019)
3-4-3: COLLECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 23-38)
3-4-4: EFFECTIVE DATE:
Said Home Rule Municipal Retailer’s Occupation Tax and Home Rule Municipal
Service Occupation Tax shall be effective July 1, 2019.
(Ord. 19-1184, 1-21-2019)
CHAPTER 5: SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
Section
3-5-1: Tax Imposed
3-5-2: Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer
3-5-3: Certified Copy Filed With State
3-5-4: Effective Date
3-5-1: TAX IMPOSED:
A Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax is hereby imposed upon the act or
privilege of originating in the Municipality or receiving in the Municipality
intrastate or interstate telecommunications by a person at the rate of three
percent (3%) of the gross charges for such telecommunications purchased at
retail from a retailer, in accordance with and subject to the provisions of the
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Act (5 ILCS 636/5-1 et seq.)
(Ord. 19-1194, 6-3-2019)
3-5-2: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER:
The tax hereby imposed shall be collected and enforced by the Department of
Revenue of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have
full power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1194, 6-3-2019)
3-5-3: CERTIFIED COPY FILED WITH STATE:
The City Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of the Simplified
Municipal Telecommunications Tax Ordinance with the Illinois Department of
Revenue prior to March 20, 2019.
(Ord. 19-1194, 6-3-2019)
3-5-4: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval and publication in pamphlet form as required by law, provided,
however, that section 3-5-1 of this chapter shall take effect for all gross
charges billed by telecommunications retailers on: a) July 1 next following the
adoption and filing of the Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax
Ordinance with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
March 20; or b) January 1 next following the adoption and filing of the
Simplified Municipal Telecommunications Tax Ordinance with the Department of
Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding September 20.
(Ord. 19-1194, 6-3-2019)
CHAPTER 6: PROPERTY TAX ABATEMENT
Section
3-6-1: Consideration
3-6-2: Application And Evaluation
3-6-3: Recommendation
3-6-4: Abatement Of Tax
3-6-1: CONSIDERATION:
The City Council will consider granting tax abatement on the City share of the
Property Tax for any new industrial plant construction by an industrial firm
considering locating in the City from out of State and for existing or newly
created McHenry industrial firms considering the construction of new facilities
or the expansion of existing McHenry facilities.
(1987 Code § 23-40)
3-6-2: APPLICATION AND EVALUATION:
Any industrial firm from out of State or from the City wishing to request tax
abatement for any proposed new construction shall contact the Office of the
Mayor for the purpose of having the request referred to the Finance Committee
of the City Council for evaluation and recommendation to the full Council. The
request of the applicant shall be accompanied by the name and location of the
firm, the estimated fair market value of the new construction, the estimated
number of new employees to be added as a consequence of said construction, the
tax year in which the first tax abatement is requested to commence, and such
other information as the applicant, the Mayor and Finance Committee deem
desirable.
(1987 Code § 23-41)
3-6-3: RECOMMENDATION:
Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Finance Committee concerning the
request for tax abatement, the City Council, in its sole discretion, may pass a
resolution to abate any portion of its taxes on said property for any period of
time up to, but not exceeding, ten (10) years. Any resolution awarding a tax
abatement should, as a minimum, specify the amount of the taxes abated (the
amount to be either in the form of a percentage or dollar figure), the number
of years for which such abatement is awarded and the specific tax years to
which such abatement applies.
(1987 Code § 23-42)
3-6-4: ABATEMENT OF TAX:
The Mayor will advise the applicant by letter of the action taken by the City
Council. Thereafter, contemporaneously with the enactment of the Annual Levy
Ordinance, the City Council and the Mayor shall, without further request from
the applicant, enact an appropriate Tax Abatement Ordinance or ordinances and
shall file the same with the County Clerk in sufficient time to implement such
tax abatements for the tax years in question.
(1987 Code § 23-43)
CHAPTER 7: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
Section
3-7-1: Tax Imposed; Rate
3-7-2: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
3-7-1: TAX IMPOSED; RATE:
   A.   Effective January 1, 2020, a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons
engaged in the business of selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased
under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in
the City at the rate of three percent (3%) of the gross receipts from these
sales made in the course of that business.
   B.   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
section 8-11-22 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-22).
(Ord. 19-1204, 10-7-2019)
3-7-2: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   A.   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailer to
the Illinois Department of Revenue. Any tax required to be collected pursuant
to or as authorized by this section and any such tax collected by such retailer
and required to be remitted to the Illinois Department of Revenue shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. A retailer may reimburse
itself for its seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating that tax
as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in a single
amount, with any State tax that a seller is required to collect.
   B.   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed
an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Illinois Department
of Revenue. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 19-1204, 10-7-2019)
CHAPTER 8: MUNICIPAL RETAIL MOTOR FUEL TAX
Section
3-8-1: Short Title
3-8-2: Definitions
3-8-3: Tax Imposed
3-8-4: Liability For Payment
3-8-5: Collection Of Tax
3-8-6: Filing Of Return
3-8-7: Rules And Regulations
3-8-8: Failure To Pay Tax When Due
3-8-9: Records
3-8-10: Disposition Of Tax Receipts
3-8-1: SHORT TITLE:
The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be known as the "Municipal Retail Motor
Fuel Tax".
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Article, whenever any of the following words, terms or
definitions is used herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in
this Section:
DEALER: Every person engaged in the business of the retail sale of motor fuel,
including any person who has an established place of business for such purposes
ascribed to them in this Section.
MOTOR FUEL: All volatile and inflammable liquids produced, blended or
compounded for the purpose of, or which are suitable or practicable for,
operating motor vehicles or internal combustion engines. This shall include but
not be limited to gasoline, gasohol and diesel fuel.
PERSON: Any natural person, receiver, administrator, executor, conservator,
assignee, trust in perpetuity, trust, estate, firm, co-partnership, joint
venture, club, company, business trust, domestic or foreign corporation,
association, syndicate, society or any group of individuals acting as a unit,
whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal nonprofit, or otherwise; whenever the
term "person" is used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the
term as applied to associations shall mean that the owners or part owners
thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
RETAIL: The sale for any good and valuable consideration to a person for use as
a consumer.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-8-3: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Beginning on September 1, 2020, there is hereby imposed and shall
immediately accrue and be collected, a tax upon the privilege of purchasing
motor fuel at retail in the City of McHenry at a rate of three cents ($0.03)
per U.S. Gallon or fraction thereof.
   B.   In the event motor fuel is dispensed by a unit of measure other than
U.S. Gallon, then the tax shall be imposed at the same ratio of three cents
($0.03) per U.S. Gallon to the unit of measure.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-8-4: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne
by the retail purchaser. The tax herein levied shall be in addition to any and
all other taxes. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to impose the tax
upon the occupation of selling motor fuel. It shall be the duty of every dealer
to secure said tax under rules and regulations prescribed by the Finance
Director and as otherwise provided by this Article.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-8-5: COLLECTION OF TAX:
Every dealer required to collect the tax levied by this Article shall secure
said tax from the retail purchaser at the time the dealer collects payment for
the motor fuel. The tax shall be paid by the retail purchaser to the person
required to collect it as trustee for and on account of the City of McHenry.
The dealer shall be entitled to withhold from tax collections a service fee
equal to one percent (1%) of the amounts collected. If any dealer fails to
collect the local motor fuel tax, such dealer shall remain liable for the local
motor fuel tax not collected and shall pay the amount of the local motor fuel
tax due to the City in accordance with this article.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-8-6: FILING OF RETURN:
Monthly, on the forms and in such manner as prescribed by the City Finance
Director, the dealer shall transmit a report of sale of motor fuel in the
previous month to the City of McHenry. Each report of sale of motor fuel shall
be accompanied by a remittance of the appropriate amount of tax applicable to
the sale reported and a signed copy of Illinois Department of Revenue Form ST-
l (Sales and Use Tax Return) or other comparable evidence acceptable to the
City that documents reported sales.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-8-7: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The Finance Director may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Chapter concerning the enforcement and application of
this Chapter. The term "rules and regulations" includes, but is not limited to,
the Finance Director's determination whether or not the tax imposed by this
Chapter applies to a dealer or transaction.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-8-8: FAILURE TO PAY TAX WHEN DUE:
Any violation of this Chapter 3-8 will be punishable or enforced in the manner
prescribed by the City's Local Government Taxpayer Bill of Rights provisions of
Chapter 3-9. It will be deemed a violation of this Chapter 3-8 for any person
knowingly to furnish false or inaccurate information as required herein. (Ord.
20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-8-9: RECORDS:
   A.   Each dealer shall keep books which, at a minimum, include:
      1.   The number of gallons of motor fuel sold at retail each day by the
dealer in the City of McHenry.
      2.   The actual motor fuel tax collected for each day by the dealer.
   B.   The City Finance Director or designee shall at all reasonable times
have full access to such records.
   C.   To the extent permitted by law, the financial records of any dealer
submitted pursuant to this Article or any rule and regulation promulgated
thereunder shall not be available for public inspection in order to protect the
dealer's right to privacy and shall be considered to be commercial or financial
information obtained from a person or business furnished under a claim that it
is proprietary, privileged or confidential, and that disclosure of the
commercial or financial information would cause competitive harm to business.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-8-10: DISPOSITION OF TAX RECEIPTS:
All proceedings resulting from the imposition of the tax under this Article,
including penalties, shall be paid to the City of McHenry and shall be credited
to and deposited in the Local Motor Fuel Tax Fund of the City allocated for the
purposes of publicly-bid, contracted road resurfacing projects only.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
CHAPTER 9: LOCAL GOVERNMENT TAXPAYERS’ BILL OF RIGHTS
Section
3-9-1: Definitions
3-9-2: Notices
3-9-3: Late Payment
3-9-4: Payment
3-9-5: Certain Credits And Refunds
3-9-6: Audit Procedure
3-9-7: Appeal
3-9-8: Hearing
3-9-9: Interest, Penalties And Enforcement Costs
3-9-10: Abatement
3-9-11: Installment Contracts
3-9-12: Statute Of Limitations
3-9-13: Voluntary Disclosure
3-9-14: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
3-9-15: Internal Review Procedure
3-9-16: Application
3-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to those terms defined in this code, certain words or terms herein
shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
ACT: The Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The City Finance Director and any staff, employees or
agents to the extent they are authorized by the City Finance Director to act in
the City Finance Director's stead. The City Finance Director shall have the
authority to implement the terms of this Chapter to give full effect to this
Chapter. The exercise of such authority by the Local Tax Administrator shall
not be inconsistent with this Chapter and the Act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX: Each tax imposed by the City that is
collected or administered by the City, not an agency or department of the
state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the City.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the City's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance passed by the City that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally-imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally-imposed and administered tax to the
City.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-2: NOTICES:
   A.   Whenever notice is required to be given under this Chapter, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the Local
Tax Administrator. The notice shall be sent by the Local Tax Administrator as
follows:
      1.   Any notice of tax assessment due must be sent by United States
registered or certified mail.
      2.   For all other required notices, either:
         a.   First class, express mail or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address; or
         b.   Personal service or delivery.
   B.   Whenever the Local Tax Administrator issues a protestable notice of tax
due, a bill, a claim denial or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax,
the written notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment or other determination;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment or other determination
(which may be satisfied by including a copy of this Chapter, The Local
Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights);
      4.   The obligations of the City during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process (which may be satisfied by including a copy of this Chapter,
The Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights); and
      5.   Such other information as may be required by this Chapter.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-3: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the City
pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the City on or before the due date, or b) received in an
envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postal service
postmark dated on or before the due date, properly addressed to the City, with
adequate postage prepaid. (Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-4: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-5: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   A.   The City shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid without
written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally-imposed and
administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed to have paid
the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts upon which to
protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid the taxes
under duress.
   B.   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be two
(2) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The City shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the City.
   C.   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the Local Tax Administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         a.   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         b.   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         c.   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the canceled
check or receipt for the payment;
         d.   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         e.   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the City.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the Local Tax Administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the Local Tax Administrator shall either:
         a.   Grant the claim; or
         b.   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement as
to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the Local Tax Administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month (1%), from the
date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or the grant
of a credit.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-6: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit of the taxpayer's books and records pursuant to
any locally administered tax shall be in writing to the taxpayer and shall
comply with the notice requirements of this Chapter.
   A.   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period to be audited;
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor; and
      4.   An identification of who will be conducting the audit, and in the
case of a third-party auditor, the City must provide written authorization for
them to review the books and records of the taxpayer before such third-party
auditor contacts the taxpayer.
   B.   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and not less
than seven (7) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is
given. However, if the date and time selected by the Local Tax Administrator is
not agreeable to the taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the
taxpayer. If such time is convenient to the Local Tax Administrator, the Local
Tax Administrator may approve the new date in writing and shall have the
discretion to grant an extension to this time period.
   C.   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the City.
   D.   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the City. If the taxpayer fails to
provide the documents necessary for audit within the time provided, the Local
Tax Administrator may issue a tax determination and assessment based on the tax
administrator's determination of the best estimate of the taxpayer's tax
liability.
   E.   Upon the completion of an audit, the City must issue an audit closure
report to the taxpayer with the results of the audit.
   F.   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally-
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the City's determination of the amount of overpayment. If the overpayment is
the result of the incorrect application of some or all of the taxpayer's tax
payment to the City instead of to another local government entity, then upon a
request by that other unit of local government, the audit information must be
given to any unit of local government that may be affected by the overpayment.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-7: APPEAL:
   A.   A taxpayer shall have the right to appeal a determination of a tax due.
   B.   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the Local Tax Administrator
of a determination of tax due or a notice of tax liability, may protest such
finding by filing with the Local Tax Administrator a written protest and
petition for hearing, setting forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a
hearing. The written protest and petition for hearing must be filed with the
Local Tax Administrator within forty-five (45) days of receipt of the written
notice of the tax determination and assessment.
   C.   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the Local
Tax Administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   D.   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty-five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   E.   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the Local Tax Administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty-five
(45) day period.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-8: HEARING:
   A.   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section
3-9-7 of this Chapter, the City Manager shall conduct a hearing regarding any
appeal.
   B.   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance is
absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of preparation
shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted shall not
exceed fourteen (14) days.
   C.   At the hearing, the City Manager shall preside and shall hear testimony
and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit or assessment.
The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not
apply.
   D.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager shall make a written
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. The
taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the written
decision.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-9: INTEREST, PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT COSTS:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   A.   Interest On Late And Unpaid Taxes: In the event any taxpayer fails to
collect and pay to the City the tax required hereunder within thirty (30) days
after the same is due, interest shall accumulate and be due upon said tax at
the rate of one percent (1%) per month commencing as of the first day of the
month following the month of which the tax was to have been collected.
   B.   Late Payment Penalty: If a tax is due and not timely paid to the City,
a late payment penalty of five percent (5%) of the tax due shall be imposed in
addition to any other interest due under this Chapter. A late payment penalty
shall not apply if a Failure to File Penalty is imposed under this subsection
C.
   C.   Failure To File Penalty: If no return has been filed prior to the City
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed.
   D.   Suit For Collection: Whenever any taxpayer fails to pay any tax or
penalty required herein, the City Attorney shall, upon the request of the City
Finance Director, bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the payment
of said tax on behalf of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction or in
any authorized administrative tribunal. Any legal fees incurred by the City in
the cost of collection shall be paid by the taxpayer.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-10: ABATEMENT:
The Local Tax Administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the Local
Tax Administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-11: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
At the discretion of the Local Tax Administrator, on behalf of the City, the
Local Tax Administrator may, but is not required to, enter into an installment
contract with the taxpayer for the payment of taxes under the controlling tax
ordinance. The Local Tax Administrator may not cancel any installment contract
so entered unless the taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing on time
and fails to cure the delinquency in the time allowed in the installment
contract or if the taxpayer fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring
any installment plan agreement or contract with the Local Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-12: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The City, through the Local Tax Administrator, shall review all tax returns in
a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and owing.
The taxpayer shall have forty-five (45) days after receiving notice of the
reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax still
due and owing.
   A.   No notice of determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than
four (4) years after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or the end of the calendar year in which the return
for the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   B.   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
City, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due for
that period, the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after
the end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was
due or end of the calendar year in which the return for the applicable period
was filed, whichever occurs later.
   C.   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-13: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally-imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation or assessment from the
Local Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
Local Tax Administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application, but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. Except for the amount of tax and interest due
under this Section, a taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure application
may not be liable for any additional tax, interest or penalty for any period
before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer incorrectly
determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is liable for the
underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid tax, unless the
underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the taxpayer, in which case
the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The payment of tax and
interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days after the filing of the
voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to by the Local Tax
Administrator, whichever is longer. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
Chapter must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the Local Tax Administrator, whichever is longer.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-14: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the City
Clerk's office.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-15: INTERNAL REVIEW PROCEDURE:
The Local Tax Administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the Local Tax Administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the Local Tax Administrator shall:
   A.   Timely remove the lien at the City's expense;
   B.   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   C.   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien.
It shall not be considered an improper lien under this section when a validly-
imposed lien is removed because the taxpayer has ultimately satisfied their
outstanding tax, interest and penalties liability. The taxpayer shall bear the
cost to remove such a lien.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
3-9-16: APPLICATION:
This Chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the City's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in conflict
with or inconsistent with this Chapter, this Chapter shall be controlling.
(Ord. 20-31, 8-3-2020)
CHAPTER 10: ELECTRIC USE TAX
Section
3-10-1: Establishment Of Tax
3-10-2: Limitations
3-10-3: Tax In Addition To Other Compensation
3-10-4: Definitions
3-10-5: Payment Of Tax To The City/Returns
3-10-6: Credits For Overpayment; Limitation
3-10-7: Actions For Past Due Amounts
3-10-8: Books And Records
3-10-9: Resales
3-10-10: Exemption For Local Governments
3-10-11: Administration And Implementation
3-10-12: Use
3-10-13: Violations; Penalty
3-10-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF TAX:
An electric use tax at the rates specified in this subsection is hereby
established and levied by the City on all persons engaged in the privilege of
using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the City, calculated on a monthly
basis, for each purchaser beginning on the effective date of this chapter:
   A.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.61
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   B.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.40
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   C.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.36
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   D.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.35
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   E.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.34
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   F.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.32
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   G.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.315 cents per kilowatt-hour;
   H.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month: 0.31
cents per kilowatt-hour;
   I.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt-hours used or consumed in a month:
0.305 cents per kilowatt-hour; and
   J.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000 kilowatt-
hours in a month: 0.30 cents per kilowatt-hour.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-2: LIMITATIONS:
No tax is imposed by this Chapter with respect to any transaction in interstate
commerce or otherwise to the extent to which that business or privilege may not
be made the subject of taxation by the state of Illinois or this City under the
constitution and statutes of the United States. Nor will any persons engaged in
using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the City be subject to taxation under
the provisions of this Chapter for such transactions as are or may become
subject to taxation under the provisions of the Illinois Municipal Retailers'
Occupation Tax Act.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-3: TAX IN ADDITION TO OTHER COMPENSATION:
This tax is in addition to all taxes, fees, franchise agreements, payments for
use of streets, alleys or other public places, use of wires, poles or other
infrastructure and equipment, and any other revenue measures and agreements
imposed by the City, the State of Illinois or any other political subdivision
of the State.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the definitions shall be those used in 65
ILCS 5/8-11-2, as may be subsequently amended.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-5: PAYMENT OF TAX TO THE CITY/RETURNS:
   A.   Collection Of Tax: The person maintaining a place of business in the
state of Illinois who delivers the electricity to the purchaser shall collect
the tax authorized by this Chapter from the purchaser and shall file a return
with, and pay the amount of the tax collected to, the City. This tax
constitutes a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the electricity
to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the same manner as
the original charge for delivering the electricity.
   B.   Persons delivering electricity may collect the tax from the purchaser
by adding the tax to the gross charge for delivering the electricity. Persons
delivering electricity also are authorized to add to the gross charge an amount
equal to three percent (3%) of the tax to reimburse the person delivering
electricity for the expense incurred in keeping records, billing customers,
preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax, and supplying data to the City
on the City's request.
   C.   Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this Chapter and any such
tax collected by a person delivering electricity constitutes a debt owed to the
City by the person delivering the electricity. With respect to such debt owed
to the City, the person delivering electricity may be allowed a credit against
such debt to the extent the tax related to deliveries of electricity is not
collected because the charges for such electricity are written off as
uncollectible; except that if such charges are thereafter collected by the
person delivering electricity, then that person must remit the tax to the City.
Any partial payment not specifically identified by the purchaser will be deemed
to be for the delivery of electricity.
   D.   Every person who delivers electricity to a purchaser shall on a monthly
basis file a return in a form and manner prescribed by the City's Finance
Director. The return and accompanying payment shall be due on or before the
last day of the month following the month during which the tax is collected or
is required to be collected under this Chapter.
   E.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the
purchaser, then the purchaser will be required to pay the tax directly to the
City, on or before the last day of the month following the month during which
electricity is used or consumed, by filing a tax return in the form and manner
that the City Finance Director will prescribe.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-6: CREDITS FOR OVERPAYMENT; LIMITATION:
If it appears that an amount of tax has been paid that was not due under the
provisions of this Chapter, whether as a result of a mistake of fact or an
error of law, then that amount will be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this Chapter from the person who made the erroneous payment
on a filing of a claim for a credit by that person with the City, except that
no amount erroneously paid will be credited if that amount was paid more than
one (1) year prior to the filing of a claim for a credit.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-7: ACTIONS FOR PAST DUE AMOUNTS:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this Chapter
may be commenced more than one (1) year after the due date of that amount.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-8: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
The person maintaining the place of business in the state of Illinois who
collects the tax authorized by this Chapter from the purchaser is required to
keep accurate books and records of its business or activity, including
contemporaneous books and records denoting the transactions that gave rise, or
may have given rise, to any tax liability under this Chapter. The books and
records are subject to and available for inspection by the City at reasonable
times during normal business hours.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-9: RESALES:
   A.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the City shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the City
Finance Director and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the
electricity and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or
partially nontaxable as a sale for resale.
   B.   If a person who receives electricity in the City claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the City Finance
Director for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it is
not liable for the tax imposed by this section on any purchases of electricity
and shall furnish such additional information as the City Finance Director may
reasonably require.
   C.   Upon approval of the application, the City Finance Director shall
assign a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the
applicant.
   D.   The City Finance Director may cancel the resale number of any person if
the person fails to pay any tax payable under this Chapter for electricity used
or consumed by the person, or if the number was either (1) obtained through
misrepresentation, or (2) no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
   E.   If a reseller had acquired electricity partly for use or consumption
and partly for resale, the reseller shall collect and remit the tax imposed by
this Chapter directly to the City Finance Director, under the rules prescribed
by this Chapter, on any amount that is used or consumed by the reseller and any
amount delivered by the reseller for use and consumption and not as a sale for
resale.
   F.   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an active
resale number and complying with all other conditions in this Chapter shall be
excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the electricity
delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports the total amount of
electricity delivered to the reseller, and such other information that the City
Finance Director may reasonably require.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-10: EXEMPTION FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENTS:
The taxes described in this article shall not be applicable to any school
districts, or any unit of local government or taxing body located in whole or
in part within the corporate limits of the City. The City Finance Director is
authorized to prepare and maintain a list of properties exempt from the taxes
described in this Chapter so long as the property is in possession by any
school district, or any unit of local government or taxing body located in
whole or in part within the corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-11: ADMINISTRATION AND IMPLEMENTATION:
The City Finance Director, or his or her designee, may prescribe reasonable
rules, definitions and regulations to collect this fee.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-12: USE:
The proceeds of this tax shall be used exclusively to fund capital asset
maintenance and replacement items included in the Community Investment Plan and
as approved as part of the annual budget process by City Council. No operating
costs are to be paid from these revenues.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-10-13: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter may, in
addition to any fee or penalty due, be assessed a fine up to seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues to exist shall be a
separate offense. Citations for violations of this Chapter shall be adjudicated
by the City's administrative adjudication hearing officer, or at the choice of
the City, by any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 22-12, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 11: MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX
Section
3-11-1: Short Title
3-11-2: Definitions
3-11-3: Tax
3-11-4: Collection Of Tax By Public Utility
3-11-5: Books And Records
3-11-6: Exemption For Local Governments
3-11-7: Use
3-11-8: Violations; Penalty
3-11-1: SHORT TITLE:
The tax imposed by this Chapter shall be known as the "Municipal Gas Use Tax"
and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the City of McHenry,
the State of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof.
(Ord. 22-13, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this state, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The Public Utilities Act as amended (220 ILCS 5/1-101 et
seq.).
PUBLIC UTILITY: A public utility as defined in Section 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act.
RETAIL PURCHASER: Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means
any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas.
(Ord. 22-13, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-11-3: TAX:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, a tax is imposed on the
privilege of using or consuming gas in the City that is purchased in a sale at
retail at the rate of three cents ($0.03) per therm with respect to all bills
issued on or after June 1, 2023.
   B.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the retail purchaser, and nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose
a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or
transporting gas.
   C.   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the Public Utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant to section
3-11-4 of this Chapter on or before the payment due date of the Public
Utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or directly to the City Finance
Director on or before the fifteenth day of the second month following the month
in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser if no Public Utility has
been designated to collect the tax pursuant to section
3-11-4 or if the gas is delivered by a person other than a Public Utility so
designated.
   D.   Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the constitutions of the United
States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the
City.
   E.   A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the
tax imposed by this Chapter with respect to the use or consumption of the gas,
but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the City Finance Director on or before the fifteenth day of the
second month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
   F.   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail
purchaser is billed by a Public Utility on or after June 1, 2023.
   G.   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this Chapter, whether as a result of mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be (i) credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this Chapter from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment or (ii) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to
become due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years
prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited or refunded.
   H.   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this
Chapter shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such
amount.
(Ord. 22-13, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-11-4: COLLECTION OF TAX BY PUBLIC UTILITY:
The City Administrator and City Finance Director are each authorized to enter
into a contract for collection of the tax imposed by this Chapter with any
Public Utility providing gas service in the City. The contract shall include
and substantially conform with the following provisions:
   A.   The Public Utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an
independent contractor;
   B.   The Public Utility will remit collected taxes to the City Finance
Director no more often than once each month;
   C.   The Public Utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections a
service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the City Finance Director;
   D.   The Public Utility shall not be responsible to the City for any tax not
actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
   E.   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
(Ord. 22-13, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-11-5: BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records, including original source
documents and books of entry, denoting the activities or transactions that gave
rise, or may have given rise to any tax liability or exemption under this
Chapter. All such books and records shall, at all times during business hours,
be subject to and available for inspection by the City.
(Ord. 22-13, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-11-6: EXEMPTION FOR LOCAL GOVERNMENTS:
The taxes described in this article shall not be applicable to any school
districts, or any unit of local government located in whole or in part within
the corporate limits of the City. The City Finance Director is authorized to
prepare and maintain a list of properties exempt from the taxes described in
this Chapter so long as the property is in possession by any school district,
or any unit of local government located in whole or in part within the
corporate limits of the City.
(Ord. 22-13, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-11-7: USE:
The proceeds from this tax shall be used exclusively to fund the development of
new capital assets as approved as part of the annual budget process by City
Council. No operating costs are to be paid from these revenues.
(Ord. 22-13, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
3-11-8: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter may, in
addition to any fee or penalty due, be assessed a fine up to seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues to exist shall be a
separate offense. Citations for violations of this Chapter shall be adjudicated
by the City's administrative adjudication hearing officer, or at the choice of
the City, by any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 22-13, 2-22-2022; amd. Ord. 22-21, 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 12: SELF-STORAGE FACILITY RENTAL TAX
Section
3-12-1: Tax Imposed
3-12-2: Definition Of Self-Storage Facility
3-12-3: Tax To Be Borne By Tenant
3-12-4: Self-Storage Facility To Secure Tax From Tenant
3-12-5: Registration And Records To Be Kept
3-12-6: Payment Of Tax To City
3-12-7: Enforcement, Penalties, Fines And Interest, Suspension Of License
3-12-1: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby imposed upon the rental or leasing of any Self-Storage Facility
accommodations in the City of McHenry, a "Self-Storage Facility Rental Tax," at
the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental or leasing charge. This tax
shall be in addition to all other taxes.
(Ord. 22-43, 6-20-2022)
3-12-2: DEFINITION OF SELF-STORAGE FACILITY:
A "Self-Storage Facility" is a building or structure containing separately
divided storage rooms offered for lease or rent to members of the public for
the storage of a) personal property, or b) motor vehicles, boats, RVs and other
vehicles.
(Ord. 22-43, 6-20-2022)
3-12-3: TAX TO BE BORNE BY TENANT:
The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the Self-Storage
Facility Rental Tax shall be borne by the lessee or tenant of any Self-Storage
Facility accommodation. Nothing herein shall be construed to impose a tax upon
the occupation of leasing or operating Self-Storage Facilities.
(Ord. 22-43, 6-20-2022)
3-12-4: SELF-STORAGE FACILITY TO SECURE TAX FROM TENANT:
The Self-Storage Facility Rental Tax shall be collected by the Self-Storage
Facility owner, manager or operator from the lessee or tenant when collecting
the price, charge or rent for use of the Self-Storage Facility. Every lessee or
tenant shall be given a bill, invoice, receipt, or other statement or
memorandum of the price, charge or rent payable upon which the Self-Storage
Facility Rental Tax shall be stated, charged, and shown separately.
(Ord. 22-43, 6-20-2022)
3-12-5: REGISTRATION AND RECORDS TO BE KEPT:
Every owner, manager, or operator of a Self-Storage Facility in the City shall
register with the City on forms provided by the Finance Department. Each such
owner, manager, or operator shall have the duty to maintain complete and
accurate books, records and accounts showing the gross receipts for the lease
or rental of any Self-Storage Facility accommodations within the City of
McHenry and showing the prices, rents or charges made or charged, and
occupancies taxable under this Self-Storage Facility Rental Tax. The City
Administrator, or his/her designee, shall at all reasonable times have full
access to said books and records.
(Ord. 22-43, 6-20-2022)
3-12-6: PAYMENT OF TAX TO CITY:
   A.   On or before the thirtieth day of each calendar month, using tax return
forms provided by the Finance Department, each Self-Storage Facility in the
City shall file, with the Finance Department, a tax payment and a monthly tax
return showing tax receipts with respect to the Self-Storage Facility Rental
Tax from the prior month.
   B.   The City, in its discretion, may request from the Self-Storage Facility
evidence documenting reported rentals. Any failure to supply documentation to
substantiate correct payment shall be deemed a violation of this Code.
   C.   If any Self-Storage Facility owner, manager, or operator fails to
collect the Self-Storage Facility Rental Tax, the owner shall remain liable for
the Self-Storage Facility Rental Tax not collected and shall pay the amount of
the Self-Storage Facility Rental Tax due to the City in accordance with this
Chapter.
   D.   Optional: Every owner, manager or operator of a Self-Storage Facility
in the City shall be entitled to retain five percent (5%) of all tax monies
collected to defray the administrative burdens and costs associated with
serving as tax collector for the City. The retained percentage shall be shown
as a debit on the tax form filed with the City with the remainder of the tax
revenues turned over to the City together with the corresponding tax return.
(Ord. 22-43, 6-20-2022)
3-12-7: ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES, FINES AND INTEREST, SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Any Self-Storage Facility that fails to collect, to timely pay all
taxes due pursuant to this Chapter or who files a false tax return with the
City shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 9: Local Government
Taxpayers' Bill of Rights, regulating locally imposed and administered tax
rights and responsibility, including, but not limited to, those provisions
related to interests, penalties, late fees, and failure to file.
   B.   Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter may,
in addition to any tax or penalty due, be assessed a fine up to seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues to exist shall be a
separate offense. Citations for violations of this Chapter shall be adjudicated
by the City's administrative adjudication hearing officer, or at the choice of
the City, by any court of competent jurisdiction.
   C.   The failure to comply with any obligation imposed by this Chapter shall
also be grounds for the suspension or revocation of any license or permit
issued by the City to the Self-Storage facility.
   D.   The City Administrator, or his or her designee, may prescribe
reasonable rules; definitions and regulations to collect this tax.
(Ord. 22-43, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 13: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX
AND A MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
Section
3-13-1: Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax Imposed
3-13-2:    Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
3-13-3:    Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes
3-13-1: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in the City of McHenry, Illinois at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business
while this chapter is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance
with and subject to the provisions of section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal
Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 25-36, 8-18-2025)
3-13-2: MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the City of McHenry,
Illinois in the business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to
making those sales of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of
service. The rate of this tax shall be the same rate identified in section 3-
13-1, above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24).
(Ord. 25-36, 8-18-2025)
3-13-3: ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES:
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 25-36, 8-18-2025)
TITLE 4: BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Section
4-1-1: City Clerk Designated As License Officer
4-1-2: Duties Of City Clerk
4-1-3: When Fee Payable
4-1-4: Termination Of Licenses
4-1-5: Transfer; Change Of Location
4-1-6: Inspections; Samples
4-1-7: Posting Of License
4-1-8: Special Permits To Nonprofit Enterprises
4-1-9: Penalty
4-1-1: CITY CLERK DESIGNATED AS LICENSE OFFICER:
In the absence of specific provisions to the contrary, the City License Officer
shall be the City Clerk and she shall collect all license fees and issue all
licenses in the name of the City, to all persons qualified under the provisions
of this Code.
(1987 Code § 12-1)
4-1-2: DUTIES OF CITY CLERK:
The City shall promulgate and enforce all reasonable rules and regulations
necessary to the operation of license and permit issuance and enforcement; the
City Clerk shall adopt all forms and may require affidavits pertaining to
information given on such forms; shall submit such applications as require
investigation or compliance with specific ordinances to such employees or
officials of the City as shall have jurisdiction thereof, and shall notify
applicants of the acceptance or rejection of the applications submitted, or
revocation of licenses or permits.
(1987 Code § 12-2)
4-1-3: WHEN FEE PAYABLE:
In the absence of provisions to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses
or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is made to
the City Clerk.
(1987 Code § 12-3)
4-1-4: TERMINATION OF LICENSES:
All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the fiscal year of the
City, where no provision to the contrary is made.
(1987 Code § 12-4)
4-1-5: TRANSFER; CHANGE OF LOCATION:
   A.   Transfer: Licenses issued may be transferred by the original licensee;
provided, that written notice thereof is given to the City Clerk within ten
(10) days before the transfer is made, but no more than one transfer of any
license shall be made within any license year. Provided, that it shall be
unlawful to transfer any peddler’s, itinerant merchant’s or chauffeur’s
license, and any attempted transfer of such a license shall have no effect.
   B.   Change Of Location: The location of any licensed business or
occupation, or of any permitted act, may be changed, provided ten (10) days’
notice thereof is given to the City Clerk, in the absence of any provision to
the contrary; provided, that the building, zoning and frontage consent
requirements of the ordinances are complied with.
(1987 Code § 12-5)
4-1-6: INSPECTIONS; SAMPLES:
   A.   Inspections: Whenever inspection of the premises used for or in
connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation is
reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to
detect violators thereof, it shall be the obligation of the licensee, or the
agent in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the
purpose of making such inspection, any authorized officer or employee of the
City to make such inspection at any reasonable time.
   B.   Samples: Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is
reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any ordinance provision or to
detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of any licensee of the
Municipality whose business is governed by such provision to give to any
authorized officer or employee of the Municipality requesting the same
sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis upon
request.
(1987 Code § 12-6)
   C.   Revocation Upon Refusal: In addition to any other penalty which may be
provided, the Mayor may revoke the license of any licensed proprietor of any
licensed business in the City who refuses to permit any such officer or
employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample, or take
an adequate sample of the desired commodity, or who interferes with such
officer or employee while in the performance of their duty in making such
inspection; provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless
written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises,
in the name of the City, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at
the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the sample.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-1-7: POSTING OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting the licensed business in the City
to keep their license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such
business.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-1-8: SPECIAL PERMITS TO NONPROFIT ENTERPRISES:
The City Clerk shall issue special permits, without the payment of any license
fees or other charges therefor, to any person or organization for the conduct
or operation of a nonprofit enterprise, either regularly or temporarily, when
she finds that the applicant operates without private profit for a public,
charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or religious purpose; all
applicants for special permits as provided for herein shall furnish such
information and make such affidavits as shall be reasonably required by the
City Clerk to determine if such applicant conforms.
(1987 Code § 12-8)
4-1-9: PENALTY:
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the City the conduct of any
activity is permitted only pursuant to and after the issuance of a license or
permit, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation for any
such provision of this Code or of any ordinance shall be punished by a fine of
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00). Each day any violation of any provision of this Code or of
any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 12-9)
CHAPTER 2: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Section
4-2-1: Definitions
4-2-2: Mayor Designated Liquor Control Commissioner; Alternate
4-2-3: License Required
4-2-4: Applications For Licenses
4-2-5: Ineligibility
4-2-6: License Classification And Fees; Approval Authority; Limitation On
Number Of Licenses
4-2-7: Effect On License If Holder Becomes Ineligible
4-2-8: Disposition Of Fees
4-2-9: Personal Nature Of Licenses; Expiration Date
4-2-10: License For One Location
4-2-11: Sales Near Churches, Schools And Similar Establishments
4-2-12: Effect On License Due To Change In Ownership; Transfer Fee
4-2-13: License Renewal
4-2-14: Operational Restrictions And Requirements
4-2-15: Minors
4-2-16: Prohibited Activities
4-2-17: Special Civic Events
4-2-18: Illinois BASSET Alcohol Certification Program
4-2-19: Revocation Of License
4-2-20: Penalty
4-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
chapter shall be construed according to the definitions given below:
AGENT: An authorized representative of the licensee who has supervisory
authority over all employees of the licensed premises.
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR: Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid containing more
than one-half (1/2) of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is fit for
beverage purposes.
BASSET: A Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Educational Training Program, or
other similar program, licensed by the State Liquor Control Commission pursuant
to 235 Illinois Compiled Statutes sections 5/3-12 (11.1) and 6-27, or title 77
of the Illinois Administrative Code, chapter XVI, section 3500, as amended.
BEER: A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or
concoction of barley, or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes,
among other things, beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter and the like. See 235
ILCS 5/1-3.04.
BYOA: Bring your own alcohol.
CATERING ENDORSEMENT: Permits the service of alcoholic liquors for consumption,
either on-site or off-site, whether the location is licensed or unlicensed, as
an incidental part of food service. Prepared meals and alcoholic liquors are
sold at a package price agreed upon under contract.
CLUB: A corporation organized under the laws of this State, not for pecuniary
profit, solely for the promotion of some common object other than the sale or
consumption of alcoholic liquor.
FULL BAR: An area within a business that is designed to store, sell, pour,
serve and consume alcoholic beverages, which includes a structure in the
appearance of a counter, across which alcoholic beverages served. A full bar
can be a stand alone component of a business, whose primary service is the
service of alcoholic beverages, or it may be a component added to a restaurant
business who provides tabled food service and alcoholic beverage service as the
two (2) core components of the business.
FULL SERVICE PERSONAL CARE ESTABLISHMENT: A business establishment that offers
multiple personal care services that when giving individually or combined as a
package require a minimum of two (2) hours to complete, which may include, but
is not limited to, hair treatments, haircuts, nail treatments, body packs and
wraps, exfoliation, waxing, aromatherapy, facials, and formal wear fitting
events.
HOTEL: Any building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and
held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and
consumed, and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers
and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which twenty five
(25) or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and
having one or more public dining rooms where meals are served to such guests,
such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same
building or buildings, structure or structures being provided with adequate and
sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity.
MIXED USE SPECIAL EVENT FACILITY: Means a fixed establishment within an
enclosed building that rents space specially designed for both private events
and public events and accommodates a minimum of fifty (50) patrons.
PACKAGED LIQUOR: Alcoholic liquor sealed in the original package container
which meets the State and Federal label requirements; provided, however, where
the packaged liquor is to be consumed off premise, the license holder may break
up original larger cases of alcoholic liquor received from distributers for
retail sale to customers.
SPECIAL EVENT: An event being held only by a not-for-profit organization within
the City limits in which the not-for-profit organization offers the retail sale
of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption, during the time frame of the
special event.
SPECIAL USE PERMIT: A permit for use by a current licensed retailer to allow
the transfer of alcoholic beverages from an existing licensed retail premises
to a designated site for a special event.
RESTAURANT: Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to
the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and
regularly served without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided
with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity and
having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare,
cook and serve suitable food for its guests.
RETAIL SALE: The sale for use or consumption, and not for resale in any form.
THEATRE AND ENTERTAINMENT CENTER: Means an establishment within an enclosed
building with stationary, affixed seating for at least one hundred (100)
patrons at which the primary activity is the display of movies, plays being
performed or musical performances being given or in combination thereof.
VIDEO GAMING CAFÉ: An establishment whose primary or a major focus of the
establishment is video gaming and the service of alcohol; food is secondary to
the operation of video gaming. The following factors may be considered when
determining if the establishment is a video gaming café:
   A.   The layout and design of the establishment;
   B.   The preparation and variety of food and beverages offered;
   C.   The creation and operation of a commercial kitchen on the premise where
gaming is situated;
   D.   The number of video gaming machines relative to the customer seating
capacity of the establishment must be ten (10) customer seating to one machine;
   E.   The square footage of space devoted to video gaming relative to the
amount of space devoted to other activities must be four (4) for non-gaming to
one (1) gaming;
   F.   The source of proposed or actual revenue derived from the
establishment;
   G.   The number of employees at the establishment and their proposed
function; and
   H.   Any other factors as determined as relevant by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
WINE: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the natural
contents of fruits or vegetables containing sugar, including those beverages
when fortified by the addition of alcohol or spirits, as defined in this
section. See 235 ILCS 5/1-3.03.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018; amd. Ord. 19-1193, 5-20-2019; Ord. 19-1196, 6-17-
2019; Ord. 19-1210, 10-21-2019; Ord. 21-18, 4-5-2021; Ord. 21-49, 10-18-2021;
Ord. 22-36, 5-16-2022; Ord. 23-70, 12-18-2023)
4-2-2: MAYOR DESIGNATED LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER; ALTERNATE:
The Mayor shall act as Local Liquor Control Commissioner of the City and, in
the event of a conflict preventing the Mayor from so acting, the designated
Local Liquor Control Commissioner is the City Administrator.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018)
4-2-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for a business or establishment to sell or offer for sale
at retail or allow the possession or consumption of alcohol without having a
valid liquor license in accordance with section
4-2-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1193, 5-20-2019)
4-2-4: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:
Applications for licenses required by this chapter shall be verified in writing
and on a form provided by the City Administrator, signed by the applicant. All
applications shall contain the following information and statements, which
shall be true and accurate by the person signing the application:
   A.   Personal, Corporate Information: The name, age and address of the
applicant in the case of an individual; in the case of a partnership, the
persons entitled to share in the profits thereof, and in the case of a
corporation, club or limited liability company, the date of incorporation or
organization, the objects for which it was organized, the names and addresses
of the officers, managers, members, directors and all shareholders owning more
than five percent (5%) of the corporate stock or membership interest.
   B.   Length Of Business: The length of time that said applicant(s) or
company has been in the business of selling alcoholic liquor.
   C.   Location, Description Of Premises: The location and description of the
premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license.
   D.   Other Applications: A statement whether the applicant(s) or company has
made a similar application for a similar license on premises other than
described in this application and the disposition of such application.
   E.   Prior Convictions, Disqualifications: A statement whether applicant(s)
or corporation officers, managers and members have ever been convicted of a
felony or have been previously disqualified to receive a license for any
reason.
   F.   Prior Revocations: Whether a previous license held by the applicant(s)
or corporation’s officers, managers and members, by any state or subdivision
thereof, or by the Federal government, has ever been revoked and the reasons
therefor.
   G.   Statement Of Conduct: A statement that the applicant will not violate
any of the laws of the State of Illinois or of the United States, or any
ordinance of this City in the conduct of the proposed business.
   H.   Additional Information: Such additional information that the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner determines to be useful in evaluating the
application.
   I.   Agent: The name, age, address and contact information for an agent who
shall at all times be able to meet with City officials, whether at the licensed
premises or elsewhere in the City, to address concerns about activities at the
premises or other issues relating to the license.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018; amd. Ord. 21-49, 10-18-2021)
4-2-5: INELIGIBILITY:
No license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who resides more than ten (10) miles outside the City, unless
the agent designated on their license application lives within ten (10) miles
of the City.
   B.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the City or
community in which they reside.
   C.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any Federal or State
law.
   D.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause.
   E.   A person who at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
   F.   A partnership, if any partner would not be eligible to receive a
license hereunder for any reason other than residency within the City, unless
the ineligible partners have in the aggregate less than five percent (5%) of
the partnership interests.
   G.   A limited liability company, if any officer, manager or member would
not be eligible to receive a license for any reason other than citizenship and
residence within the City, unless the ineligible members own in the aggregate
less than five percent (5%) of the membership interests.
   H.   A corporation, if any officer, manager, director or stockholder would
not be eligible to receive a license for any reason other than citizenship and
residence within the City, unless the ineligible shareholders own in the
aggregate less than five percent (5%) of any class of stock.
   I.   A trust or any other type of organization that is not a partnership,
corporation or limited liability company.
   J.   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it is a
foreign corporation which is qualified under the “Business Corporation Act of
1983" to transact business in Illinois.
   K.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any Federal or State
law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor,
subsequent to the passage of this chapter, or shall have forfeited his bond to
appear in court to answer charges for any such violation.
   L.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a license
is sought, or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
   M.   Any person, partnership, limited liability company or corporation not
eligible for a State retail liquor dealer’s license.
   N.   Any current City police officer, the Mayor, Council member or
department head, unless authorized by a majority vote of the City Council.
   O.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be operated
by the licensee.
   P.   Any person whose application for liquor license contains false
statements or misrepresentations thereon.
   Q.   Any person whose designated agent would be ineligible for a license
under this section.
   R.   Any person proposing to operate a Video Gaming Cafe provided, however,
any licensee operating as a Video Gaming Cafe as of January 1, 2024, may
continue to operate under such license, as renewed from time to time. A change
of ownership may also be considered by Council so long as it does not affect
the total number of license locations per Section
4-6-8: Number of Licenses.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018; amd. Ord. 21-49, 10-18-2021; Ord. 24-1, 1-16-2024)
4-2-6: LICENSE CLASSIFICATION AND FEES; APPROVAL AUTHORITY; LIMITATION ON
NUMBER OF LICENSES:
   A.   Approval Authority; Exception: Licenses required by this chapter shall
be divided into the following classes. The approval and authority to issue
liquor licenses is the responsibility of the Liquor Control Commissioner, with
the approval of the City Council. The Liquor Control Commissioner or appointed
designee may issue Class D “special event” licenses, Class E “bring your own
alcohol” licenses, and Special Use Permits without prior Council approval when
the license does not involve the use of additional City services or public
property.
   B.   Increase, Reduction In Number Of Licenses: Upon the approval by City
Council of an increase in Class A, Class B, Class C, Class F and Class G liquor
licenses, and by the Mayor of Class E liquor licenses, the City Clerk is hereby
directed to amend this section to increase the number of liquor licenses
accordingly. Any time a license is revoked or voluntarily surrendered, the
maximum number of authorized licenses of that class will reduce by one, and the
City Clerk is hereby directed to amend this section to reflect that reduction.
   C.   Prorating: In the event a new license is issued after May 1 of the
year, the license fee for that fiscal year will be prorated monthly to account
for the remaining months in the year.
   D.   Classifications Specified; Fees; Number Permitted:
      1.   Class A (Full Bar) License: Issuance of a Class A license shall
authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, and the
retail sale of packaged liquor. The annual fee for such licenses shall be one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). A Class A licensee shall be eligible
to apply for a catering endorsement for an additional fee of three hundred
dollars ($300.00), which shall permit the servicing of alcoholic liquor for
off-site consumption as an incidental part of food service, sold at a package
price, as agreed upon under contract. Nonprofit organizations with a Class A
license shall be eligible to pay a reduced fee of five hundred dollars
($500.00) per year to receive and maintain a Class A license. No more than
forty-eight (48) Class A licenses shall be in force in the City at any time.
      2.   Class A-1 (Limited Full Bar) License: Issuance of a Class A-
1 license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises. The annual fee for such licenses shall be one thousand dollars
($1,000). No more than one (1) Class A-1 license shall be in force in the City
at any time.
      3.   Class B (Service) License: Issuance of a Class B license shall
authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor, for consumption on the premises only
when served as follows. No full bar is permitted.
         a.   Restaurant Table Service: All sales, service, and consumption
conducted at tables; and
         b.   Theatre And Entertainment Service: All sales and service
conducted over a concession counter with consumption in theater and
entertainment center seats; and
         c.   Mixed Use Service: All sales and service conducted at tables or
over a temporary counter and consumption within the defined area of the mixed
use special event facility.
      The annual fee for a Class B license shall be eight hundred dollars
($800.00). No more than fourteen (14) Class B licenses shall be in force in the
City at any time.
      4.   Class C (Packaged Retail) License: Issuance of a Class C license
shall authorize the retail sale of packaged alcoholic liquor only. No
consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be permitted on the premises. The annual
fee for a Class C license shall be one thousand one hundred dollars
($1,100.00). No more than twenty-six (26) Class C licenses shall be in force in
the City at any time.
      5.   Class D (Special Event) License: Issuance of a Class D license shall
only authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor by not-for-profit
organizations, for consumption on the premises during a designated special
event. No such license shall be issued for a license period in excess of five
(5) days nor shall any private premises be eligible for more than eight (8)
such licenses during any calendar year. The fee for such license shall be one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per event. The premises shall be considered
unlicensed both immediately before and immediately after any special event
license period.
      6.   Class E BYOA License: Issuance of a Class E license shall allow for
the legal consumption of alcohol within the premises of an establishment or
business that is open to the public and does not otherwise possess a City
issued liquor license. Issuance of a Class E license does not permit the owner,
manager or staff of the business to sell or serve alcoholic liquor to
customers. The annual fee for a BYOA license shall be two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). No more than two (2) Class E licenses shall be in force in the City
at any time. Conditions of a BYOA license are as follows:
         a.   The licensee shall only permit BYOA to occur on the premises in
conjunction with the purchase of a service within the establishment;
         b.   Only patrons who are over the age of twenty-one (21) and that are
participating in the service of the business shall be permitted to consume
alcohol that has been provided by the patrons;
         c.   The licensee may provide glassware and ice to patrons, but may
not serve alcohol; and
         d.   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, transport or
possess liquor in an unsealed and open condition.
      7.   Class G (Limited Service And Package) License: Issuance of a Class G
license shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises, and the retail sale of packaged liquor. The annual fee for such
licenses shall be one thousand three hundred dollars ($1,300.00). Conditions on
license are as follows:
         a.   This license shall be issued only for the designated area of
Miller Point Park that is identified under a valid use/permit agreement with
the City.
         b.   No more than one Class G license shall be issued.
      All sale alcoholic liquor must be in metal cans, plastic bottles or
plastic cups; glass containers are not permitted.
      8.   Special Use Permit: A Special Use Permit is required for current
retail liquor license holders to hold any special off-premise event(s). Any
current Class A or Class B liquor license holder may apply for a Special Use
Permit.
      9.   Class H (Limited Service) License: Issuance of a Class H license
shall authorize the sale of beer and wine for on premise consumption only. No
full bar is permitted. The annual fee for such licenses shall be one thousand
dollars ($1,000.00). Conditions of license are as follows:
         a.   This license shall be issued only for specialty businesses
approved by the Mayor with consent of Council. Prior to applying for a Class H
license, prospective businesses must submit a business description form as
supplied by the City for review by Staff and the Council.
         b.   All sales and service shall be conducted at tables or over a
counter.
         c.   This license is not eligible for video gaming.
   E.   “To Go” Mixed Drinks/Cocktails And Single Servings Of Wine: Each liquor
licensee who also possesses a State of Illinois combined retailer licensee
(“Combined 1A Licensee”) or a retailer licensee (1A) with both an on-premises
and off-premises license, may sell and deliver “to go” mixed drinks/cocktails
and single servings of wine for off-premises consumption subject to compliance
with all applicable City and State rules and regulations.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018; amd. Ord. 19-1193, 5-20-2019; Ord. 19-1196, 6-17-
2019; Ord. 19-1210, 10-21-2019; Ord. 19-1211, 10-21-2019; Ord. 20-15, 4-20-
2020; Ord. 20-24, 4-20-2020; Ord. 20-23, 6-15-2020; Ord. 20-25, 7-20-2020; Ord.
20-, 8-3-2020; Ord. 21-18, 4-5-2021; Ord. 21-41, 8-16-2021; Ord. 21-50, 10-18-
2021; Ord. 21-51, 10-18-2021; Ord. 21-67, 12-6-2021; Ord. 22-18, 3-7-2022; Ord.
22-23, 4-5-2022; Ord. 22-27, 4-18-2022; Ord. 22-36, 5-16-2022; Ord. 22-37, 6-6-
2022; Ord. 22-51, 9-6-2022; Ord. 22-54, 10-3-2022; Ord. 23-16, 3-20-2023; Ord.
23-22, 4-17-2023; Ord. 23-28, 5-15-2023; Ord. 23-36, 6-19-2023; Ord. 23-38, 7-
17-2023; Ord. 23-43, 8-21-2023; Ord. 23-44, 8-21-2023; Ord. 23-51, 10-2-2023;
Ord. 23-54, 10-16-2023; Ord. 24-2, 1-16-2024; Ord. 24-8, 3-4-2024; Ord. 24-11,
4-15-2024; Ord. 24-14, 5-6-2024; Ord. 24-19, 5-20-2024; Ord. 24-19, 5-20-2024;
Ord. 24-36, 8-5-2024; Ord. 24-42, 8-19-2024; Ord. 24-47, 10-7-2024; Ord. 24-48,
11-4-2024; Ord. 24-58, 12-16-2024; Ord. 25-2, 1-21-2025; Ord. 25-12, 3-3-2025;
Ord. 25-22, 4-21-2025; Ord. 25-24, 5-5-2025; Ord. 25-27, 5-19-2025)
4-2-7: EFFECT ON LICENSE IF HOLDER BECOMES INELIGIBLE:
If the licensee identified on the license discontinues operations at the
premises described in the application and license for a period of thirty (30)
consecutive days (except as hereafter set forth or businesses that are seasonal
by nature), or whenever there is clear evidence of an intent of the licensee to
abandon the premises, said license shall be deemed void, and the license shall
cease to exist upon written notice to the licensee by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner. Thereafter, the total number of available licenses for that class
shall be reduced by action of the City Council. If said discontinued operation
is due to fire or other such damage wherein the building inspector deems the
premises uninhabitable, said thirty (30) day period shall be tolled until
occupancy is granted by the building inspector.
(Ord. 19-1193, 5-20-2019)
4-2-8: DISPOSITION OF FEES:
All license fees shall be paid to the Mayor at the time application is made,
and shall be forthwith turned over to the Finance Director. In the event the
license applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant; if
the license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in the general
corporate funds or in such other funds as shall have been designated by the
Council.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018)
4-2-9: PERSONAL NATURE OF LICENSES; EXPIRATION DATE:
A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for the license period
which shall expire on April 30 next following the date of issuance, unless
sooner revoked, and shall not constitute property nor shall it be subject to
attachment, garnishment or execution, nor shall it be alienable or
transferable, voluntarily or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or
hypothecated. Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or
intestate devolution, but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee;
provided, that executors or administrators, of the estate of any deceased
licensee, and the trustee of any insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such
estate consists in part of alcoholic liquor, may continue the business of the
sale or manufacture of alcoholic liquor under order of the appropriate court,
and may exercise the privileges of the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt
licensee after the death of such decedent, or such insolvency or bankruptcy
until the expiration of such license, but not longer than six (6) months after
the death, insolvency or bankruptcy of such licensee. A refund shall be made of
that portion of the license fees paid for any period in which the licensee
shall be prevented from operating under such license in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018)
4-2-10: LICENSE FOR ONE LOCATION:
Licenses issued hereunder apply only to the premises described in the
application and in the license issued thereon, and only one location shall be
so described in each license.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018)
4-2-11: SALES NEAR CHURCHES, SCHOOLS AND SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS:
No license shall be issued under the terms and conditions of this chapter for
the sale at retail of any alcoholic liquor within a distance of one hundred
feet (100') of any church, school or hospital. No person shall hereafter engage
in the business of retail of any alcoholic liquor within a distance of one
hundred feet (100') of any undertaking establishment or mortuary.
Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the Local Liquor
Commissioner may, in his discretion, based on the circumstances including, but
not limited to, safety, grant an exemption to the prohibition in this section.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018; amd. Ord. 23-36, 6-19-2023)
4-2-12: EFFECT ON LICENSE DUE TO CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP; TRANSFER FEE:
   A.   Ownership Changes: Any changes in partnership, officers, directors,
persons holding directly or beneficially more than five percent (5%) of the
stock, partnership, membership or ownership interest, managers of businesses
licensed under this chapter, shall be reported in writing to the Liquor Control
Commissioner within ten (10) days of the change. All new personnel shall meet
the standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a liquor
license. All such changes in personnel shall be subject to review by the Local
Liquor Control Commissioner within thirty (30) days of the change.
   B.   Issuance Of New License; Fee: Upon such a change in ownership, the pre-
existing license shall be deemed terminated and the new license shall be
applied for by the new ownership, and a transfer fee of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) shall be paid.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018)
4-2-13: LICENSE RENEWAL:
   A.   Permitted: Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration
thereof, provided they are then qualified to receive a license and the premises
for which such renewal privilege is sought is suitable for such purpose; and
provided further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be
construed as a vested right which shall in any case prevent the Mayor and City
Council from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued in his
jurisdiction.
   B.   Waiver Of Renewal Privilege: A licensee may during the first fifteen
(15) days of the license period waive their renewal privilege in writing to a
new operator without first making application for a renewal of license in his
own name, thereby surrendering his privilege of renewal.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-2-14: OPERATIONAL RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Peddling: It shall be unlawful to peddle alcoholic liquor in the City.
   B.   Premises Compliance: All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor, or for the storage of such liquor for such sale, shall comply in all
respects with the provisions of this Code.
   C.   Minimum Age Of Bartenders And Persons Serving Alcoholic Liquor: No
licensee hereunder may employ any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
for the purpose of bartending or drawing, pouring, dispensing or mixing any
alcoholic liquor; provided, however, this subsection shall not prohibit
licensees from employing persons eighteen (18) years of age or older to serve
alcoholic liquor to customers at tables in restaurants for consumption on the
premises.
   D.   Minimum Age Of Persons Conducting Retail Sale Of Packaged Alcoholic
Liquor: No licensee hereunder may employ any person under the age of twenty one
(21) years for the purpose of conducting the sale of any alcoholic liquor in
packages.
   E.   Closing Hours:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided for herein, it shall be unlawful to
sell or offer for sale at retail, give away or deliver, either in, upon or from
any licensed premises as follows:
         a.   Class A licensees:
            (1)   Monday through Friday: Between the hours of one o’clock (1:
00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
            (2)   Saturday and Sunday: Between the hours of two o’clock (2:00)
A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
      Provided, however, on Memorial Day (observed), Thanksgiving Day, New
Year’s Day and Independence Day (4th of July), when those holidays fall on
Monday through Friday, it shall be lawful for Class A licensees to sell
alcoholic liquor until two o’clock (2:00) A.M.
         b.   Class A-1 Licenses: Between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M.
and nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. any day of the week.
         c.   Class B licenses: Between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) A.M.
and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. any day of the week.
      Provided, however, on Memorial Day (observed), Thanksgiving Day, New
Year’s Day and Independence Day (4th of July), it shall be lawful for Class B
licensees to sell alcoholic liquor until two o’clock (2:00) A.M.
         d.   Class C licensee: Between the hours of twelve o’clock (12:00)
midnight and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. any day of the week.
         e.   Class D and E licensees: As defined on the special event liquor
and BYOA license, but not between the hours of twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight
and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
         f.   Class F licenses: In no case shall the serving and/or consumption
on the licensed premises of beer and/or wine take place outside of the normal
business hours of the licensed premises and, in any event, not between the
hours of twelve o’clock (12:00) midnight and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
         g.   Class G licenses: Between the hours of eleven o’clock (11:00)
A.M. and seven thirty o’clock (7:30) P.M. any day of the week; provided,
however, in the event that a City hosted special event, with alcohol sales, is
conducted at the Miller Point Park during the hours of eleven o’clock (11:00)
A.M. through seven thirty o’clock (7:30) P.M., this Class G license shall be
temporarily suspended until the City hosted special event is concluded.
         h.   Class H licenses: Between the hours of twelve o’clock (12:00)
midnight and eleven o’clock (11:00) A.M. any day of the week.
      2.   During prohibited hours, it shall be unlawful to keep open for
business, to admit the public to, to permit the public to remain within or to
permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor by employees or members of the
public in or upon the licensed premises. Officers of the City Police Department
shall be permitted access for purposes of inspection to ensure compliance with
this section.
   F.   Use Of Premises Following Legal Closing Hours: Every location in which
alcoholic liquor is sold under this chapter shall observe the following rules
and regulations:
      1.   Within fifteen (15) minutes after required closing, all customers
shall be off the premises, and all containers of alcohol shall be emptied and
removed from the areas accessible to customers.
      2.   During said fifteen (15) minute period, no employee shall be
stationed behind the bar or any service counter for the sale of alcoholic
liquor; provided, however, that if there are no customers on the premises
during such period of time, employees may go behind such bar or service counter
for any purpose other than for the sale or dispensation of alcoholic liquor.
      3.   All exterior lights shall be extinguished at the closing hour in
effect for that day.
      4.   After the expiration of the said fifteen (15) minutes, employees may
proceed with such nightly cleanup routine as may be desired in any section of
the premises.
      5.   No patrons shall be permitted entrance into the premises after the
closing hour, and all doors of the establishment shall be locked at the closing
hour.
      6.   Employees of any licensed establishment shall immediately upon
request admit officers of the Police Department for the purpose of inspection
of the premises to ensure compliance with the provisions of this subsection F.
   G.   View From Street: In premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption on the premises is licensed, no screen, blind, curtain,
partition, article or thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors
of such licensed premises, nor inside such licensed premises, which shall
prevent a clear view into the interior of such licensed premises from the
street, road or sidewalk at all times, and no booth, screen, partition or other
obstruction, nor any arrangement of lights or lighting, shall be permitted in
or about the interior of such premises which shall prevent a clear and full
view of the entire interior of such premises from the street, road or sidewalk,
and such premises shall be so located as to provide for such a view. All rooms
where liquor is sold for consumption upon the premises shall be continuously
lighted during business hours by natural light or by artificial white light so
that all parts of the interior of the premises shall be clearly visible. In
case the view into any such licensed premises required by the foregoing
provisions, shall be wilfully obscured by the licensee or by him wilfully
suffered to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be
subject to revocation in the manner herein provided. In order to enforce the
provisions of this subsection, the Mayor shall have the right to require the
filing with the City of plans, drawings and photographs showing the clearance
of the view as above required.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018; amd. Ord. 19-1193, 5-20-2019; Ord. 19-1196, 6-17-
2019; Ord. 19-1210, 10-21-2019; Ord. 21-18, 4-5-2021; Ord. 22-51, 9-6-2022;
Ord. 24-58, 12-16-2024)
4-2-15: MINORS:
   A.   Purchasing, Accepting, Possessing, Consuming By Minors:
      1.   The purchase, acceptance or possession of any alcoholic liquor by
any person under the age of twenty one (21) years is forbidden. This subsection
does not apply to possession by a person under the age of twenty one (21) years
making a delivery of an alcoholic liquor in pursuance of the order of their
parent or in pursuance of his employment.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      2.   The consumption of any alcoholic liquor by any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years is forbidden.
      3.   The possession and dispensing or consumption by a minor of alcoholic
liquor in the performance of a religious service or ceremony, or the
consumption by a minor under the direct supervision and approval of the parents
or parent of such minor in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this
subsection.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018)
   B.   Sale Or Delivery To Minors: No licensee nor any officer, associate,
member, representative, agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or
deliver alcoholic liquor to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
or to any intoxicated person or to any person known by the licensee to be
intoxicated or suffering from any mental illness. No person, after purchasing
or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver such
alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty one (21) years,
except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
   C.   Misrepresenting Age: Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
who misrepresents their age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining
alcoholic liquor from any retail licensee in the City shall be guilty of
violating this Code.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   D.   Warning To Minors: All licensees under this chapter shall display at
all times, in a prominent place, a printed card which shall read substantially
as follows:
   WARNING TO MINORS
You are subject to a fine of up to $750.00 under the ordinances of the City of
McHenry if you are under the age of 21 and purchase alcoholic liquor or
misrepresent your age for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic
liquor.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018)
   E.   Parental Responsibility For Violations: Any parent or guardian who
shall knowingly suffer or permit any minor child who is their child or ward, to
violate any provision or provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of
violating this Code.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-2-16: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Specified: It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or
operating a commercial establishment located within the City, at which
alcoholic liquor is offered for sale for consumption on the premises, to permit
or allow the following activity to be conducted on the premises of such a
commercial establishment, all of which activity is defined in section 4-3A-1 of
this title: adult business; adult entertainment center; adults only activity,
bookstore, motion picture theater(s); adult only sauna; nudity; obscene
activity; rap parlor; sadomasochistic activity; or sexual conduct activity.
   B.   Adult Businesses Defined In Zoning Ordinance: It shall be unlawful for
any establishment defined as an adult business pursuant to the City Zoning
Ordinance to sell, distribute or permit alcoholic liquor on the premises.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018)
   C.   Vaping Alcohol: It shall be unlawful for any business that possess an
on premises consumption liquor license to allow the consumption of alcohol
through any means other than the traditional method of drinking alcohol in the
liquid form. Vaping alcohol is strictly prohibited.
(Ord. 19-1210, 10-21-2019)
4-2-17: SPECIAL CIVIC EVENTS:
The City Council and the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may from time to
time announce certain special civic events, such as Fiesta Days, where outdoor
and public property alcoholic sales and consumption adjacent to the licensee’s
property may be permitted. Any Class A and B licensee wishing to sell alcoholic
liquor outdoor and on public property at special civic events must attend a
meeting of licensees at a time and place designated by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner or his designee. Notice of the meeting will be sent to all Class A
and B licensees approximately one month prior to the special civic event. At
the completion of the meeting, each licensee will receive a special civic event
endorsement permitting off-premises, outdoor and public property sales on a
restricted basis specified in the endorsement.
(Ord. 19-1210, 10-21-2019)
4-2-18: ILLINOIS BASSET ALCOHOL CERTIFICATION PROGRAM:
   A.   Completion Required: Successful completion of a BASSET program, or
other similar program as approved by the Chief of Police and the Illinois
Liquor Control Commission, is required for all persons who sell or serve
alcoholic liquor, all management personnel working in a licensed premises, and
anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for the
purchase of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license.
   B.   New Owners, Managers, Employees: Any new owner, manager, employee or
agent requiring BASSET training shall, within thirty (30) days from their first
day of employment or other association with a licensee, enroll in a BASSET
approved program and then complete the program successfully within sixty (60)
days of enrollment. Until successful completion of the program, such person
shall work under the direct supervision of a person who is BASSET certified.
   C.   Term Of Validity: BASSET certification or other approved training shall
be valid only for three (3) years or such shorter time as may be specified by
the certification program. After the certification expires, recertification is
required. If there is a lapse in certification, the individual must work under
the direct supervision of a person who is BASSET certified. Any lapse in
certification of more than sixty (60) days shall be a violation of this
section.
   D.   Certificates Maintained: Photocopies of certificates of completion of a
BASSET program shall be maintained by the licensee in a manner that will allow
inspection, upon demand, by a member of the Police Department or the Local
Liquor Control Commission. In addition, a copy of each BASSET certification
must be presented to the Police Department (Investigation Section) upon
completion.
   E.   Violators Reapply And Complete: In the event a licensed premises is
found to be in violation of any provision of this chapter or the Liquor Control
Act (235 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.) of 1934, the Commission, within their sole
discretion, and in addition to any other actions which may be taken in response
to violations of this chapter, may require all persons who sell or serve
alcoholic liquor and/or all management personnel working in a licensed premises
and/or anyone whose job description entails the checking of identification for
the purchase of alcoholic liquor pursuant to the license to reapply, attend and
successfully complete a BASSET program at the Police Department.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018)
4-2-19: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   License Revocation Authorized:
      1.   No person holding a license issued by the City shall, in the conduct
of the licensed business or upon the licensed premises, either directly or
through an agent or employee of the licensee:
         a.   Violate or permit a violation of any Federal law or State Statute
related to the control of liquor.
         b.   Violate or permit a violation of any City ordinance or resolution
regulating the sale of alcoholic liquor or relating to the eligibility of the
licensee to hold a liquor license.
         c.   Violate or permit a violation of any rule or regulation of the
Illinois Liquor Control Commission as revised from time to time.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018)
         d.   Permit the sale and/or consumption of any alcoholic liquor
outdoors except upon issuance of specific permit or license by the City
Council.
(Ord. 19-1193, 5-20-2019)
         e.   Permit the sale and/or consumption of any alcoholic liquor
outdoors during a special civic event without an endorsement under section 4-2-
17 of this chapter.
         f.   Allow fighting, disorderly conduct or excessive noise
constituting a nuisance or tumultuous conduct of patrons and/or employees of
licensee, as defined in this Code, to take place on the licensed premises or
on, about and/or adjacent to the property where the licensed premises is
located.
         g.   Knowingly allow the use, sale or possession of illegal narcotics
on the licensed premises.
         h.   Allow patrons to serve or distribute alcoholic liquor to minors
on the licensed premises or allow minors to drink alcoholic liquor on the
licensed premises.
         i.   Fail to call the Police Department upon the violation of any City
ordinance or State law relating to fighting, disorderly conduct or excessive
noise constituting a nuisance or tumultuous conduct of patrons and/or employees
on the licensed premises.
         j.   Submit to the Mayor an application for license containing a false
or misleading statement.
      2.   Proof before the Liquor Control Commissioner of the facts which
establish a violation of any Federal law, State Statute, City ordinance or
resolution or rule of the Illinois Liquor Control Commission shall be
sufficient cause for revocation, suspension, alteration of hours on a temporary
or permanent basis and fine of any liquor licensee, irrespective of whether or
not a conviction has been obtained in any court. In addition, the licensee
shall be obligated to reimburse the City for all attorney fees incurred as a
result of the prosecution of the offending licensee.
      3.   All appeals from the decision of the City Local Liquor Control
Commissioner shall be limited to a review of the official record of
proceedings.
   B.   Relicensing After Revocation: If such license shall be permanently
revoked, no license shall be granted to any person for a period of one year
thereafter for the conduct of the business of selling alcoholic liquor in the
premises described in such revoked license.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018)
   C.   Hearing On Revocation: No license issued hereunder shall be revoked
except after a hearing, with at least three (3) days’ notice having been given
to the licensee for an opportunity to appear and defend the charges against
them.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-2-20: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be subject to license suspension or revocation, alteration of hours on a
temporary or permanent basis and fines of not less than four hundred dollars
($400.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each
offense committed on each day during, or on which, a violation occurs or
continues, plus reimbursement of legal fees incurred by the City in the
prosecution of Liquor Code violations against the licensee.
(Ord. 18-1183, 11-12-2018) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 3: ADULT BUSINESSES AND USES
ARTICLE A: DEFINITIONS
Section
   
4-3A-1: Definitions
4-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
Terms used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings:
ADULT BUSINESS: Any establishment in which twenty five percent (25%) or more of
its stock in trade or business activity in a use, such as, but not limited to,
the following: adults only bookstores, adults only motion picture theater(s),
adult entertainment centers, rap parlors, adults only nightclubs or adults only
saunas, where explicit sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is
explicitly or implicitly encouraged or tolerated.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: Synonymous with adult business, as defined in
this section.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CENTER: An enclosed building or part of an enclosed
building, which contains one or more coin operated mechanisms which, when
activated, permit a customer to view a live person nude or in such attire,
costume or clothing as to expose to view the human male or female genitalia;
pubic hair; buttocks; perineum; anal or pubic regions; or, female breast, at or
below the areola thereof. In addition, the viewing of a live person, in the
above described manner, after paying of any admission or fee for the viewing of
same activity.
ADULTS ONLY: Any items or activities emphasizing, depicting, describing or
relating to nudity, explicit sexual conduct (whether autoerotic, heterosexual,
homosexual or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity.
ADULTS ONLY BOOKSTORE: A bookstore or video store in which twenty five percent
(25%) or more of its stock in trade, books, magazines, films for sale or
viewing on premises by use of motion picture devices or other coin operated
means, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
principal emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to nudity,
explicit sexual conduct (whether autoerotic, heterosexual, homosexual or
otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity.
ADULTS ONLY MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building used regularly and
routinely for presenting adults only material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to nudity, explicit
sexual conduct (whether autoerotic, heterosexual, homosexual or otherwise),
bestiality or sadomasochistic activity, for observation by patron therein.
ADULTS ONLY NIGHTCLUB: An establishment or place either occasionally or
primarily in the business of featuring topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic
dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators or similar entertainers, where
explicit sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or
implicitly encouraged or tolerated.
ADULTS ONLY SAUNA: An establishment or place primarily in the business of
providing a steam bath and/or massage services, where explicit sexual conduct
is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or
tolerated.
BOOTH: Any enclosure that is specifically offered to patrons of an adult
business for the private viewing of any adults only item or movie. Said
definition does not include enclosures that are used as private offices by any
operator, employee or agent for attending to the tasks of their employment and
are not offered for use by the public.
BREAST: A portion of the human female mammary gland (commonly referred to as
the female breast) including the nipple and areola (the darker colored area of
the breast surrounding the nipple) and an outside area of such gland wherein
such outside area is: a) reasonably compact and contiguous to the areola; and
b) contains at least the nipple and the areola and one-fourth (1/4) of the
outside surface area of such gland.
BUTTOCKS: The area at the rear of the human body (sometimes referred to as the
gluteus maximus) which lies between two (2) imaginary straight lines running
parallel to the ground when a person is standing, the first or top such line
being one-half inch (1/2") below the top of the vertical cleavage of the nates
(i.e., the prominence formed by the muscles running from the back of the hip to
the back of the leg) and the second or bottom of such line being one-half inch
(1/2") above the lowest point of the curvature of the fleshly protuberance
(sometimes referred to as the gluteal fold), and between two (2) imaginary
straight lines, one on each side of the body (the “outside lines”), which
outside lines are perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines
described above and which perpendicular outside lines pass through the
outermost point(s) at which each nate meets the outer side of each leg.
Notwithstanding the above, buttocks shall not include the leg, the hamstring
muscle below the gluteal fold, the tensor fasciae latae muscle or any of the
above described portion of the human body that is between either: a) the left
inside perpendicular line and the left outside perpendicular line; or b) the
right inside perpendicular line and the right outside perpendicular line. For
the purpose of the previous sentence, the left inside perpendicular line shall
be an imaginary straight line on the left side of the anus: a) that is
perpendicular to the ground and to the horizontal lines described above; and b)
that is one-third (1/3) of the distance from the anus to the right outside
line. (The above description can generally be described as covering 1/3 of the
buttocks centered over the cleavage for the length of the cleavage.)
CUBICLE: Synonymous with booth, as defined in this section.
DOOR: Full, complete, nontransparent closure device that obscures the view or
activity taking place within the enclosure.
ENTITY: For purposes of article D of this chapter, any proprietorship,
partnership, corporation, association, business trust, joint venture, joint
stock company or other for profit and/or not for profit organization.
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in
the practice of therapeutic massage, as defined in this section, and who
provides proof of two (2) of the following:
   A.   Proof of active membership in a Professional Massage Therapy
Organization, as defined in this section.
   B.   Graduation and completion of a professional entry level massage therapy
program consisting of a minimum of five hundred (500) hours of in-classroom
study and a minimum of one hundred (100) hours of clinical experience in a
recognized school, as defined in this section.
   C.   Passing of the National Certification Examination for Therapeutic
Massage and Bodywork (NCETMB) administered by the National Certification Board
for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork, as approved by the National Commission
for Certifying Agencies (NCCA), the National Organization for Competency
Assurance (NOCA) or any examination exhibiting proficiency in massage therapy/
bodywork approved by the State of Illinois or a Federal certifying agency.
MASSAGE THERAPY CLINIC: Any place of business having a source of income or
compensation derived from the practice of therapeutic massage, as defined in
this section, where a licensed massage therapist administers therapeutic
massage or from where a massage therapist is dispatched to administer
therapeutic massage, as defined in this section. A massage therapy clinic may
be located within a massage therapist’s home, provided it is in compliance with
the terms of article C of this chapter and other ordinances of the City.
NIGHTCLUB: An establishment serving food and/or liquor and providing music and
space for dancing by patrons only. A nightclub shall not include an "adult
business".
NUDE: Any person insufficiently clothed in any manner so that any of the
following body parts are not entirely covered with a fully opaque covering:
   A.   The male or female genitals; or
   B.   The male or female pubic area; or
   C.   The female breast; or
   D.   The buttocks.
Attire which is insufficient to comply with this requirement includes, but is
not limited to, G-strings, T-backs and thongs.
Body paint, body dyes, tattoos, liquid latex whether wet or dried, and similar
substances shall not be considered opaque covering. Each female person may
determine which one-fourth (1/4) of her breast surface area (see definition of
breast) contiguous to and containing the nipple and the areola is to be
covered.
NUDITY: The display of the human male or female genitalia; pubic hair;
buttocks; perineum; anal or pubic regions; female breast, at or below the
areola thereof, with no covering or with a less than fully opaque covering; or,
male genitalia, in a discernible turgid state, with or without covering.
OBSCENE: Any material or performance is obscene if:
   A.   The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards,
would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient interest; and
   B.   The average person, applying contemporary adult community standards,
would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, ultimate
sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or perverted, actual
or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition of the
genitals; and
   C.   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
OPERATOR: For purposes of an adult business, as defined in this section, any
person, (whether said persons be an individual, partner, corporation, joint
stock company, fiduciary, officer, director, stockholder, employee or manager),
which conducts, maintains or owns any adult business.
PATRON:
   A.   For purposes of an adult business, as defined in this section, any
customer, patron or visitor to an adult business who is not employed by any
operator of said establishment.
   B.   For purposes of article C of this chapter, a patron is any person who
receives a massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that
he or she will pay money or give other consideration therefor.
PERSON: For purposes of article D of this chapter, any live human being aged
ten (10) years of age or older.
PLACES PROVIDED OR SET APART FOR NUDITY: Enclosed single sex public restrooms,
enclosed single sex functional shower, locker and/or dressing room facilities,
enclosed motel rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping
accommodations, doctors’ offices, portions of hospitals, and similar places in
which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily expected outside of the
home and the sphere of privacy constitutionally protected therein. This term
shall not be deemed to include places where a person’s conduct of being nude is
used for the promotion of business or is otherwise commercially exploited.
PROFESSIONAL MASSAGE THERAPY ORGANIZATION: An organization comprised of
individuals who have graduated from a recognized school, as defined in this
section, and which is member owned and operated, i.e., its members elect the
board of directors. Such organizations include, but are not limited to, Rolf,
Trager, APTA, HPA, IMF, AOBTA and IMTA.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is
present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected
to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial
establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the
public at large or where entrance is limited by cover charge or membership
requirement); bottle clubs; hotels; motels; restaurants; nightclubs; country
clubs; cabarets; and meeting facilities utilized by any religious, social,
fraternal or similar organization. A premises, or portion thereof such as a
hotel room, used solely as a private residence, whether permanent or temporary
in nature, shall not be deemed to be a public place.
RAP PARLOR: An establishment or place primarily in the business of providing
nonprofessional conversation or similar services for adults, where explicit
sexual conduct is depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly
encouraged or tolerated.
RECOGNIZED SCHOOL: A school or educational institution which meets at least one
of the following requirements:
   A.   An approved school operating according to State regulations which has a
current State license, approval or accreditation and/or certification and
provides an entry level massage training program of a minimum of five hundred
(500) hours of in-class work completed under the physical supervision of
faculty; or
   B.   A massage school program accredited and/or approved by the Commission
on Massage Training/Approval and Accreditation (COMTAA).
Schools offering correspondence courses and not requiring actual in-class
attendance are not considered recognized schools.
ROOM: Synonymous with booth, as defined in this section.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ACTIVITY: Flagellation or torture by or upon a nude person; a
person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume. In addition, the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained with the
intent to stimulate or arouse sexually the initiator and/or the recipient.
SELL: To solicit or receive an order for, to keep or expose for sale and to
keep with intent to sell.
SEXUAL CONDUCT: Ultimate sex acts (whether autoerotic, heterosexual, homosexual
or otherwise), bestiality or sadomasochistic activity. In addition, physical
contact, intended to stimulate or arouse sexually the initiator and/or the
recipient, with a person’s unclothed genitalia, buttocks, perineum, anal or
pubic regions, or female breast.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL: The term sexual or genital area is defined including the
genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts
of a female.
THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE:
   A.   Scientific health care, health maintenance and rehabilitation
techniques applied to a client by a trained and professionally licensed massage
therapist for the purpose of causing increased circulation throughout the body,
ridding the body of waste products and/or toxins, inducing relaxation, easing
mental and physical tension, alleviating aches and pains, and the break up of
fatty tissues, adhesions, scar tissue and muscle spasm, and releasing the
body’s endorphins. Such techniques are provided under circumstances where it is
reasonably expected that the client, or a third party acting on the client’s
behalf, will pay money or give other consideration therefor.
   B.   Therapeutic massage may include, but is not limited to, joint
mobilization techniques, stretches, effleurage (stroking), petrissage
(kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve
strokes and any reasonable method of pressure on the external soft parts of the
body with the hands, elbows or forearms, or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments,
antiseptics, oils, power, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar
preparations commonly used in this practice. Therapeutic massage does not
diagnose or treat classified diseases, practice spinal manipulation or
prescribe medicine or drugs.
UNDERAGE: Any person under eighteen (18) years of age, the legally minimum age
at which one can purchase or view adults only items.
WALL SIGN: Any flat sign which is placed against a building or other structure
and attached thereto in such manner that only one side is visible.
(1987 Code § 2.50-1)
ARTICLE B: ADULT BUSINESS LICENSE
Section
4-3B-1: Adult Business License Required
4-3B-2: Exclusions For Licensing
4-3B-3: Application For License
4-3B-4: Standards For Issuance Of License
4-3B-5: Fees
4-3B-6: Display Of License
4-3B-7: Employment Of Minors Prohibited
4-3B-8: Physical Layout Of Adult Business
4-3B-9: Operator Responsibilities
4-3B-10: Inspections And Enforcement
4-3B-11: Renewal Of License
4-3B-12: Revocation Of License
4-3B-13: Penalties And Prosecution
4-3B-1: ADULT BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required; Determination Of Business Type: No business
establishment having any portion of its stock in trade or business activity in
a use, such as, but not limited to, the following: adults only bookstores,
adults only motion picture theater, adult entertainment centers, rap parlors,
adults only nightclubs or adults only saunas, where any sexual conduct is
depicted and/or sexual activity is explicitly or implicitly encouraged or
tolerated (collectively, “business involved in adult sales”) shall be operated
or maintained in the City without first fully completing a form of statement of
business prepared by the City providing it with enough information to determine
whether the proposed establishment constitutes an adult business, as defined in
section
4-3A-1, “Definitions”, of this chapter. Within fourteen (14) business days
thereafter, the City Administrator shall notify the applicant as to whether the
business involved in adult sales constitutes an adult business requiring
compliance with the additional adult business license regulations of the City,
or whether additional information is needed to make the required determination.
No business involved in adult sales shall be operated or maintained in the City
without first obtaining a license to operate issued by the City. On or before
September 1, 2006, all existing businesses involved in adult sales shall
complete the statement of business form required herein and file it with the
City Administrator.
   B.   License For Each Business Required: A license may be issued only for
one adult business located at a fixed and certain place. Any person,
partnership or corporation which desires to operate more than one adult
business must have a license for each.
   C.   Nontransferable: No license or interest in a license may be transferred
to any person, partnership or corporation.
   D.   Existing Businesses: All adult businesses existing at the time of the
passage of this article must submit an application for a license within ninety
(90) days of the passage of this chapter. If an application is not received
within said ninety (90) day period, then such existing adult business shall
cease operations.
(1987 Code § 2.50-2)
4-3B-2: EXCLUSIONS FOR LICENSING:
All private schools and public schools, as defined in the Illinois Compiled
Statutes, located within the City are exempt from obtaining a license hereunder
when instructing pupils in sex education as part of their curriculum.
(1987 Code § 2.50-12)
4-3B-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Submittal: Any person, partnership or corporation desiring to secure a
license shall make application to the City Administrator. The application shall
be filed in triplicate with and dated by the City Administrator. A copy of the
application shall be distributed promptly to the Police Department.
   B.   Information Required: The application for a license shall be upon a
form provided by the City. An applicant for a license, which shall include all
partners or limited partners of a partnership applicant, and all officers or
directors of a corporate applicant and all stockholders holding more than five
percent (5%) of the stock of a corporate applicant, or any other person who is
interested directly in the ownership or operation of the business, shall
furnish the following information under oath:
      1.   Name and address, including all aliases.
      2.   Written proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of
age.
      3.   All residential addresses of the applicant for the past ten (10)
years.
      4.   The applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
      5.   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for ten (10)
years immediately preceding the date of application.
      6.   Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other
county, city or state under an adult business license or similar business
license; whether the applicant has ever had such a license revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade name under
which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or revocation.
      7.   All criminal statutes, whether Federal or State, or City ordinance
violation convictions, forfeiture of bond and pleadings of nolo contendere on
all charges, except minor traffic violations.
      8.   Fingerprints and two (2) portrait photographs at least two inches by
two inches (2" x 2") of the applicant.
      9.   The address of the adult business establishment to be operated by
the applicant.
      10.   If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify
the name of the corporation, the date and state of incorporation, the name and
address of the registered agent.
   C.   Notification To Applicant Of Decision: Within twenty one (21) days of
receiving an application for a license, the City Administrator shall notify the
applicant whether the application is granted or denied.
   D.   Denial; Reasons Stated; Hearing: Whenever an application is denied, the
City Administrator shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for
such action. If the applicant requests a hearing within ten (10) days of
receipt of notification of denial, a public hearing shall be held within ten
(10) days thereafter before the City Council, as hereinafter provided.
(1987 Code § 2.50-3)
   E.   Failure, Refusal To Comply: Failure or refusal of the applicant to give
any information relevant to the investigation of the application or their
refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination
under oath regarding said application or their refusal to submit to or
cooperate with any investigation required by this article, shall constitute an
admission by the applicant that they are ineligible for such license and shall
be grounds for denial thereof by the City Administrator.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-3B-4: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   Standards Specified: To receive a license to operate an adult business,
an applicant must meet the following standards:
      1.   If the applicant is an individual:
         a.   The applicant shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age.
         b.   The applicant shall not have been convicted of, pleaded no
contest or stipulated to the facts involving a felony or any crime involving
moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in
any jurisdiction within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
         c.   The applicant shall not have been found to have previously
violated this article within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of
the application.
      2.   If the applicant is a corporation:
         a.   All officers, directors and stockholders required to be named
under subsection 4-3B-3B10 of this article shall be at least eighteen (18)
years of age.
         b.   No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under
subsection 4-3B-3B10 of this article shall have been convicted of, pleaded no
contest or stipulated to the facts involving a felony or any crime involving
moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in
any jurisdiction within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
         c.   No officer, director or stockholder required to be named under
subsection 4-3B-3B10 of this article shall have been found to have previously
violated this article within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of
the application.
      3.   If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other type
of organization where two (2) or more persons have a financial interest:
         a.   All persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall be at least eighteen (18) years of
age.
         b.   No persons having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall have been convicted of, pleaded no
contest or stipulated to the facts involving a felony or any crime involving
moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity or other crime of a sexual nature in
any jurisdiction within five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the
application.
         c.   No person having a financial interest in the partnership, joint
venture or other type of organization shall have been found to have violated
any provision of this article within five (5) years immediately preceding the
date of the application.
   B.   Investigation: No license shall be issued unless the Police Department
has investigated the applicant’s qualifications to be licensed. The results of
that investigation shall be filed in writing with the City Administrator no
later than fourteen (14) days after the date of the application.
   C.   Location Restrictions: It is prohibited within a Municipality to locate
an adult entertainment facility within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
property boundaries of any school, daycare center, cemetery, public park,
forest preserve, public housing and place of religious worship as provided in
65 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/11-5-1.5.
(1987 Code § 2.50-4; amd. 2019 Code)
4-3B-5: FEES:
A license fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be submitted with
the application for a license. If the application is denied, one-half (1/2) of
the fee shall be returned. License fees paid less than twelve (12) months prior
to renewal shall not be prorated.
(1987 Code § 2.50-5)
4-3B-6: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
The license shall be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the adult
business such that it may be readily seen by a person entering the premises.
(1987 Code § 2.50-6)
4-3B-7: EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any adult business licensee or their manager or
employee to employ in any capacity within the adult business any person who is
not at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-3B-8: PHYSICAL LAYOUT OF ADULT BUSINESS:
   A.   Private Viewing Requirements: Any adult business having available for
customers, patrons or members, any booth, room or cubicle for the private
viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Access: Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to
and from aisles and public areas of the adult business, and shall be
unobstructed by any door, lock or other control type devices.
      2.   Construction: Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following
construction requirements:
         a.   Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent
booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall.
         b.   Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so
that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same.
         c.   All walls shall be solid and without any openings, extended from
the floor to a height of not less than six feet (6') and be light colored,
nonabsorbent, smooth textured and easily cleanable.
         d.   The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth textured
and easily cleanable.
         e.   The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle, when not in
use, shall be a minimum of ten (10) foot-candles at all times, as measured from
the floor.
      3.   Occupants: Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle
at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity,
cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth. No individual shall
damage or deface any portion of the booth.
   B.   Entertainment Businesses: Any adult business, as defined in section
4-3A-1 of this chapter, which features dancers or other entertainers or forms
of entertainment, must comply with the following requirements:
      1.   Platform: All dancing or other entertainment shall occur on a
platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet (2') from
the level of the floor.
      2.   Distance To Patrons: No dancing or other entertainment shall occur
closer than ten feet (10') to any patron.
      3.   Touching Prohibited: No dancer or other entertainer shall fondle or
caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer or other
entertainer.
      4.   Tips, Gratuity: No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity or
tip to any dancer or other entertainer and no dancer or other entertainer shall
directly or indirectly solicit any pay or gratuity or tip from any patron.
(1987 Code § 2.50-10)
4-3B-9: OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Register Of Employees: The operator shall maintain a register of all
employees, showing the name and aliases used by the employee, home address,
age, birthdate, sex, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers,
social security number, date of employment and termination and duties of each
employee. The above information on each employee shall be maintained in the
register on the premises for a period of three (3) years following termination.
   B.   Inspection Of Register: The operator shall make the register of
employees available immediately for inspection upon demand of a member of the
Police Department at all reasonable times.
   C.   Acts Or Omissions Of Employees:
      1.   Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator
if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or
approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator’s negligent failure to
supervise the employee’s conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such
act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or
caused the omission.
      2.   Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator
for purposes of determining whether the operator’s license shall be revoked,
suspended or renewed.
   D.   Minors Prohibited: No employee of an adult business shall allow any
minor to loiter around or to frequent an adult business.
   E.   Sanitation: The operator shall maintain the premises in a clean and
sanitary manner at all times.
   F.   Lighting: The operator shall maintain at least ten (10) foot-candles of
light in the public portions of the establishment, including aisles, at all
times. However, if a lesser level of illumination in the aisles shall be
necessary to enable a patron to view the adult entertainment in a booth, room
or cubicle adjoining an aisle, a lesser amount of illumination may be
maintained in such aisles, provided, however, at no time shall there be less
than one foot-candle of illumination in said aisles, as measured from the
floor.
   G.   Compliance Required: The operator shall ensure compliance of the
establishment and its patrons with the provisions of this article.
(1987 Code § 2.50-11)
4-3B-10: INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT:
The Police Department shall have the authority to enter any adult business at
all reasonable times to inspect the premises and enforce this article.
(1987 Code § 2.50-14)
4-3B-11: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Term; Application: Every license issued pursuant to this article will
terminate on April 30 of each year, unless sooner revoked, and must be renewed
before operation is allowed in the following year. Any operator desiring to
renew a license shall make application to the City Administrator. The
application for renewal must be filed no later than sixty (60) days before the
license expires. The application for renewal shall be filed in triplicate with
and dated by the City Administrator. A copy of the application for renewal
shall be distributed promptly by the City Administrator to the Police
Department and to the operator. The application for renewal shall be upon a
form provided by the City and shall contain such information and data, given
under oath or affirmation, as is required for an application for a new license.
   B.   Fee: A license renewal fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall
be submitted with the application for renewal. In addition to the renewal fee,
a late penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be assessed against the
applicant who files for a renewal less than sixty (60) days before the license
expires. If the application is denied, one-half (1/2) of the total fees
collected shall be returned.
   C.   Information Obtained By Police: If the Police Department is aware of
any information bearing on the operator’s qualifications, that information
shall be filed in writing with the City Administrator.
(1987 Code § 2.50-7)
4-3B-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Reasons For Revocation: The City Council shall revoke a license for any
of the following reasons:
      1.   Discovery that false or misleading information or data was given on
any application or material facts were omitted from any application.
      2.   The operator or any employee of the operator, violates any provision
of this article or any rule or regulation adopted by the City Council pursuant
to this article; provided, however, that in the case of a first offense by an
operator where the conduct was solely that of an employee, the penalty shall
not exceed a suspension of thirty (30) days if the Council shall find that the
operator had no actual or constructive knowledge of such violation and could
not by the exercise of due diligence have had such actual or constructive
knowledge.
      3.   The operator becomes ineligible to obtain a license.
      4.   Any cost or fee required to be paid by this article is not paid.
      5.   Any alcoholic liquor is served or consumed on the premises of the
adult business.
      6.   Violation of any City ordinance, code or regulation and failure to
pay the required fine or penalty or failure to cure the violations.
      7.   The transfer of a license or any interest in a license.
(1987 Code § 2.50-8)
   B.   Notice; Hearing: The City Council, before revoking or suspending any
license, shall give the operator at least ten (10) days’ written notice of the
charges against the operator, and the opportunity for a public hearing before
the City Council.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   C.   Term Of Revocation: Any operator whose license is revoked shall not be
eligible to receive a license for one year from the date of revocation. No
location or premises for which a license has been issued shall be used as an
adult business for six (6) months from the date of revocation of the license.
(1987 Code § 2.50-8)
4-3B-13: PENALTIES AND PROSECUTION:
   A.   Penalty: Any person, partnership or corporation who is found to have
violated this article shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars
($300.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per offense, plus
costs of prosecution incurred by the City, including reasonable attorney fees
and shall result in the revocation of any license.
   B.   Separate Offense: Each violation of this article shall be considered a
separate offense, and any violation continuing more than one day shall be
considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 2.50-13)
ARTICLE C: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS AND MASSAGE THERAPISTS
Section
4-3C-1: Definitions
4-3C-2: License Required
4-3C-3: Exemptions To Licensing
4-3C-4: Application For Massage Therapy Clinic License
4-3C-5: Processing Of Application
4-3C-6: Transfer; Change In Ownership Or Management
4-3C-7: Limitation On Issuance And Review Of License
4-3C-8: Fee; Term
4-3C-9: Massage Therapy Clinic Facilities
4-3C-10: Prohibited Acts And Conditions
4-3C-11: Premises Restrictions
4-3C-12: Expiration Of License; Renewal
4-3C-13: Notice Of Revocation, Suspension Or Refusal Of License
4-3C-14: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
4-3C-15: Appeal
4-3C-16: Massage Therapists
4-3C-17: Penalty
4-3C-1: DEFINITIONS:
In addition to the terms defined in article A of this chapter, for purposes of
this article, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed
to them below, unless otherwise indicated by the context:
MASSAGE THERAPIST: Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in
the practice of massage therapy and is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation.
MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSE: A valid massage therapy license issued by the Illinois
Department of Financial and Professional Regulations.
(1987 Code § 2.50-15)
4-3C-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm or corporation to
operate a massage therapy clinic in the City without a valid and current
license issued by the City pursuant to the terms of this article. A separate
license shall be required for each massage therapy clinic location regardless
of whether such multiple clinics are operated by the same person, association,
firm or corporation.
(1987 Code § 2.50-16)
4-3C-3: EXEMPTIONS TO LICENSING:
The licensing requirements of this article shall not be applicable to:
   A.   Hospitals, nursing homes and persons holding an unrevoked certificate
to practice the healing arts under the laws of the Illinois Department of
Professional Regulation, including, but not limited to, chiropractors,
naprapaths, nurses, occupational therapists, physical therapists and
physicians.
   B.   Any barber, cosmetologist or nail technician lawfully carrying on their
respective business to the extent authorized under a valid unrevoked license or
certificate or registration issued by the State; provided, this exemption is
only intended to permit normal and customary barber, cosmetologist or nail
technician services which involve incidental physical contact, such as scalp
rubs and facials, which otherwise qualify as massage activities. This exemption
is not intended to include, and does not permit, general massage activities as
part of any barber, cosmetologist or nail technician business beyond that
authorized by the State license or certification.
   C.   Any State registered athletic trainer who administers such athletic
related massage in the normal course of training duties.
   D.   Where massage services are actually performed at the patron's premises,
including the patron's place of business or residence, a massage therapy clinic
license shall not be required for such patron's premises. However, a massage
therapist's license shall be required for the massage therapist performing
massage activities in such patron's premises.
(1987 Code § 2.50-17) (amd. Ord. 23-47, 9-5-2023)
4-3C-4: APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE THERAPY CLINIC LICENSE:
Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a massage therapy clinic
shall make application to the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall
have the right to confirm any of the information asked for, or provided in the
application, and shall work in conjunction with the Police Department where
applicable. Applications shall include the following:
   A.   Personal, Corporate Information: The name (including nicknames or
aliases) and address, telephone number, social security number and age of the
applicant; the registered agent of the applicant if the applicant is a
corporation; and the general or managing partners if the applicant is a
partnership.
   B.   Location: The location of the massage therapy clinic.
   C.   Statement Of Convictions: A complete statement of all convictions of
the applicant as provided in this section. If the applicant is a corporation,
such statement shall include applicant’s officers, and directors thereof, and
any stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than twenty
percent (20%) of the stock of such corporation. If the applicant is a
partnership, such statement shall include all general partners, and any limited
partner owning more than twenty percent (20%) of the aggregate limited partner
interest in such partnership. Such listing shall include the following:
      1.   Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or other sex
offenses; or
      2.   A felony based upon conduct or involvement in such business or
activity or related or similar business or activity, within the past eleven
(11) years; or
      3.   A felony unrelated to conduct or involvement in such business or
activity or related to similar business or activity, but which felony involved
the use of a deadly weapon, violations of the Cannabis Control Act or the
Controlled Substance Act, or violence against another person, including rape,
within the past five (5) years; or
      4.   A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation, based upon conduct
or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or
activity, within the past two (2) years.
   D.   Description Of Business; Diagram: A description of the proposed massage
therapy clinic, including the number of massage therapists, other activities or
business conducted at the same location, and the physical facilities to be
used, with a floor layout diagram of same attached thereto.
   E.   Management: A statement of whether the business will be conducted by a
manager. In such case, the manager’s name, address, telephone number and age
shall be provided, along with a statement of any convictions as set forth in
this section.
   F.   Health Inspection: A current certificate of inspection of the premises
from the McHenry County Department of Health, if required.
   G.   Fee: The license fee as provided in section 4-3C-8 of this article.
   H.   Prior Employment: Business, occupation or employment of the applicant
for three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application.
   I.   Correction Of Information: In the event the applicant is made aware
that any information or document submitted as part of this application process
is inaccurate or incomplete, the applicant shall immediately notify the City
and provide appropriate corrections. Failure to accurately and completely
provide, or as necessary update, required information, may delay the processing
of such application or result in its denial.
   J.   Citizenship; Liability Insurance: Proof of United States citizenship,
permanent resident alien status or a valid work permit, as well as proof of
professional liability insurance in an amount of not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per each occurrence.
(1987 Code § 2.50-18)
4-3C-5: PROCESSING OF APPLICATION:
   A.   Complete Application: An application shall not be considered proper or
filed until all information and material required of the applicant pursuant to
this article has been submitted.
   B.   Investigation: Upon receipt of a proper application, the City
Administrator, along with the Police Chief or designee, shall investigate the
information contained in the application and shall determine compliance with
all applicable laws of the City. The nature and scope of the investigation
shall be within the discretion of the City Administrator and the Police
Department, and shall include, but is not limited to, a criminal history
background check and premises inspection. The applicant for a massage therapy
clinic license shall allow the Building Code Enforcement Officer to inspect the
premises and/or review plans for the facility, to ascertain whether the
premises and/or planned changes are in conformance with the City Building Code.
In the event plans are submitted prior to construction, a final inspection will
be conducted prior to issuance of the license to assure compliance with said
Building Code.
   C.   Time For Completion: The investigation, including any required
inspections and background checks, shall be completed within thirty five (35)
business days after receipt of a proper application; provided, however, the
City Administrator may extend this investigation period an additional period,
not to exceed an additional eleven (11) business days, upon a finding that such
additional period is needed to properly complete the investigation. Provided,
whenever such extension period is invoked, written notice shall be provided to
the applicant along with the specific reasons for such extension.
   D.   Issuance Of License: If, within eleven (11) business days following
completion of the investigation, the City Administrator determines that the
applicant and premises are in compliance with the applicable laws of the City
and the State, the City Administrator shall issue the license.
   E.   Notice Of Denial; Appeal: If, within eleven (11) business days
following completion of the investigation, the City Administrator determines
that the premises is not in compliance with the applicable laws of the City and
the State, the City Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing that
the license has been denied, setting forth the reasons therefor, and advising
the applicant of his or her right to appeal pursuant to section 4-3C-15 of this
article. Unless a timely appeal has been filed as provided in section 4-3C-15
of this article, such denials shall be final and effective on the eleventh day
following service of the notice on the applicant. The fee paid by the applicant
pursuant to section 4-3C-8 of this article, shall be returned, less fifty
dollars ($50.00), which will be retained as the processing fee.
(1987 Code § 2.50-19)
4-3C-6: TRANSFER; CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP OR MANAGEMENT:
   A.   License Applicable To Applicant, Location; New Location: Any license
issued pursuant to this article shall be applicable only to the specific
applicant and location designated, and may not be sold, transferred or
otherwise assigned; provided, where the licensee remains the same, but a
request is made to designate and substitute a different location, the City
Administrator may approve such new location upon submission of proof that such
location is in compliance with the provisions of this article. A fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) shall be required for processing such location change.
   B.   Transfer Of Ownership Defined: For purposes of this article, a transfer
of ownership or control of a massage therapy clinic shall mean the sale, lease
or sublease of the business, the transfer of securities which constitute a
controlling interest in the business whether by sale, exchange or similar
means, or the establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control, or any person not previously listed as an applicant
pursuant to this article acquires an ownership interest in the business of
twenty percent (20%) or more.
   C.   Ownership Or Control Transfer: A transfer of ownership or control of a
massage therapy clinic shall constitute change in the licensee and the existing
license shall be deemed surrendered and extinguished. A new application and
license shall be filed and processed as provided in this article prior to such
transfer taking effect. Any transfer in the ownership or control of a massage
therapy clinic in violation of this section shall constitute operation of such
business without a license.
   D.   Notice Of Change Required: Notice shall be provided prior to any change
of the designated manager conducting business for the massage therapy clinic as
provided in this article. The licensee shall, not less than eleven (11)
business days before such change is to take effect, give the City Administrator
written notice of such change. The notice shall include any information
concerning the new manager which is required in section 4-3C-4 of this article.
(1987 Code § 2.50-20)
4-3C-7: LIMITATION ON ISSUANCE AND REVIEW OF LICENSE:
No massage therapy clinic license shall be issued or renewed under the
following circumstances:
   A.   Convictions: To an applicant who has been convicted of the following
offenses:
      1.   Any offense involving sexual misconduct with children or sex
offenses; or
      2.   A felony based upon conduct or involvement in such business or
activity or related or similar business or activity, within the past eleven
(11) years; or
      3.   A felony unrelated to conduct or involvement in such business or
activity or related to similar business or activity, but which felony involved
the use of a deadly weapon, violations of the Cannabis Control Act or the
Controlled Substance Act or violence against another person, including rape,
within the past five (5) years; or
      4.   A misdemeanor or licensing ordinance violation, based upon conduct
or involvement in such business or activity or related or similar business or
activity, within the past two (2) years.
   B.   Revoked License: To an applicant whose license issued under this
article has been revoked for cause.
   C.   Applicant Not Eligible: To an applicant who at the time of application
for renewal of any license issued hereunder would not be eligible for such
license upon a first application.
   D.   Minor: To an applicant under the age of eighteen (18) years of age.
   E.   Grounds For Revocation: To an applicant where grounds for revocation
exist as provided under section 4-3C-14 of this article.
   F.   Circumstances For Nonissuance Or Nonrenewal: In addition to the
provisions stated hereinabove, no massage therapy clinic license shall be
issued or renewed under the following circumstances:
      1.   To a partnership, if any general partner thereof, or any limited
partner owning more than twenty percent (20%) of the aggregate limited partner
interest in such partnership, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder.
      2.   To a corporation, if any officer or director, or any stockholder or
stockholders owning in aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock of
such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder.
      3.   To a corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois, or unless it
is a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Business Corporation Act
of 1983 to transact business in Illinois.
      4.   To any applicant whose place of business is conducted by a manager
unless the manager possesses the same qualifications required by the licensee.
      5.   To any applicant who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee.
   G.   Citizenship: To an applicant who is not a United States citizen or has
status as a permanent resident alien or a valid work permit.
(1987 Code § 2.50-21)
4-3C-8: FEE; TERM:
The fee for a massage therapy clinic license required by this section shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00) and such license shall be valid for three (3)
years.
(1987 Code § 2.50-22)
4-3C-9: MASSAGE THERAPY CLINIC FACILITIES:
No license, or renewal thereof, shall be issued to conduct a massage therapy
clinic unless an inspection, conducted by the City Administrator, or their
designee, confirms that the clinic complies with the following minimum
requirements. Renewal of a license may require reinspections by the City
Administrator or their designee.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   A.   Running Water: Hot and cold running water shall be provided.
   B.   Dressing, Toilet Facilities: Adequate private dressing and toilet
facilities shall be provided for patrons.
   C.   Sanitation: All walls, ceilings, floors, steam rooms and other physical
facilities shall be kept in good repair, and maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition.
   D.   Towels, Linens: Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided
for each client receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens
shall be permitted.
(1987 Code § 2.50-24)
4-3C-10: PROHIBITED ACTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Touching Specific Areas: No employee or operator shall perform, offer
or agree to perform any act which would require the touching of a patron’s
genital area.
   B.   Coverage: The sexual or genital areas of patrons must be covered by
nontransparent towels, clothing, cloths or undergarments at all times while in
a massage therapy clinic premises, except while said patrons are alone in a
washroom, bathroom, shower or clothes changing area, or except when said patron
is receiving lymphatic drainage treatment from a massage therapist having a
minimum of twenty (20) hours of training in such treatment.
(1987 Code § 2.50-14)
   C.   Acts Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, in a
massage therapy clinic to place their hand upon, to touch with any part of his
or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital area
of any other person.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   D.   Skin Issues:
      1.   No person shall administer a therapeutic massage to a patron if the
massage therapist has a skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin
eruption; unless a physician duly licensed by the State of Illinois certifies
in writing that such massage therapist may safely administer a massage and
prescribing the condition thereof.
      2.   No employee or operator shall administer a therapeutic massage to a
patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin
eruption; unless a physician duly licensed by the State of Illinois certifies
in writing that such person may be safely massaged and prescribing the
conditions thereof.
   E.   Advertising: It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise
themselves as a massage therapist without having a valid massage therapist
license as defined in this article.
   F.   Display Of License: Any license issued under this article shall be
displayed in a conspicuous location within the customer area of a licensed
clinic. Massage therapists shall wear or otherwise display in a conspicuous
location within the customer area their State massage therapy license at all
times when they are performing, or holding themselves out as available to
provide any therapeutic massage. In lieu of this display requirement, when
therapeutic massage services are provided at the patron’s location, the State
massage therapy license shall be presented to the customer before such services
commence.
   G.   Employee Presence: At all times during the hours of operation of a
massage therapy clinic, there shall be present a manager or other employee of
the licensee who shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age.
   H.   Single Use Of Facilities: No bathroom, bath, shower and/or clothes
changing area may be occupied by more than one person at any time. No massage
therapist, massage therapy clinic owners, managers, employees and/or agents may
be in any sauna or whirlpool while a patron is in same.
   I.   State License Required: No massage therapy clinic licensee shall employ
as a massage therapist any person unless said person has a valid State massage
therapy license.
   J.   Failure To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any person who holds a
license to operate a massage therapy clinic within the City to fail to comply
with the conditions and regulations set forth in this section or to suffer or
permit noncompliance with such conditions and regulations on or within the
licensed premises.
   K.   Name Specified On License: It shall be unlawful for any person,
association, firm or corporation licensed as provided in this article to
operate under any name or conduct business under any designation not specified
in such license.
   L.   Hours Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, corporation,
firm or association licensed under this article to provide massage therapy
services between the hours of nine o’clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o’clock (7:00)
A.M.
   M.   Supervision Of Premises: A licensee shall have the premises supervised
at all times when open for business. At least one person who is a State
licensed massage therapist shall be on the licensed premises at all times while
the establishment is open. The licensee shall personally supervise the
business, or shall delegate such supervisory responsibility to a manager whose
name is listed on the City license and shall not violate, or permit others to
violate, any application provisions of this article. The violation of any
provision of this article by any agent or employee of the licensee shall
constitute a violation by the licensee.
   N.   Employee Dress Code: All employees, including massage therapists, shall
be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering at least the
entire torso and the sexual and genital areas, as defined herein.
   O.   Separate License For Each Premises: Licenses shall apply only to the
premises described in the application, and in the license issued thereon, and
only one location shall be so described in each license.
   P.   Minors Prohibited: No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be
permitted to come or remain on the area where the massage activity is taking
place on the licensed premises.
   Q.   Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited: No person shall sell, give, dispense,
provide, keep or consume, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided, kept
or consumed, any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises.
(1987 Code § 2.50-25)
4-3C-11: PREMISES RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Alcohol: No massage therapy clinic shall be located on any premises for
which a license to sell alcoholic liquor has been issued.
   B.   Code Compliance: The massage therapy clinic premises shall be in
compliance with applicable codes and ordinances of the City, including, but not
limited to, Zoning, Building, Fire and Life Safety Codes.
   C.   Term Of License Revocation: When any license has been revoked for
cause, no license shall be granted to any person for the period of one year
thereafter for the conduct of a massage therapy clinic in the premises
described in the revoked license.
(1987 Code § 2.50-26)
4-3C-12: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; RENEWAL:
   A.   Expiration; Renewal: Each license shall expire on December 31 of the
third year and may be renewed only by making application as provided in this
article; provided, in lieu of full submittal, an applicant may, on forms
provided by the City, certify that the information previously provided remains
true and valid. This renewal application shall be processed as provided in
section
4-3C-5 of this article. Application for renewal should be made at least thirty
(30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days
before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
Renewal applications for massage therapy clinic licenses shall be obtained from
the City Administrator’s Office.
   B.   Term Of Denial: When the City Administrator denies renewal of a
license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date
of denial; provided, if subsequent to denial the City Administrator finds that
the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the
applicant may be granted a license.
(1987 Code § 2.50-23)
4-3C-13: NOTICE OF REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR REFUSAL OF LICENSE:
No license shall be revoked, suspended or refused until the licensee has
received due notice. Said notice shall be served upon the licensee by
delivering the same personally or by leaving such notice at the place of
business or residence of the licensee in the custody of a person fifteen (15)
years of age or older. In the event the licensee cannot be found, and the
service of such notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner herein provided,
a copy of such notice shall be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid,
addressed to the licensee at the licensee’s place of business or residence at
least eleven (11) business days prior to the date of such hearing.
(1987 Code § 2.50-27)
4-3C-14: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The license of a massage therapy clinic may be revoked or suspended, in
addition to the fines provided for in section
4-3C-16 of this article, upon one or more of the following grounds:
   A.   Fraud, Deceit: The licensee has committed an act(s) of fraud or deceit
in the application for license, or renewal thereof, submitted to the City
Administrator.
   B.   Impersonation: The licensee is engaged in the practice of massage under
a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another massage therapist of a
like or different name.
   C.   Illegal Practices: The licensee has committed an act of fraudulent,
false, misleading or deceptive advertising, or prescribing medicines, drugs or
practices any other licensed profession without legal authority therefor.
   D.   Prostitution, Controlled Substances: The licensee has committed an act
(s) of prostitution, sexual offense or trafficking in controlled substances
after the date of issuance of a massage therapy clinic or of a massage
therapist license.
   E.   Violation: The licensee is found to be in violation of any section of
this article.
   F.   Prohibited Acts On Premises: The licensee permits acts of prostitution
or solicitations for acts of prostitution to be performed within the premises
or elsewhere or permits any procedure during the performance of services within
or off the premises that are performed for the purpose of sexual arousal or
gratification of any patron, or should reasonably be expected to cause such
result, or permits the use or trafficking of controlled substances or cannabis
on the premises, or the commission of any unlawful act on the premises, unless
expressly permitted by this article.
   G.   Lewd Conduct: The licensee performs an act of prostitution or other
lewd conduct within the premises or without the premises or solicits an act of
prostitution or other lewd conduct on or off the premises or performs services
within or without the premises in such manner for the purpose of sexual arousal
or gratification of a patron, or should reasonably be expected to cause such
result, or the licensee uses or is trafficking in controlled substances or
cannabis.
   H.   License Suspended Within Twenty Four Months: The licensee has violated
or is not in compliance with this article and the license has been suspended
within the preceding twenty four (24) months.
   I.   Permitting Prostitution: A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution
on the premises.
   J.   License Suspended: A licensee knowingly conducted massage activities in
the City during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended.
   K.   Committing Offenses: Within a twenty four (24) month period, a person
or persons committed an offense as listed in subsection 4-3C-7A of this
article, which substantially occurred in or on a licensed premises, and for
which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees
of the licensee at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the
license.
(1987 Code § 2.50-28)
4-3C-15: APPEAL:
   A.   Filing; Time Limit: Any applicant or licensee who receives a notice of
denial, revocation or suspension may file an appeal with the Mayor as provided
herein. Such appeal shall be filed with the Mayor in writing no later than
eleven (11) business days following receipt of the notice, and shall include a
response to the City Administrator’s notice. Such response shall include a
brief statement addressing the substantive deficiencies cited in the City
Administrator’s notice and shall set forth the basis for why the license should
not be denied, revoked or suspended. If an appeal is filed of an order of the
City Administrator, suspending or revoking a license, such suspension or
revocation shall be stayed pending final order of the Mayor as provided in this
section.
   B.   Public Hearing:
      1.   The Mayor shall schedule an informal public hearing not later than
eleven (11) business days following receipt of such appeal. The purpose of the
hearing will be to offer the applicant or licensee an opportunity to show cause
why the application should not be denied, or why the license should not be
suspended or revoked. A record shall be made of the informal public hearing and
documents may be submitted and/or testimony given, either in person or through
sworn affidavit. This record may be made by electronic recording. The Mayor
shall have the power to administer oaths and to continue the hearing from time
to time to permit the applicant to provide additional information.
      2.   The Mayor may designate a Hearing Officer to schedule, convene and
conduct the public hearing. In such case, the Hearing Officer shall have the
same powers as the Mayor to administer oaths and continue the hearing from time
to time to permit the applicant to provide additional information. Where such
designation has been made, the Hearing Officer shall submit proposed findings
and recommendations to the Mayor within twenty one (21) days of the close of
the hearing.
   C.   Findings And Order: Within twenty one (21) days after the close of the
hearing set forth in subsection B of this section, the Mayor shall make written
findings of fact and issue an appropriate order. Within five (5) business days
a copy of such order shall be served upon the applicant or licensee. If the
Mayor determines that the license should be revoked or suspended, the
suspension or revocation shall take effect immediately upon receipt unless
otherwise specified.
   D.   Final Administrative Action; Further Appeal: The decision of the Mayor
provided in subsection C of this section shall be the final administrative
action of the City with respect to the license or application, and shall be
subject to the immediate appeal by the licensee or applicant to the Circuit
Court. Such appeal to the Circuit Court shall be filed not later than thirty
five (35) days following the receipt of the Mayor’s findings and order. Failure
to file such appeal as provided herein shall render the Mayor’s decision final.
(1987 Code § 2.50-29)
4-3C-16: MASSAGE THERAPISTS:
   A.   Employment of Massage Therapists: No person shall employ as a massage
therapist any person unless said person is a properly licensed massage
therapist pursuant to Illinois law and the Massage Licensing Act, 225 ILCS 57/
1 et seq. A copy of each therapist license shall be submitted to the City of
McHenry with the initial licensing application and each time a new therapist is
employed thereafter.
   B.   Display of License: The massage business license and the massage
therapy license of each and every licensed massage therapist employed in the
massage establishment shall be displayed in an open and conspicuous place in
the massage establishment or available upon request.
(Ord. 23-47, 9-5-2023)
4-3C-17: PENALTY:
   Any person, corporation, firm or partnership found guilty of violating,
disobeying, omitting, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the
provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for
each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which a violation occurs or continues. In addition to any penalty, a
licensee violating any provision of this article may be subject to having the
license revoked, suspended or not renewed.
(1987 Code § 2.50-30)
ARTICLE D: PUBLIC NUDITY
Section
4-3D-1: Intent
4-3D-2: Legislative Findings
4-3D-3: Nudity Prohibited In Public Places
4-3D-4: Exemptions
4-3D-5: Enforcement And Penalties
4-3D-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this article to protect and preserve the health, safety,
welfare and morals of the citizens of the City by prohibiting a person from
intentionally or recklessly appearing or being nude, or causing another person
to appear to be nude, in a public place and in other places which may
reasonably be expected to be observed by the public within the City, except as
herein provided.
(1987 Code § 2.50-32)
4-3D-2: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
In addition and supplemental to the findings and determinations contained in
this article, which are incorporated by reference into this section, it is
hereby found by the City Council, acting in its legislative capacity for the
purpose of regulating the conduct of appearing nude in public places that the
acts prohibited in this article encourage or create the potential for criminal
activity, that actual and simulated nudity and sexual conduct, begets and has
the potential for begetting undesirable and unlawful behavior; that sexual,
lewd, lascivious and salacious conduct among patrons and employees within
establishments results in violation of law and creates dangers to the health,
safety, welfare and morals of the public and those who engage in such conduct.
(1987 Code § 2.50-33)
4-3D-3: NUDITY PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, intentionally or recklessly
appear, or cause another person to appear, nude in a public place or in any
other place which is readily visible to the public, except as provided in
section 4-3D-4 of this article. It shall also be unlawful for any person or
entity maintaining, owning or operating any public place establishment to
encourage, suffer or allow any person to appear nude in such public place,
except as provided in section 4-3D-4 of this article.
(1987 Code § 2.50-34)
4-3D-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The prohibitions in section 4-3D-3 of this article shall not apply:
   A.   When a person appears nude in a place provided or set apart for nudity,
provided such person is:
      1.   Nude for the sole purpose of performing the legal function(s) that
is customarily intended to be performed within such place provided or set apart
for nudity; and
      2.   Not nude for the purpose of obtaining money or other financial gain
for such person or for another person or entity.
   B.   When the conduct of being nude cannot legally be prohibited by this
article because it constitutes a part of a bona fide live communication,
demonstration or performance by a person wherein such nudity is expressive
conduct incidental to and necessary for the conveyance or communication of a
genuine message or public expression and is not a mere guise or pretense
utilized to exploit the conduct of being nude for profit or commercial gain and
as such is protected by the United States or Illinois Constitution or because
it is otherwise protected by the United States or Illinois Constitution.
   C.   A mother breast feeding her baby in any location, public or private,
where the mother is otherwise authorized to be, irrespective of whether the
nipple of the mother’s breast is uncovered during or incidental to the breast
feeding.
(1987 Code § 2.50-35)
4-3D-5: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 2.50-36) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 4: CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES
Section
4-4-1: Definitions
4-4-2: Building Permit Required
4-4-3: Application
4-4-4: Other Limitations
4-4-5: Additional Submittals
4-4-6: Inspections
4-4-7: Revocation
4-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this section, terms shall have the following meaning:
CARNIVAL: A traveling amusement show usually including rides, sideshows and
games of skill.
CIRCUS: A traveling company consisting typically of a variety of performances
by acrobats, clowns, and trained animals.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-4-2: BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
A building permit is required for a carnival or circus, as defined in section
4-4-1. Such permit shall not be issued without first obtaining approval by the
City Council with any conditions attached as the City Council deems appropriate
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-4-3: APPLICATION:
Not less than forty five (45) calendar days before the carnival or circus, a
building permit application shall be submitted to the Community Development
Department, which shall include:
   A.   A site plan showing the layout of the event, including rides, tents,
trailers, overnight quarters for security personnel (if applicable), and all
wires, lines, cables, etc.
   B.   Certificate of insurance for a minimum two million dollars
($2,000,000.00) general liability, including bodily injury, property damage and
motor vehicle liability, naming the City as an additional insured. A letter
from the insurer stating there are no outstanding claims against the policy.
   C.   The filing fee, which is fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day the event
will run. Said fee may be waived for City based not for profit organizations
that submit a copy of their certificate of incorporation.
   D.   A letter of consent from the property owner if the event will be held
on private property or a letter to the City Council requesting the use of
public property.
   E.   Information on all proposed signs for the event, including number, size
and location.
   F.   Copy of the McHenry County temporary food service permit, if
applicable.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-4-4: OTHER LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The carnival or circus shall not exceed ten (10) days.
   B.   The carnival or circus shall not be located in or directly adjacent to
any developed residential area, with the exception that it may be on a church,
school or public park property even if located next to residential property.
   C.   The event must be operated or sponsored by a not for profit
organization based in the City.
   D.   No private property location may host more than one carnival or circus
per year.
   E.   No employee, agent or other representative of the carnival/circus may
live, sleep or otherwise remain overnight on the premises of the carnival.
Persons providing security on the site may receive an exemption from this
requirement, upon approval by the City Council.
   F.   All carnival/circus workers must keep government issued photo
identification on their person at all times during the public event. The
government issued identification must be presented at any time to an officer of
the City upon request.
   G.   Only those carnival/circus employees who have completed a background
check through the Police Department will be permitted to work on the premises.
The background check is valid for the calendar year in which it is conducted
and is subject to review after the initial approval. No person will be allowed
to work the event if he/she:
      1.   Is a registered child sex offender; or
      2.   Has been convicted of a felony in the past five (5) years; or
      3.   Has been convicted of any other crime involving moral turpitude or
violence; or
      4.   Is identified as a known gang member in the Illinois State Police
LEADS System; or
      5.   Is deemed unfit for any reason by the Police Department.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-4-5: ADDITIONAL SUBMITTALS:
   A.   Copy of an Illinois Department of Labor amusement ride permit.
   B.   List of employees who will work on the premises of the carnival/circus,
including their legal name, date of birth, home address and social security
number.
   C.   All registered employees shall submit their fingerprints along with a
completed police background authorization form. The fee for this service shall
be five hundred dollars ($500.00) plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
employee. Volunteers for local not for profit organizations shall be exempt
from fingerprinting.
   D.   Signed waivers of liability for all employees who will work on the
premises of the carnival/circus.
   E.   Completed City carnival operator questionnaire, if required by the
City.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-4-6: INSPECTIONS:
Any City official shall have free access to the carnival/circus grounds and all
booths, shows and concessions at all times to ensure compliance with City,
County and State ordinances and regulations.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-4-7: REVOCATION:
The City may revoke a permit or carnival worker permit at any time and demand
immediate cessation of the carnival/circus when it is found to be in violation
of City, County or State ordinances and regulations or when public safety is
endangered.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
CHAPTER 5: COIN OPERATED DEVICES
Section
4-5-1: Definitions
4-5-2: Gambling Devices Prohibited
4-5-3: Electronic Sweepstakes Machines Or Devices Prohibited
4-5-4: Video Gaming Terminals - Not Prohibited
4-5-5: Violation; Penalty
4-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
ELECTRONIC SWEEPSTAKES MACHINE OR DEVICE: A mechanically, electrically or
electronically operated machine or device, that is owned, leased or otherwise
possessed by a sweepstakes sponsor or promoter, or any of the sweepstakes
sponsors or promoters partners, affiliates, subsidiaries or contractors, that
is intended to be used by a sweepstakes entrant, that uses energy, and that is
capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism.
ENTER OR ENTRY: The act or process by which a person becomes eligible to
receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes.
ENTERTAINING DISPLAY: A visual information capable of being seen by a
sweepstakes entrant that takes the form of actual game play or simulated game
play, including, but not limited to, a poker game or any other kind of playing
card game; a bingo game; a craps game; a keno game; a lotto game; an eight-
liner game; a pot-of-gold game; a game based on or involving the random or
chance matching of different pictures, words, numbers of symbols not dependent
on the skill or dexterity of the player; a casino or gambling game; and any
other video game the outcome of which is not in whole or in part dependent on
the skill or dexterity of the player that is played in the course of revealing
a prize as a result of an entry into a sweepstakes.
JUKE BOX: Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot or other
opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated, for the
emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any machine which, upon the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for use as
a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not a prize is offered, and
whether or not skill in manipulation predominates over chance or luck. It shall
include such devices as marble machines, skill ball, pinball machines,
mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions similar
thereto under whatever name they may be indicated.
PRIZE: Any gift, award, gratuity, goods, service, credit or anything else of
value, which may be transferred to a person, whether possession of the prize is
actually transferred or placed on an account or other record as evidence of the
intent to transfer the prize.
SWEEPSTAKES: Any game, advertising scheme or plan, or other promotion which,
with or without payment of any consideration, a person may enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
an element of chance.
(Ord. 19-1191, 4-15-2019)
4-5-2: GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED:
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or
permit any gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to law,
or that may be contrary to any future laws of the State of Illinois, except
video gaming terminals licensed by the City and State of Illinois and chapter 6
of this title.
(1987 Code § 9-7)
4-5-3: ELECTRONIC SWEEPSTAKES MACHINES OR DEVICES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, lease, operate or place into
operation an electronic sweepstakes machine or device in any location open to
the public within the City for the following purposes:
   A.   To conduct a sweepstakes through the use of an entertaining display
including the entry process or the reveal of a prize; or
   B.   To promote a sweepstakes that is conducted through the use of an
entertainment display including the entry process or the reveal of a prize.
(Ord. 19-1191, 4-15-2019)
4-5-4: VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS - NOT PROHIBITED:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting duly
licensed video gaming terminals as authorized by chapter 6 of this title.
(Ord. 19-1191, 4-15-2019)
4-5-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 19-1191, 4-15-2019; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 6: VIDEO GAMING TERMINALS
Section
4-6-1: Applicability Of Provisions
4-6-2: Definitions
4-6-3: License Required
4-6-4: Limitations Of Establishments And Terminals
4-6-5: Application For License
4-6-6: Fees For Establishments And Terminals
4-6-7: Push Tax Imposed
4-6-8: Number Of Licenses
4-6-9: Development Agreement
4-6-10: Inspection Of Premises
4-6-11: Display Of Licenses
4-6-12: Existing Video Gaming Establishments
4-6-1: APPLICABILITY OF PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided, shall apply to
all amusements as hereinafter defined, whether specifically licensed or
regulated under other provisions of this City Code or other ordinances, or not.
(Ord. 21-56, 10-31-2021)
4-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings so
indicated:
AMUSEMENT: (1) Any theatrical, dramatic, musical or spectacular performance,
motion picture show, flower, poultry or animal show, animal act, circus, rodeo,
athletic contest, sport, game or similar exhibition for public entertainment,
including, without being limited to, boxing, wrestling, skating, dancing,
swimming, racing, or riding on animals or vehicles, baseball, basketball,
softball, football, tennis, golf, hockey, track and field games, bowling,
billiard and pool games. (2) Any entertainment offered for public
participation, including, without being limited to, dancing, carnival,
amusement park rides and games, bowling, billiard and pool games, or any Video
Gaming Terminal.
PERSON: Any natural individual that participates in an amusement, including a
firm, organization, society, foundation, institution, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company, public or
private corporation, receiver, executor, trustee or other representative
appointed by order of any court, or any other entity recognized by law.
PLAY: Shall mean each individual push of the Video Gaming Terminal which
initiates the simulation provided by the Video Gaming Terminal. Play shall not
include the physical pushing of individual wager  amounts, selection of types
of the games on the VGT, or the entry of any information or printing of winning
receipts.
TERMINAL OPERATOR: Any individual, partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company that is licensed under the Video Gaming Act, 230 ILCS 40/1 et
seq., and that owns, services, and maintains Video Gaming Terminals for
placement in licensed establishments, licensed truck stop establishments,
licensed large truck stop establishments, licensed fraternal establishments, or
licensed veterans establishments.
VIDEO GAMING CAFÉ: An establishment whose primary or a major focus of the
establishment is video gaming and the service of alcohol; food is secondary to
the operation of video gaming. The following factors may be considered when
determining if the establishment is a video gaming café:
   A.   The layout and design of the establishment;
   B.   The preparation and variety of food and beverages offered;
   C.   The creation and operation of a commercial kitchen on the premise where
gaming is situated;
   D.   The number of video gaming machines relative to the customer seating
capacity of the establishment must be ten (10) customer seating to one machine;
   E.   The square footage of space devoted to video gaming relative to the
amount of space devoted to other activities must be four (4) for non-gaming to
one (1) gaming;
   F.   The source of proposed or actual revenue derived from the
establishment;
   G.   The number of employees at the establishment and their proposed
function; and
   H.   Any other factors as determined as relevant by the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner.
VIDEO GAMING ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment holding a valid and current video
gaming establishment license issued by the City. In order to qualify for an
establishment license, the establishment must:
   A.   Hold a current and valid video gaming location license issued by the
Illinois Gaming Board;
   B.   Hold a current and valid Class A (full bar) or Class B (table service)
liquor license in accordance with chapter 2 of this title, or hold a valid
Class C license with a truck stop endorsement as defined by Illinois Statute;
   C.   Meet all other criteria required by applicable laws of the State of
Illinois and/or the City of McHenry, as may be amended from time to time.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion
of cash, electronic cards or vouchers, or any combination thereof, is available
to play or simulate the play of a video game, including, but not limited to,
video poker, line up and blackjack, as authorized by the board utilizing a
video display and microprocessors in which the player may receive free games or
credits that can be redeemed for cash. The term does not include a machine that
directly dispenses coins, cash or tokens or is for amusement purposes only.
This definition shall be expanded by any amendments to the Video Gaming Act,
230 Illinois Compiled Statutes chapter 40/5.
(Ord. 21-56, 10-31-2021; amd. Ord. 23-70, 12-18-2023)
4-6-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person or establishment shall have, keep or operate a video gaming terminal
in any place or public resort, unless it is a licensed video gaming
establishment and every video gaming terminal therein is annually licensed in
accordance with these regulations.
(Ord. 21-56, 10-31-2021)
4-6-4: LIMITATIONS OF ESTABLISHMENTS AND TERMINALS:
   A.   Establishment Licenses: Unless and until the City Council acts on an
application for an additional video gaming establishment license, the existing
maximum number of video gaming establishment licenses shall not be increased.
When a video gaming establishment license is revoked or relinquished, or is not
renewed, the maximum number of video gaming establishment licenses shall be
reduced for each such revocation, relinquishment or nonrenewal.
   B.   Terminals: Individual video gaming terminal licenses shall be issued by
the City Administrator or designee but only after a video gaming establishment
license is authorized by Council. No authorized video gaming establishment
shall be issued more than six (6) individual video gaming terminal licenses.
   C.   Premises on which Video Gaming Terminals are Prohibited; Video Gaming
Cafes, as defined in the definition section above, are prohibited. Provided,
however, any person or entity in possession of a current City video gaming
establishment license and operating a Video Gaming Cafe as of January 1, 2024
may continue operating under such license, as renewed from time to time. A
change of ownership may also be considered by Council so long as it does not
affect the total number of license locations per Section
4-6-8: Number of Licenses.
(Ord. 21-56, 10-31-2021; amd. Ord. 23-70, 12-18-2023; Ord. 24-1, 1-16-2024)
4-6-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Required: All applications for video gaming establishment and video
gaming terminal licenses issued by the City shall be completed on forms
provided by and filed with the City Clerk. All applications shall conform to
the general provisions set forth in chapter 1, “Business Licenses Generally”,
of this title, as well as the State of Illinois, through the Illinois Gaming
Board, and pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act and the rules and
regulations implemented thereto.
   B.   Action On Filed Applications: Filed applications for video gaming
establishments shall be submitted to the City Council for approval or denial.
The City Council may issue or deny the application, within its sole discretion,
taking into consideration factors, including, but not limited to, the
following: location of the applicant’s establishment, past history of the
applicant and its principals, the nature of any proposed business(es)
associated with the applicant, surrounding property uses, and any other factors
deemed relevant by the City Council members regarding aesthetics, the character
of the community and welfare of the public. Issuance of a liquor license shall
not entitle the holder to renewal of a video gaming license, and no protectible
property interest or vested right shall have been created.
(Ord. 21-56, 10-31-2021)
4-6-6: FEES FOR ESTABLISHMENTS AND TERMINALS:
The annual license fee payable to the City shall be as follows:
 
1 terminal  = $2,000
2 terminals = $3,000
3 terminals = $4,000
4 terminals = $5,000
5 terminals = $6,000
6 terminals = $7,000
 
The fees for terminals at any not-for-profit establishment shall be as follows:
 
1 terminal  = $500
2 terminals = $750
3 terminals = $1,000
4 terminals = $1,250
5 terminals = $1,500
6 terminals = $1,750
 
The cost of all fees shall be shared equally between the terminal operator and
the video gaming establishment. Fees for licenses revoked or relinquished in
the middle of the license year shall not be refunded. All renewal license fees
shall be submitted and paid prior to May 1 of each year as licenses are
effective from May 1 through the following April 30.
(Ord. 19-1197, 6-17-2019; amd. Ord. MC-19-1197-A, 7-20-2020; Ord. 21-56, 10-31-
2021; Ord. 22-5, 2-7-2022; Ord. 23-23, 5-1-2023)
4-6-7: PUSH TAX IMPOSED:
Except as otherwise provided by this Chapter, an amusement tax to be known as a
“Push Tax” is imposed upon any person who participates in the Play of Video
Gaming Terminals that takes place in the City. The rate of that tax shall be
equal to one cent ($0.01) per Play on a Video Gaming Terminal.
   A.   Tax Additional. The tax imposed by this Section is in addition to all
the other taxes imposed by the State of Illinois, the City, or any municipal
corporations or subdivisions thereof.
   B.   Collection; Payment; Accounting. It shall be the duty of any terminal
operator to secure, from each person participating in the Play of a Video
Gaming Terminal, the Push Tax imposed by this Section. For the purposes of this
Section, it shall be presumed that the amount of the Push Tax imposed on each
person has been collected from the person by the video gaming operator
licensee, unless the taxpayer or tax collector demonstrates otherwise with
books, records, or other documentary evidence.
      1.   Push Tax payments shall be remitted to the City on or before the
20th day of the month following the month in which the tax is collected or is
required to be collected and shall be accompanied by a tax return, which shall
be in a form prescribed by the City Finance Director.
      2.   Every terminal operator who is required to collect the Push Tax by
this Section shall be considered a tax collector for the City. All Push Tax
amounts collected shall be held by the terminal operator as trustee for, and on
behalf of, the City. The failure to collect the Push Tax shall not excuse or
release the individual person Playing the Video Gaming Terminal from the
obligation to pay the tax. The ultimate obligation of the Push Tax shall remain
on the individual person Playing the Video Gaming Terminal, and shall never be
shifted to the terminal operator or video gaming establishment.
      3.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, in order to
permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the City, no person shall be
entitled to a refund of, or credit for, the Push Tax imposed by this Section
unless the person files a claim for the refund or credit within one (1) year
after the date on which the Push Tax was paid or remitted to the City.
      4.   The terminal operator of any Video Gaming Terminal(s) Played in the
City shall be subject to audit, inspection, and record keeping provisions of
the City Code. It shall be unlawful for any terminal operator, video gaming
establishment, or individual person Playing a Video Gaming Terminal, to
prevent, hinder, or interfere with the City, its officers, employees, or agents
in any manner that is designed to or has the effect of preventing, hindering,
or interfering with such officials, employees, or agents in the discharge of
their respective duties related to the performance, audit, or enforcement of
the provisions of this Section. It is the duty of every terminal operator to
keep accurate and complete books and records for each Video Gaming Terminal to
which the City’s officers, employees, or agents will at all times have full and
complete access.
   C.   Promulgation of Rules and Regulations. The City is authorized to adopt,
promulgate, and enforce any additional rules and regulations pertaining to the
interpretation, collection, administration, and enforcement of this Section.
   D.   Violations; Penalties
      1.   Violations.
         a.   A terminal operator who falsely reports, or fails to report, the
amount of Push Tax required by this Section shall be in violation of this
Section, and shall be subject to a fine, as defined in this Section, as well as
suspension or revocation of their license. All payments not remitted when due
shall be paid together with a penalty assessment on the unpaid balance at a
rate of five percent (5%) per month, which penalty shall compound monthly.
         b.   It shall be deemed a violation of this Section for any terminal
operator, video gaming establishment, or individual person Playing a Video
Gaming Terminal, or any agent of any of the foregoing, to knowingly furnish
false or inaccurate information to the City.
         c.   Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation.
      2.   Suspension or Revocation of License. The Mayor as local liquor
commissioner shall have the power to suspend for not more than thirty (30) days
or revoke any liquor or video gaming licenses if, after hearing, it is
determined that a terminal operator or video gaming establishment shall have
violated any of the provisions of this Section, any of the Statutes of the
state, or any ordinances, resolutions, or rules enacted by the City. Ten (10)
days’ written notice of the hearing shall be given to the terminal operator or
video gaming establishment. Alternatively, the terminal operator or video
gaming establishment may agree to negotiated terms and penalties rather than
proceeding to a hearing.
      3.   Fines Imposed. In addition to the foregoing, or any other penalties
provided by the City Code, any terminal operator or video gaming establishment
violating the provisions of this Section shall be subject to an additional fine
of $500.00 for a first offense and $750.00 for a second offense. For a third
offense, a terminal operator or video gaming establishment shall be subject to
a $1,000.00 fine and a mandatory revocation of any license relating to a Video
Gaming Terminal or its operation within the City jurisdictional limits.
      4.   Action to Enforce. Whenever any person obligated to remit any tax as
provided in this Section fails to do so, the City may bring an action to
enforce the payment of such tax in any court of competent jurisdiction.
      5.   Penalties Additional. Any citations issued under this Section may be
in addition to any other citations or enforcement mechanisms authorized by or
issued pursuant to the City Code.
(Ord. 21-56, 10-31-2021)
4-6-8: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
   A.   The total number of location licenses for video gaming terminals issued
under this chapter shall not exceed forty-five (45).
   B.   The total number of location licenses for video gaming terminals may be
increased or decreased from time to time, by the adoption of an ordinance
amending this chapter, in the discretion of the City Council as follows:
      1.   If an application is submitted to the Liquor Commissioner for a
location license for video gaming terminals for which no licenses are currently
available, and if the Liquor Commissioner has determined that the application
complies in all respects with the requirements of this chapter, other chapters
of this Code, City ordinances and State law, and if the Liquor Commissioner
recommends issuance of the license, the application shall be presented to the
City Council for its consideration of an increase in the number of location
licenses available.
      2.   Whenever a location license previously issued under the provisions
of this chapter is not renewed, or is revoked, surrendered, or terminated by
dormancy, the maximum number of location licenses shall automatically and
immediately be reduced by one. Thereafter, the reduced number of location
licenses shall not thereafter be increased without approval by a majority vote
of the City Council.
(Ord. 21-56, 10-31-2021; amd. Ord. 23-21, 4-17-2023; Ord. 23-33, 6-5-2023; Ord.
23-49, 9-18-2023; Ord. 23-51, 10-2-2023; Ord. 23-55, 10-16-2023; Ord. 23-56,
11-6-2023; Ord. 24-7, 3-4-2024; Ord. 24-36, 8-5-2024; Ord. 24-42, 8-19-2024;
Ord. 25-3, 1-21-2025; Ord. 25-12, 3-3-2025; Ord. 25-23, 4-21-2025; Ord. 25-28,
6-2-2025)
4-6-9: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
All video gaming establishment licenses shall be subject to a written agreement
between the licensee and the City Administrator addressing issues deemed
relevant by the City Council, including, but not limited to, outdoor signage
and partitions. With regard to partitions, at a minimum, the agreement shall
provide that all Class B liquor license holders, and all Class A liquor license
holders whose business includes table seating for patrons under the age of
twenty one (21), must erect a partition that effectively separates the gaming
area from visible view of the remaining customer area of the business. Plans
and specifications of the partition shall be included with the agreement. Video
monitoring of the gaming area by staff must be installed in all locations in
which any full partition is installed where the view of the gaming area by
staff is screened out.
(Ord. 21-56, 10-31-2021)
4-6-10: INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
The City reserves the right to inspect the premises of any licensed video
gaming establishment for compliance with these regulations and all other
applicable ordinances. Refusal of inspection is ground for revocation of all
video gaming licensing.
(Ord. 21-56, 10-31-2021)
4-6-11: DISPLAY OF LICENSES:
Upon approval of the video gaming establishment license, including receipt of
the payment of the license fee, the City shall issue a license certificate
bearing the notation “City of McHenry Video Gaming Establishment License”. One
license shall be issued for each licensed video gaming establishment and list
the number of video gaming terminals licensed for said establishment, and it
shall be affixed in a conspicuous place near any video gaming terminals. Upon
approval of the video gaming terminal license, including receipt of payment for
each video gaming terminal, a licensing sticker issued by the City must be
affixed to each video gaming terminal and visible for inspection.
(Ord. 19-1197, 6-17-2019; amd. Ord. 21-56, 10-31-2021)
4-6-12: EXISTING VIDEO GAMING ESTABLISHMENTS:
Upon renewal of each video gaming establishment, in existence at the time of
adoption of this chapter, each licensee shall enter into the Development
Agreement referenced in section
4-6-7 of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-56, 10-31-2021)
CHAPTER 7: FLEA MARKETS
Section
4-7-1: Definitions
4-7-2: Licensing Requirements
4-7-3: Exemptions To Chapter
4-7-4: Application For License
4-7-5: Fees
4-7-6: Inspections
4-7-7: Duties, Responsibilities Of Operator
4-7-8: Prohibited Transactions
4-7-9: Character Of Produce And Other Foodstuffs
4-7-10: Adult Merchandise
4-7-11: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
4-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:
CONSIGNMENT STORES: Stores which people bring items they no longer want (such
as old clothes, shoes and equipment) to have them sold. When an item at a
consignment store is sold, the person who brought it to the store gets a
portion of the money paid for it.
FLEA MARKET OPERATION: Any business activities commonly known as, but not
limited to, swap shops, penny markets and rummage sales, and where tangible
articles are bought, sold or exchanged by more than one vendor, not otherwise
regulated in this Code. Flea market operation shall not include resale or
consignment businesses.
FLEA MARKET OPERATOR: Any person, firm or corporation who owns or controls the
premises at which a flea market operation is conducted. A flea market operation
may/may not be the owner of the premises on which the flea market operation is
conducted.
FLEA MARKET VENDOR: Any person, firm or corporation who engages in or conducts
the activity of buying, selling or exchanging, whether on a casual or regular
basis, any tangible articles, whether new, secondhand or used, in any flea
market operation.
FLEA MARKET VENDOR SPACE: The total square footage area, measured length by
width in feet, generally occupied by one flea market vendor.
GARAGE SALES: Sales of any new or used personal property conducted on or about
the premises of a private residence in a Residentially zoned district by the
owner or occupant, or with the permission of the owner or occupant, and which
sale is open to the public.
RESALE/SECONDHAND STORE: Stores which sell items which had been already
purchased by another party.
(1987 Code § 12-45)
4-7-2: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   License Required: No person shall have or keep a flea market operation
unless licensed by the City.
   B.   Application For License: Applications for licenses shall be made to the
City Clerk and all applicants shall conform to the general provisions set forth
in this chapter.
   C.   Federal, State Licenses: The applicant must obtain Federal and State
licenses and approvals as applicable, and exhibit proof of said licenses and/or
approvals prior to the issuance of a flea market license. Upon receiving
applicable State and Federal approvals and payment of the applicable license
fee, the City shall issue one license for each flea market operation.
(1987 Code § 12-44)
4-7-3: EXEMPTIONS TO CHAPTER:
The following are exempt from this chapter:
   A.   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction;
   B.   Religious, benevolent, charitable and civic organizations operating as
not for profit, provided all articles presented for sale or exchange have been
donated;
   C.   Garage sales;
   D.   Consignment stores;
   E.   Resale/secondhand stores;
   F.   All sales listed in chapter 9, “Special Sales”, of this title;
   G.   Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(1987 Code § 12-46)
4-7-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to conduct a flea market operation
shall file a written application with the Department of Community and Economic
Development on a form furnished by said department. The applicant shall furnish
the following information:
   A.   The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual (sole
proprietorship), partnership (general partnership), corporation or otherwise;
   B.   Articles of incorporation or organizational documentation if the
business is incorporated or a limited liability corporation;
   C.   A certificate of ownership issued by the McHenry County Clerk’s Office
if the business is a sole proprietorship or general partnership;
   D.   A layout of flea market vendor space with corresponding length by width
dimensions measured in feet of all vendor spaces.
(1987 Code § 12-47)
4-7-5: FEES:
An annual license fee shall be paid to the City in the sum of one thousand four
hundred dollars ($1,400.00) for each flea market operation. The license fee
shall be paid in full at the time the license is issued or paid in four (4)
quarterly installments of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) each, with the
first quarterly installment due no later than May 1 of each calendar year.
Subsequent installment payments of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) each
shall be due August 10, November 10 and February 10 of each year.
(1987 Code § 12-48)
4-7-6: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Jurisdiction; Limited Authority: The Police Chief or the Chief’s
designee shall have general supervision over all flea market operations and
shall also have power to inspect their respective places of business. This
inspection shall be limited to: 1) confirming the proper posting of a flea
market operation license; and 2) inspection of record books, computers and
inventory directly related to the purchase and sale of articles deemed to be
identified as transactions under this chapter. All inspections must take place
at the business and during normal operating hours of the business.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   B.   Stolen Articles; Hold Order: Articles which the Police Department or
other law enforcement agency have reasonable grounds to believe were stolen may
be impounded or left with the vendor under a hold order at the discretion of
any member of the Police Department. An article may be impounded or held under
a hold order by the Police Department or other law enforcement agency for seven
(7) days pending investigation as to ownership of the article. It shall be
unlawful for any flea market operator and/or vendor to dispose any property
contrary to any hold order issued by a member of the Police Department or other
law enforcement agency.
(1987 Code § 12-49)
4-7-7: DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES OF OPERATOR:
It shall be the duty of every flea market operator to confirm that all flea
market vendors using the flea market operation are provided a copy of these
regulations.
(1987 Code § 12-51)
4-7-8: PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any flea market vendor or for any employee or agent
thereof to receive any articles by purchase or otherwise from:
   A.   Minors: Minors under eighteen (18) years of age.
   B.   Intoxicated Persons: Any person appearing to be under the influence of
drugs or alcohol.
   C.   Known Unqualified Persons: Any person known to the flea market vendor
to have been involved in the previous sale of stolen property or known to have
been convicted of theft, burglary, home or vehicular invasion, armed robbery,
robbery, or electronic fencing under the laws of the State of Illinois, or the
equivalent laws of any other state, and any person presenting a serial numbered
article from which the serial number has been removed or obliterated.
(1987 Code § 12-52)
4-7-9: CHARACTER OF PRODUCE AND OTHER FOODSTUFFS:
The sale of general merchandise of all kinds, and the sale of foodstuffs shall
be permitted subject to the review and approval of the McHenry County Health
Department. It shall be the responsibility of the flea market operator to
ensure all applicable permits have been obtained and are current.
(1987 Code § 12-53)
4-7-10: ADULT MERCHANDISE:
The sale of any type of adult oriented merchandise, as defined in this Code,
shall be expressly prohibited.
(1987 Code § 12-54)
4-7-11: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
The City Council shall have the authority to revoke or suspend a license issued
hereunder when it finds that the flea market operation is being conducted in
violation of this chapter or of any other ordinance, rule or regulation of the
City.
(1987 Code § 12-50)
CHAPTER 8: GARAGE SALES
Section
4-8-1: Purpose
4-8-2: Definition
4-8-3: License Required; Fee; Display
4-8-4: Information Filed
4-8-5: Number Of Sales
4-8-6: Time Limitations
4-8-7: Types Of Merchandise
4-8-8: Signs
4-8-9: Persons And Sales Exempted
4-8-1: PURPOSE:
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the regulation of the nature
and frequency of garage sales, in order to ensure public safety, provide proper
parking control and to prevent any annoyance or harm which might otherwise
occur from the uncontrolled operation of such sales in districts not zoned for
commercial use.
(1987 Code § 10-50.1)
4-8-2: DEFINITION:
For purposes of this chapter, the term GARAGE SALE shall mean and include all
sales of tangible personal property conducted on premises in the City that are
zoned for residential use, regardless of the name by which such sale may be
called.
(1987 Code § 10-50.2)
4-8-3: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE; DISPLAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct any garage
sale in the City without first filing with the City Clerk the information
hereinafter specified and obtaining from the City Clerk a license to do so, to
be known as a "garage sale license". Each license issued pursuant to this
chapter shall be prominently displayed on the premises upon which the garage
sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the licensed sale. No fee
shall be charged for such license.
(1987 Code § 10-50.3)
4-8-4: INFORMATION FILED:
The information to be filed with the City Clerk pursuant to this chapter shall
be as follows:
   A.   Name of the person, firm, group, corporation, association or
organization conducting said sale.
   B.   The address at which said sale is to be conducted.
   C.   The date(s) of the sale.
   D.   The number of days of the proposed sale.
   E.   The hours of the sale.
   F.   The number of garage sales held on the premises during the current
calendar year.
(1987 Code § 10-50.4)
4-8-5: NUMBER OF SALES:
No more than two (2) garage sales shall be conducted on the same premises by
the same household within any calendar year.
(1987 Code § 10-50.5)
4-8-6: TIME LIMITATIONS:
No garage sale shall be conducted over a period of more than three (3)
consecutive calendar days, nor shall any such sale begin before eight thirty
o’clock (8:30) A.M. or continue later than five o’clock (5:00) P.M. on any
given day.
(1987 Code § 10-50.6)
4-8-7: TYPES OF MERCHANDISE:
Garage sales shall be limited to the sale of household goods and furnishings
which have been in use in the dwelling unit located on the premises on which
such sales are conducted. No person, firm or corporation shall, at any garage
sale, sell at retail any goods purchased or acquired in wholesale lots.
(1987 Code § 10-50.7)
4-8-8: SIGNS:
Any person, firm or corporation licensed under the provisions of this chapter
may erect two (2) signs advertising the licensed sale. One such sign shall be
located on the premises where the sale is to take place, and the other shall be
located at the nearest major intersection to the sale premises, giving
directions to the sale. All signs shall be removed no later than three (3)
hours after conclusion of the sale.
(1987 Code § 10-50.8)
4-8-9: PERSONS AND SALES EXEMPTED:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
   A.   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   B.   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
   C.   Any persons selling or advertising for sale an item or items of
personal property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed three (3) in number with
only one of any type of item permitted.
   D.   Any sale which falls within the provisions of Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
   E.   Any sale conducted by a charitable or religious organization where the
sale is being held entirely as a fundraising activity for said organization.
(1987 Code § 10-50.9)
CHAPTER 9: SPECIAL SALES
Section
4-9-1: Definitions
4-9-2: License Required
4-9-3: Supplement To General Licensing Provisions
4-9-4: Application For License
4-9-5: Fees For License
4-9-6: Established Business Requisite To License
4-9-7: Exception For Survivors Of Business Person
4-9-8: Persons Exempted
4-9-9: Interval Between Sales
4-9-10: Location Restricted
4-9-11: Limitations Of Sales
4-9-12: Going Out Of Business Sales To Surrender License
4-9-13: Nontransferable
4-9-14: Duties Of Licensee
4-9-15: License Period; Renewal
4-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
FIRE AND OTHER ALTERED GOODS SALE: A sale conducted in such a manner as to
reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged
or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means.
GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALE: A sale conducted in such a manner as to reasonably
cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on
hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including, but not limited
to, the following:
Adjuster’s sale;
Adjustment sale;
Alteration sale;
Assignee’s sale;
Bankruptcy sale;
Benefit of Administrator’s sale;
Benefit of creditors’ sale;
Benefit of Trustees’ sale;
Building coming down sale;
Closing or closeout sale;
Creditors’ committee sale;
Creditor’s sale;
End sale;
Executor’s sale;
Final days sale;
Forced out of business sale;
Forced out sale;
Insolvents’ sale;
Last days sale;
Lease expires sale;
Liquidation sale;
Loss of lease sale;
Mortgage sale;
Quitting business sale;
Receiver’s sale;
Trustees’ sale.
GOODS: Any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the
object of a sale regulated hereunder.
REMOVAL OF BUSINESS SALE: A sale conducted in such a manner as to reasonably
cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and
discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods
on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the
City, or will then continue business from other existing locations in the City.
(1987 Code § 20-1)
4-9-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
A license issued by the City Clerk shall be obtained by any person before
selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by
any means to be one of the following kinds:
   A.   Going out of business sale;
   B.   Removal of business sale; or
   C.   Fire and other altered stock sale.
(1987 Code § 20-2)
4-9-3: SUPPLEMENT TO GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS:
   A.   Intent: The provisions of this chapter are intended to augment and be
in addition to the provisions of the general licensing provisions of chapter 1
of this title.
   B.   Greater Restrictions: Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction
upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by the general
licensing provisions of this title, this chapter shall control.
(1987 Code § 20-3)
4-9-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this chapter shall make a
written application to the City Clerk setting forth and containing the
following information:
   A.   Owner Information: The name and address of the owner of the goods to be
the object of the sale;
   B.   Purchase; Acquisition: The name and address of the person from whom he
purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased,
the manner of such acquisition;
   C.   Sale Address: Address of the premises where such sale is to be held;
   D.   Nature Of Occupancy: The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or
sublease and the effective date of termination of such occupancy;
   E.   Sale Dates: The dates during which the sale is to be held;
   F.   Statement Of Facts: A full and complete statement of the facts in
regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious
disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted;
   G.   Advertising: The means to be employed in advertising such sale,
together with the proposed content of any advertisement;
   H.   Inventory Details: A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be
sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant’s records. Said inventory shall
be attached to and become part of the required application.
      1.   All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by
the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges
and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment.
      2.   Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of
conducting a sale regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase, or additions to
the stock of goods of the business hereby affected, within fourteen (14) days
before the filing of an application hereunder, shall be deemed to be of such
character.
(1987 Code § 20-4)
4-9-5: FEES FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Specified: Any applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the
City Clerk with their application a license fee of twenty five dollars
($25.00).
   B.   Renewal: Any applicant for a renewal license hereunder shall submit to
the City Clerk with their renewal application a renewal license fee of twenty
five dollars ($25.00).
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-9-6: ESTABLISHED BUSINESS REQUISITE TO LICENSE:
Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or described in
the application for a license hereunder for a period of at least twelve (12)
months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a license.
(1987 Code § 20-5)
4-9-7: EXCEPTION FOR SURVIVORS OF BUSINESS PERSON:
Upon the death of a person doing business in this City, their heirs, devisees
or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license hereunder.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-9-8: PERSONS EXEMPTED:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect the following
persons:
   A.   Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent
jurisdiction;
   B.   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials;
   C.   Auctioneers, selling at auction;
   D.   Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who
publishes in good faith, any advertisement, without knowledge of its false,
deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of
this chapter have not been complied with.
(1987 Code § 20-7)
4-9-9: INTERVAL BETWEEN SALES:
Any person who has held a sale, and regulated hereunder, at the location stated
in the application, within one year previous to the date of such application
shall not be granted a license.
(1987 Code § 20-8)
4-9-10: LOCATION RESTRICTED:
Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more than one place of
business, the license issued shall apply to the one store or branch specified
in the application and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent
that it is cooperating with it, or in any way participating in the licensed
sale; nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or
represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or
participating in any way in the licensed sale.
(1987 Code § 20-9)
4-9-11: LIMITATIONS OF SALES:
   A.   Particular Sale And Location: The license shall authorize only the one
type of sale described in the application at the location named therein.
(1987 Code § 20-12)
   B.   Inventoried Goods: The license shall authorize only the sale of goods
described in the inventory attached to the application.
(1987 Code § 20-13)
4-9-12: GOING OUT OF BUSINESS SALES TO SURRENDER LICENSE:
Upon being issued a license hereunder for a going out of business sale, the
licensee shall surrender to the City Clerk all other business licenses he may
hold at that time applicable to the location and goods covered by the
application for a license under this chapter.
(1987 Code § 20-14)
4-9-13: NONTRANSFERABLE:
Any license herein provided for shall not be assignable or transferable.
(1987 Code § 20-15)
4-9-14: DUTIES OF LICENSEE:
A licensee hereunder shall:
   A.   Additions To Inventory: Make no additions whatsoever, during the period
of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached
to the application for license.
   B.   Misleading Advertising: Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or
misleading advertising.
   C.   Conduct Of Sale: Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with
any advertising or holding out incident thereto.
   D.   Maintain Inventory Record On Premises: Keep available at the place of
sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall
present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request.
   E.   Distinction Between Goods: Keep any other goods separate and apart from
the goods listed in the field inventory as being objects of sale and shall make
such distinction.
(1987 Code § 20-16)
4-9-15: LICENSE PERIOD; RENEWAL:
   A.   Period: The license shall authorize the sale described in the
application for a period of not more than seven (7) consecutive days, Sundays
and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance thereof.
   B.   Renewal: The City Clerk shall renew a license for one time period only,
such period to be in addition to the seven (7) days permitted in the original
license and not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days, Sundays and holidays
excluded, when she finds:
      1.   That facts exist justifying the license renewal;
      2.   That the licensee has filed an application for renewal;
      3.   That the licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a
revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining
unsold and not listing any goods not included in the original application and
inventory.
      4.   For the purposes of this subsection, any application for a license
under the provisions of this chapter covering any goods previously inventoried
as required hereunder, shall be deemed to be an application for renewal,
whether presented by the original applicant, or by any other person.
(1987 Code § 20-11)
CHAPTER 10: PAWNBROKERS, SECONDHAND DEALERS AND JUNK/SCRAP COLLECTION VEHICLES
Section
4-10-1: Definitions
4-10-2: Exemptions To Chapter
4-10-3: License Required
4-10-4: Application For License
4-10-5: Background Checks Of Applicants, Employees
4-10-6: License To State Location Of Business
4-10-7: Posting Of License Required
4-10-8: Change Of Location
4-10-9: Electronic Reporting Of Transactions
4-10-10: Record Of Transactions
4-10-10-1: Nonjunk/Scrap Articles
4-10-10-2: Junk/Scrap Articles
4-10-11: Pawnbrokers Issuance Of Signed Receipt
4-10-12: Employment Of Persons Under Sixteen By Pawnbroker
4-10-13: Secondhand Dealer Not To Act As Pawnbroker
4-10-14: Waiting Periods
4-10-15: Prohibited Transactions
4-10-16: False, Fictitious, Forged, Altered ID Card Reporting
4-10-17: Lost Or Stolen Articles Reported To Police
4-10-18: Return Of Stolen Property
4-10-19: Inspection Of Premises By Police
4-10-20: Hours Of Operation
4-10-21: Junk/Scrap Collection Vehicles
4-10-22: Revocation Of License
4-10-23: Penalty
4-10-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
INDIVIDUALLY IDENTIFIABLE ARTICLES: Nonjunk/scrap articles that are
individually identifiable by a serial number, or other applied numbers,
letters, characters or markings; or other unique features that serve to
distinguish it from any other similar article and can be used to establish
ownership of the article.
JUNK/SCRAP: Manufactured articles or parts that are nonprecious metals that
have been discarded and are useful only as material for reprocessing or
recycling.
LICENSEE: The owner, operator and all employees of a business licensed under
this chapter.
PAWNBROKER: Every owner, operator or employee engaged in the business of
receiving property in pledge or as security for money or other things advanced
to the pawner or pledger shall be deemed to be a pawnbroker.
PRECIOUS METALS: Manufactured articles or parts consisting primarily of gold
(chemical symbol Au), silver (chemical symbol Ag), platinum (chemical symbol
Pt) or palladium (chemical symbol Pd), but not including articles merely plated
with these materials or articles that are similar in color to these metals, but
not actually consisting of them.
SECONDHAND DEALER: Every owner, operator or employee engaged in the business of
the purchase, sale, trade or barter of secondhand articles, including, but not
limited to, recyclable materials, scrap metal, electronics, video game systems,
video games, video game accessories, jewelry, collectable coins, valuable and/
or precious metals and stones, or household goods, shall be deemed to be a
secondhand dealer, whether such dealer operates from a fixed storefront
business, or is conducting business on a temporary, short term basis from a
nonfixed location.
(1987 Code § 12-21)
4-10-2: EXEMPTIONS TO CHAPTER:
This chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Used Motor Vehicles: The purchase or sale of used motor vehicles,
including motorcycles and motor driven cycles, as defined in the Illinois
Vehicle Code; or
   B.   Charitable Organizations: Charitable organizations that accept donated
goods for resale as a fundraising program for the charity; or
   C.   Purchases Between Brokers, Dealers: Any articles purchased by a
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer from another pawnbroker or secondhand dealer;
or
   D.   Collectable Coins And Paper Currency Dealers: Businesses that solely
deal in collectable coins and paper currency.
(1987 Code § 12-22)
4-10-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Generally; Term: No person shall engage in, carry on or conduct the
business of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, or operate or cause to be
operated any motor vehicle for the purpose of collecting or disposing of junk/
scrap within the City, unless he/she is licensed to do so. The license shall be
issued annually with an expiration of April 30. Licenses issued pursuant to
this section shall be nontransferable and shall not be prorated.
   B.   Licenses Are Separate: A pawnbroker’s license, secondhand dealer’s
license and scrap/junk collection vehicle license are separate from each other
and the license shall state which it is for. Persons may hold more than one
license under this section.
   C.   Secondhand Dealer Use Of Collection Vehicle: A secondhand dealer’s
license will entitle the licensee to the use of one junk/scrap collection
vehicle. Each additional motor vehicle used for such purpose shall require a
separate license. No license for a junk/scrap collection vehicle shall be
issued for less than the full annual license fee.
(1987 Code § 12-36)
4-10-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Required: Any person desiring a license as a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer, or for a junk/scrap collection vehicle, shall make application in
writing to the City, setting out in the application the full name and residence
of the applicant, if an individual, and, if a corporation, the name and
residence of each of its officers. Such application shall also set out the
location at which it is intended or desired to conduct such business, and such
other information as the City shall deem appropriate.
   B.   False Information: Any false information provided on the application
shall result in the denial or revocation of the license.
(1987 Code § 12-37)
4-10-5: BACKGROUND CHECKS OF APPLICANTS, EMPLOYEES:
   A.   Issuance Upon Passing Background Check: The City shall grant licenses
to such pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or junk/scrap collection vehicle
applicants as shall pass a background check conducted by the Police Department,
to engage in the business of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer at, or operated
a junk/scrap collection vehicle from, the place designated in the application
for and during the period of such license.
   B.   Employees, Volunteers: Any person employed by or providing volunteer
work for the licensee at the business or in the vehicle for which the license
is sought, at any time during the period of the license, shall also be required
to pass a background check conducted by the Police Department, if that employee
or volunteer engages in the collection, receipt, purchase or sale of secondhand
or junk/scrap articles.
   C.   Results; Determination: The results of all background checks shall be
provided to the City, who shall determine if the applicant and all employees/
volunteers of the business for which the license is sought meet satisfactory
standards of good character.
(1987 Code § 12-41)
4-10-6: LICENSE TO STATE LOCATION OF BUSINESS:
   A.   Pawnbroker, Secondhand Dealer: Every license granted to any pawnbroker
or secondhand dealer under the provisions of this chapter shall designate the
place in which the person receiving the license shall be authorized to carry on
such business. Such business shall not be carried on or conducted in any other
place than designated by the license.
   B.   Junk/Scrap Collection Vehicle: Every license granted to any owner of a
junk/scrap collection vehicle under the provisions of this chapter shall
designate the business location and phone number the vehicle operates from, or
if none, the street address and phone number of the licensee’s residence.
(1987 Code § 12-38)
4-10-7: POSTING OF LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every license granted under this chapter shall be conspicuously posted for
public viewing so as to be seen by anyone entering the place of business of
such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, whether the place of business is a fixed
storefront or temporary, nonfixed location, or in any vehicle licensed under
this chapter.
(1987 Code § 12-40)
4-10-8: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
   A.   Pawnbroker, Secondhand Dealer: In case any person licensed as a
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall remove their place of business from the
place designated on such license, no business shall be carried on or engaged in
at the new location under such license until written notice of such change has
been given by the licensee to the City, and such change has been noted by the
City upon such license. The address of their place of business shall thereupon
be changed on the sides of any vehicle used by such licensed pawnbroker or
dealer, and made to correspond with such new place of business.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   B.   Junk/Scrap Collection Vehicle: Any change in the address listed on the
license for a junk/scrap collection vehicle shall be provided in writing to the
City, who shall note such change upon said license. No junk/scrap collection
shall be carried on or engaged in by the licensee until such notification and
change has been made, and until the address of the licensee’s place of business
or residence shall be changed on the sides and rear of the licensed vehicle and
made to correspond with such new address.
(1987 Code § 12-39)
4-10-9: ELECTRONIC REPORTING OF TRANSACTIONS:
   A.   Contract For Service; Notification Of Change: The Police Department
shall enter into a contract for service and maintain its contract for service
with LeadsOnline, or a similar entity as designated by the Chief of Police, in
order to enhance its investigative services to protect both pawnbrokers/
secondhand dealers and members of the general public. In the event of a change
to its electronic reporting system, the City will notify all impacted licensees
of the change within a reasonable time prior to such change.
   B.   Computer System With Internet Required: Every pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer shall operate and maintain a computer system with internet access and
photographic or video capability sufficient for the electronic reporting
requirements described in this chapter. Any failure or malfunction of such
equipment on the part of the licensee shall not exempt the licensee from the
recording/reporting requirements outlined in section 4-10-10 of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 12-23)
4-10-10: RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS:
   A.   Report Required: Throughout the term of the license, every pawnbroker
or secondhand dealer shall report/upload to LeadsOnline, or the City’s current
electronic reporting system, the listed information in sections 4-10-10-1 and
4-10-10-2 of this chapter for each and every transaction conducted during each
day they were open for business by the end of that business day.
   B.   Included Transactions: A transaction shall consist of all articles
brought in to a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer for sale, barter, trade, pledge
or pawn by an individual (pawner/seller) at the same time and date, and
includes the sale of nonjunk/scrap articles by a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer to another person. Articles brought into a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer by an individual (pawn/seller) for sale, barter, trade, pledge or pawn
at different times on the same date by the same person shall be considered as
separate transactions, regardless of how short the difference in the time is
between those transactions. Separate transactions, either from the same person
or different persons, shall not be combined and reported collectively.
(1987 Code § 12-24)
4-10-10-1: NONJUNK/SCRAP ARTICLES:
   A.   Purchases/Receipts By Licensees:
      1.   All nonjunk scrap articles brought in to a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer by an individual (pawner/seller) for sale, barter, trade, pledge or pawn
during a single transaction shall be itemized separately. Licensees shall not
lump nonjunk articles together (e.g., “5 gold chains”) and must individually
itemize and describe each individual article.
      2.   Each nonjunk scrap article brought in to a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer by an individual (pawner/seller) for sale, barter, trade, pledge or pawn
during a transaction shall be associated with the person (pawner/seller) who
brought the article in. The licensee shall record/report the following
information for each such transaction:
         a.   A digital photographic image of the photo ID card of the pawner/
seller, sufficiently clear to allow the information on the ID card to be read.
The photo ID must be a currently valid (not expired) card issued by a
government entity of the United States, and must include the pawner’s/seller’s
first and last name, current address, date of birth and physical descriptors.
In the event the card is valid but does not contain the pawner’s/seller’s
current address, the licensee must separately record and report the current
address.
         b.   The date and time of the transaction.
         c.   A complete and thorough description of each nonjunk/scrap
article, including, but not limited to, the following:
            (1)   Type of article.
            (2)   Brand name/make/manufacturer (if applicable).
            (3)   Model number (if applicable).
            (4)   Serial number (if applicable).
            (5)   Color/finish.
            (6)   Any other identifying marks, writing, engraving, etc.
         d.   A digital photograph of each nonjunk/scrap article purchased or
received as trade, barter, pledge or pawn, sufficiently detailed to allow
reasonable identification of each trade. If the article contains any
identifying numbers, marks, writing, engraving, etc., or any other
distinguishing characteristics, the digital image(s) shall capture same.
   B.   Sales By Licensees:
      1.   All nonjunk/scrap articles sold, be it a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer to an individual shall be itemized separately. Licensees shall not lump
nonjunk/scrap articles together (e.g., “5 gold chains”) and must individually
itemize and describe each individual article.
      2.   Each nonjunk/scrap articles sold, be it a pawnbroker or secondhand
dealer, shall be associated with the person to whom it was sold. The licensee
shall record/report the following information for each such transaction:
         a.   The name and current address of the purchaser must be recorded/
reported - a photographic image of the purchaser’s government issued photo ID
is not required.
         b.   A digital photograph of the nonjunk/scrap articles sold by a
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to an individual is not required.
(1987 Code § 12-24)
4-10-10-2: JUNK/SCRAP ARTICLES:
   A.   Purchases/Receipts By Licensees:
      1.   Junk/scrap articles may be recorded/reported in bulk, but must
specify the weight, type (e.g., steel, copper, aluminum, etc.) and form (e.g.,
sheet, cans, pipe, wire, etc.) of the bulk material.
      2.   Each different type and form of junk/scrap bulk material brought
into a secondhand dealer by an individual for sale during a transaction shall
be associated with the person who brought the material in. Licensees shall
record/report the following information for each such transaction:
         a.   A photographic image of a photo ID card of the seller,
sufficiently clear to allow the information on the ID to be read. The photo ID
must be a currently valid (not expired) card issued by a government entity of
the United States, and must include the pawner/seller’s first and last name,
current address, date of birth and physical descriptors. In the event the card
is valid but does not contain the seller’s current address, the licensee must
separately record and report the current address.
         b.   If the seller is selling on behalf of a company or business, the
name, address and telephone number of such company or business shall also be
recorded/reported.
         c.   If the junk/scrap is brought by motor vehicle to a licensee for
sale, the make, model, color and license plate number of that vehicle shall be
recorded/reported.
         d.   The date and time of the transaction.
         e.   A digital photograph or, if the licensee has a video system,
video segment of each individual type and form of bulk purchased by the
licensee shall be linked to the record of that transaction.
   B.   Sales By Licensees: Licensees do not need to record/report any
information pertaining to the sale of junk/scrap material.
(1987 Code § 12-24)
4-10-11: PAWNBROKERS ISSUANCE OF SIGNED RECEIPT:
Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of making any advancement or loan, deliver
to the person pawning or pledging any property a receipt signed by them
containing an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all
the goods, articles or other things pawned or pledged, the amount of money,
value or thing loaned thereon, the time of pledging the same, the rate of
interest to be paid on such loan, and the name and residence of the person
making the pawn or pledge.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-10-12: EMPLOYMENT OF PERSONS UNDER SIXTEEN BY PAWNBROKER:
No pawnbroker shall permit any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to
take pledges in pawn for them.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-10-13: SECONDHAND DEALER NOT TO ACT AS PAWNBROKER:
No secondhand dealer shall receive any article or thing by way of pledge of
pawn, nor shall he/she loan or advance any sum of money on the security of any
article or thing, unless he/she also happens to be separately licensed as a
pawnbroker under this chapter, and complies with the specific requirements of
sections 4-10-11 and 4-10-12 of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 12-27)
4-10-14: WAITING PERIODS:
   A.   Specified: No articles received on deposit or pledge by any pawnbroker,
shall be permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of business of such
pawnbroker for the space of forty eight (48) hours after the delivery of the
signed receipt required by section 4-10-11, “Pawnbrokers Issuance Of Signed
Receipt”, of this chapter. No articles pawned or pledged shall be sold or
disposed of by any pawnbroker within one year from the time the pawner or
pledger shall make default in the payment of interest on the money so advanced
by the pawnbroker, unless by the written consent of the pawner or pledger.
   B.   Individually Identifiable Articles (Excluding Precious Metals): No
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall expose for sale, or sell or barter, or
melt, crush/compact, destroy or otherwise dispose of any nonscrap/junk article
that is individually identifiable within thirty (30) days or the time of
purchasing or receiving the same, nor until the same has been in or upon the
premises where the same are offered, exposed, bartered or sold at least thirty
(30) days. During this thirty (30) day time period, articles must be kept on
site and available for inspection pursuant to section 4-10-19, “Inspection Of
Premises By Police”, of this chapter, upon request.
   C.   Precious Metal Articles: No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall
expose for sale, or sell or barter, or melt, crush/compact, destroy, or
otherwise dispose of any nonscrap/junk article within ten (10) days of the time
of purchasing or receiving the same, nor until the same has been in or upon the
premises where the same are offered, exposed, bartered or sold at least ten
(10) days. During this ten (10) day time period, articles must be kept on site
and available for inspection pursuant to section 4-10-19, “Inspection Of
Premises By Police”, of this chapter, upon request.
   D.   Waiting Period Exemptions:
      1.   Coins, paper money and bullion that have no distinguishing
characteristics that separate them from other such items are not subject to a
waiting period so long as the transaction has been recorded in compliance with
section 4-10-10, “Record Of Transactions”, of this chapter.
      2.   Junk/scrap articles shall have no waiting period restriction so long
as the transaction has been recorded in compliance with section 4-10-10,
“Record Of Transactions”, of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 12-28)
4-10-15: PROHIBITED TRANSACTIONS:
   A.   Specified: No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, in the course of
conducting their business, shall receive any articles for pawn, pledge,
advancement of money, loan, resale or personal use from:
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      1.   Minors who are under eighteen (18) years of age.
      2.   Any person appearing to be intoxicated or under the influence of
drugs or alcohol.
      3.   Any person known to the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer to have been
involved in the previous pawn or sale of stolen property or known to have been
convicted of theft, residential burglary, burglary, home invasion, vehicular
invasion, armed robbery, robbery or electronic fencing under the laws of the
State of Illinois, or the equivalent laws of any other state. A pawnbroker or
secondhand dealer may access the LeadsOnline “No Buy” list or contact the
McHenry Police prior to conducting a transaction to ensure the prospective
pawner/seller has not been convicted of any such crime.
      4.   Any person presenting a serial numbered nonscrap/junk article from
which the serial number has been removed or obliterated.
   B.   Report To Police: In the event that any of the above enumerated persons
shall attempt to conduct a prohibited transaction, a representative of that
business shall notify the Police Department of the incident while the person is
still present in the business if safe to do so, or otherwise as soon as the
person has left the business.
(1987 Code § 12-29)
4-10-16: FALSE, FICTITIOUS, FORGED, ALTERED ID CARD REPORTING:
In the event that a person seeking to sell or pawn any item presents to the
owner, operator or employee of a pawn or resale shop what is reasonably
believed to be a false, fictitious, forged or altered ID card, a representative
of that business shall notify the Police Department of the incident while the
person is still present in the business if safe to do so, or otherwise as soon
as the person has left the business.
(1987 Code § 12-30)
4-10-17: LOST OR STOLEN ARTICLES REPORTED TO POLICE:
Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer who shall receive or be in possession of
any goods, articles or things under circumstances which would lead a reasonable
person to conclude they have been lost or stolen, or which have been alleged or
supposed to have been lost or stolen, shall immediately notify the Police
Department of such receipt and, forthwith on demand, exhibit the same to any
member of the Police Department.
(1987 Code § 2-31)
4-10-18: RETURN OF STOLEN PROPERTY:
When any person is found to be the owner of stolen property which has been
pawned or purchased by a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, such property shall
be turned over to the Police Department without the payment of the money
advanced by the pawnbroker or paid by the secondhand dealer thereon, or any
costs or charges of any kind which the pawnbroker or secondhand dealer may have
placed upon the same.
(1987 Code § 12-32)
4-10-19: INSPECTION OF PREMISES BY POLICE:
The Police Chief or the Chief’s designee shall have general supervision over
all pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers and shall also have power to inspect
their respective places of business. This inspection shall be limited to: a)
confirming the proper posting of a pawnbroker license or a secondhand dealer
license; and b) inspection of record books, computers and inventory directly
related to the purchase and sale of articles deemed to be identified as
transactions under this chapter. All inspections must take place at the
business and during normal operating hours of the business.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-10-20: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No business licensed under this chapter shall purchase or accept as pawn or
pledge any goods, articles or things whatsoever from any person between the
hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M.
(1987 Code § 12-34)
4-10-21: JUNK/SCRAP COLLECTION VEHICLES:
   A.   Vehicle Identified: Every motor vehicle licensed under this chapter
shall be permanently and conspicuously marked on both sides and the rear of the
vehicle with the name of licensee, along with the street address and phone
number of their place of business. If the licensee of a junk/scrap collection
vehicle is not a licensed secondhand dealer or has no fixed place of business,
their name, along with the street address and phone number of their residence,
shall be permanently and conspicuously marked on both sides and the rear of the
vehicle.
   B.   Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and
Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible
for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each
day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 12-35)
   C.   Liability Insurance; Safety Sticker: Every applicant for a junk/scrap
collection vehicle license must show valid proof of liability insurance and a
safety sticker for second division vehicles as required under the Illinois
Vehicle Code. All junk/scrap collection vehicles licensed under this section
shall meet all requirements for second division vehicles under the Illinois
Vehicle Code. Violations of the Illinois Vehicle Code requirements shall be
enforced by the Police Department.
(1987 Code § 12-35) (amd. 2019 Code; Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; Ord. 22-40, 6-20-
2022)
4-10-22: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief or the Chief’s designee to report to
the City any failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter on the part
of any such licensee, and the City shall commence administrative hearing
procedures to revoke the license of such persons or businesses.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
4-10-23: PENALTY:
The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be revocation of licensure, in
addition to a fine as imposed by the Administrative Law Judge pursuant to title
1, chapter 4, article B of this Code.
(1987 Code § 12-43)
CHAPTER 11: RAFFLES
Section
4-11-1: Definitions
4-11-2: Authority For Issuance; Applicability
4-11-3: License Required
4-11-4: Application For License
4-11-5: License Fees
4-11-6: Restrictions On Issuance Of License
4-11-7: Conduct Of Raffles
4-11-8: Raffles Manager; Bond
4-11-9: Raffle Tickets
4-11-10: Prize Limit And Raffle Duration
4-11-11: Records Maintained
4-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an
indefinite number of the public. The services rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide
systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to
schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and
intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported schools.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
KEY LOCATION: The location where the winning chances in the raffle are
determined.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other reasonable operating
expenses incurred as a result of operating a raffle.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for
profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes section
5/28-1 of the Criminal Code of 2012, conducted by an organization licensed
under this chapter in which:
   A.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
   B.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society or organization founded for the
purpose of religious worship.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members which are
substantially veterans and spouses, widows or widowers of veterans, the primary
purpose of which is to promote the welfare of its membership and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to confer a public benefit.
(Ord. 19-1203, 9-3-2019)
4-11-2: AUTHORITY FOR ISSUANCE; APPLICABILITY:
The Office of the City Administrator or designee shall have the authority to
issue licenses for raffles subject to the limitations set forth in this
chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to authorize the conducting
or operating of any gambling scheme, enterprise, activity or device other than
a raffle provided herein.
(Ord. 19-1203, 9-3-2019)
4-11-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to conduct raffles or chances within the City unless the person,
firm or corporation has a valid license issued in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Not For Profit Organizations: Licenses shall be issued only to bona
fide religious, charitable, labor, fraternal, educational, veteran or other
bona fide not for profit organizations that operate without profit to their
members and which have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5)
years immediately before making application for a license and which have been
during that entire five (5) year period engaged in carrying out their objects,
or to a nonprofit fundraising organization that the City determines is
organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardship as the result of an illness, disability, accident, disaster or to any
law enforcement agency or Statewide association that represents law
enforcement.
(Ord. 19-1203, 9-3-2019)
4-11-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   Information Required: Applications for such licenses shall be made to
the City Administrator or his/her designated representative, signed by the
applicant or its duly authorized representatives and verified by oath or
affidavit, and shall contain the following information and statements:
      1.   Name and address of the applicant;
      2.   The area or areas within the City and outside the City in which the
raffle chances will be sold and issued;
      3.   The time period during which raffle chances will be sold or issued;
      4.   The date, time, manner and "key location" of determining the winning
chance(s);
      5.   A sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the
respective licensee organization signed by the presiding officer and/or
secretary of that organization;
      6.   A copy of the applicants not for profit articles of incorporation
and/or charter; and
      7.   Such other information as the Office of the City Administrator may
require under the authority of this chapter or 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes
chapter 15.
   B.   Validity: Each license issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
single raffle or a specified number of raffles to be conducted during a
specific period not to exceed one year.
(Ord. 19-1203, 9-3-2019)
4-11-5: LICENSE FEES:
 
Cash Value Or Merchandise Value License Fee
     $0.00 - $100,000.00   None
     $101,000.00 - $499,000$ 500.00
     $500,000.00 - $999,9991,000.00
     $1,000,000.00 or great2,500.00
 
(Ord. 19-1203, 9-3-2019)
4-11-6: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
No such license shall be issued to:
   A.   A person who has been convicted of a felony;
   B.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter;
   C.   A person who is not of good moral character;
   D.   A person whose license issued under this chapter has been revoked for
cause;
   E.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application;
   F.   Any firm or corporation in which a person defined in subsection A, B or
C of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which
such a person is active or employed;
   G.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or not;
or
   H.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A, B or C of
this section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle, as
defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1203, 9-3-2019)
4-11-7: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
   A.   Proceeds Devoted To Lawful Purpose: The entire net proceeds of any
raffle must be exclusively devoted to the lawful purposes of the organization
permitted to conduct that game.
   B.   Management Participation: No person except a bona fide director,
officer, employee or member of the sponsoring organization may participate in
the management or operation of the raffle.
   C.   Remuneration, Profit: No person may receive any remuneration or profit
for managing or participating in the management of the raffle.
   D.   Contracting With Third Parties: Sponsoring organizations may contract
with third parties who, acting at the direction of and under the supervision of
the sponsoring organization, provide bona fide services to the sponsoring
organization in connection with the operation (not management) of a raffle and
may pay reasonable compensation for such services, including:
      1.   Advertising, marketing and promotion,
      2.   Legal,
      3.   Procurement of goods, prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose
of operating the raffle,
      4.   Rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented,
      5.   Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping,
      6.   Website hosting,
      7.   Mailing and delivery,
      8.   Banking and payment processing, or
      9.   Other services related to the operation of the raffle.
   E.   Rent Premises: A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the
winning chance or chances in a raffle; provided, that the rent is not
determined as a percentage of the receipts or profits from the raffle.
   F.   State Applicable: Raffle chances may be sold or issued throughout the
State.
   G.   Key Location: Winning chances may be determined only at the “key
location” identified on the application and subsequent license.
   H.   Persons Under Eighteen: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may participate in the conducting of raffles or chances. A person under the age
of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning chances are being
determined only when accompanied by his/her parents or guardian and in
accordance with applicable law.
(Ord. 19-1203, 9-3-2019)
4-11-8: RAFFLES MANAGER; BOND:
Operation and conduct of raffles shall be under the supervision of a single
raffles manager designated by the person or organization making application for
a license. The raffles manager shall file with the Office of the City
Administrator a fidelity bond in an amount not less than the anticipated gross
receipts for each raffle. The bond shall be in favor of the organization and
conditioned upon his/her honesty in the performance of duties. The bond shall
also provide that notice be given in writing to the City not less than thirty
(30) days prior to its cancellation. The City Administrator or his/her
designated representative is authorized to waive the requirement for a bond by
including a waiver provision in the license issued; provided, that the license
containing such waiver provision shall be granted only by the affirmative vote
of the requisite number of members of the licensed organization or, if the
licensed organization does not have members, of members of the governing board
of the organization, to constitute an affirmative action of the licensed
organization.
(Ord. 19-1203, 9-3-2019)
4-11-9: RAFFLE TICKETS:
   A.   Content: Each raffle ticket, chance or other raffle token shall state,
on its face, the name and address of the licensee, the date or dates of the
drawings, and the prize or prizes to be awarded; provided however, that this
requirement shall not apply to any raffle in which the following occurs:
      1.   Prizes in aggregate value under fifty dollars ($50.00) are awarded;
      2.   Any raffle in which raffle chances are sold only on the date of the
drawing during the event at which the drawing is to be conducted;
      3.   Any raffle in which the chances sold document a serial number which
can be traced back to a specific raffle which clearly defines the name of the
organization, location, drawing dates, times and prize amounts.
   B.   Time Limitation: No such raffle ticket, chance or token shall be sold
or issued more than three hundred sixty five (365) days before the
determination of a winning chance or chances.
   C.   Refunds: If any raffle for which a license is issued under this chapter
is canceled, or if any such raffle is not conducted on the date contained in
the application for license, the licensee shall refund all money paid for any
raffle chances issued or sold to the persons to whom such raffle chances were
issued or sold within forty five (45) days after the date on which the raffle
was to be conducted or within forty five (45) days after the cancellation of
the raffle, whichever is sooner.
(Ord. 19-1203, 9-3-2019)
4-11-10: PRIZE LIMIT AND RAFFLE DURATION:
   A.   Aggregate Retail Value: The aggregate retail value of all prizes or
merchandise awarded by a licensee and received by a player or players in a
single raffle shall not exceed three million dollars ($3,000,000.00).
"Aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded" shall mean the
gross value, before taxes, of all the prizes or merchandise awarded in a single
raffle.
   B.   Retail Value: The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a
licensee and received by a player or players in a single raffle shall be three
million dollars ($3,000,000.00). "Maximum retail value of each prize awarded"
shall mean the gross value, before taxes, of each single prize awarded in a
single raffle.
   C.   Maximum Price: The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle
chance issued or sold shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   D.   Maximum Days: The maximum number of days during which chances may be
issued or sold is four hundred (400).
   E.   Notice To Terminate: In the event that the Chief of Police (or
designee) determines that a proposed raffle is adversely impacting City
services or the safety of the community due to size, traffic, security or other
reasons, a notice may be issued requiring the game be brought to an end within
seven (7) days.
(Ord. 19-1203, 9-3-2019; amd. Ord. 22-39, 6-6-2022)
4-11-11: RECORDS MAINTAINED:
   A.   Requirements: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and changes
shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each
single gathering or occasion at which winning chances are determined. All
deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description
of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment.
   B.   Segregation Of Gross Receipts, Expenses, Net Proceeds: Gross receipts
from the operation of raffles programs shall be segregated from other revenues
of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo games are also
conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to a license therefor
issued by the Department of Revenue of the State, and placed in a separate
account. Each organization shall have separate records of its raffles. The
person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds from the
operation of raffles shall not be the same person who accounts for other
revenues of the organization.
   C.   Time Limit For Reporting: Each organization licensed to conduct raffles
shall report monthly to its membership, and to the City, its gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds
itemized as required in this section. Such reports shall be filed with the
Office of the City Administrator on the fifteenth day of each month.
   D.   Preservation Time: Records required by this section shall be preserved
for three (3) years, and organizations shall make available their records
relating to operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and
places.
(Ord. 19-1203, 9-3-2019)
CHAPTER 12: SCAVENGERS
Section
4-12-1: Definition
4-12-2: Exemptions
4-12-3: Number Of Licenses
4-12-4: Exclusive License
4-12-5: Fee For License
4-12-6: Vehicle Insurance
4-12-7: Vehicle Requirements
4-12-8: Residential Services
4-12-9: Business, Commercial And Industrial Services
4-12-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, the word SCAVENGER means any person engaged in
the business of collecting, carting, hauling or transporting garbage, ashes,
refuse of all kinds and any and all miscellaneous waste materials.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-12-2: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to anyone who is engaged in the business of
landscaping, lawn and ground maintenance, tree trimming, lawn mowing, bush and
tree trimming, construction or trucking who remove, haul and dispose of brush,
tree branches and trunks, grass clippings, landscape wastes, building debris,
construction debris or junk.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-12-3: NUMBER OF LICENSES:
Only one scavenger license for one-, two-, three- and four-family residence
service in the City shall be issued. All other scavenger services in the City
shall not be required to obtain a scavenger license by the City of McHenry.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-12-4: EXCLUSIVE LICENSE:
   A.   Terms And Conditions: The exclusive license for one-, two-, three- and
four-family residence scavenger service in the City shall be issued to such
scavenger on such terms and conditions as the City Council may from time to
time determine.
   B.   Bond Required: The waste hauler who is awarded the exclusive license
for one-, two-, three- and four-family residential scavenger services shall
immediately, upon being awarded the license, file a bond with the City in the
penal sum of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00), executed by the
waste hauler as principal and also by two (2) non-corporate sureties, who shall
be residents of the State. The waste hauler, however, shall have the option of
substituting a corporate surety on such bond, in lieu of the aforesaid non-
corporate sureties. Such bond shall be approved by the City Attorney and shall
be conditioned upon the waste hauler complying fully with all of the provisions
of the ordinances of the City at all times and also complying fully with all of
the provisions of the Statutes of the State.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-12-5: FEE FOR LICENSE:
No annual fee shall be charged for the exclusive license issued for one-, two-,
three- and four-family residential scavenger service.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-12-6: VEHICLE INSURANCE:
Each vehicle used in scavenger operations shall be insured against public
liability in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each person
injured and in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each
occurrence.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-12-7: VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Watertight; Cover: All vehicles used by a scavenger in their business
shall be watertight and shall be equipped with airtight covers for such
portions as are used for the transportation of garbage, refuse of all kinds or
miscellaneous waste materials.
   B.   Vehicles And Containers Closed: All vehicles, boxes or containers used
or leased by a scavenger shall be kept securely closed to prevent the contents
from scattering.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-12-8: RESIDENTIAL SERVICES:
   A.   Rates, Terms, Conditions: The scavenger licensee furnishing one- and
two-family residential scavenger service shall provide such services at such
rates and under such terms and conditions as may be determined from time to
time by the City Council.
   B.   Special Services: A scavenger may provide such other special type of
collection service (such as the pickup of household debris, construction
material, junked appliances, discarded furniture or other miscellaneous
materials) as the homeowner may request at a collection fee to be agreed upon
between the scavenger and the homeowner.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
4-12-9: BUSINESS, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL SERVICES:
A scavenger may contract with each business, commercial and industrial
establishment, individually, for scavenger service, at a monthly collection fee
to be agreed upon between them.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
CHAPTER 13: SOLICITORS
Section
4-13-1: Purpose
4-13-2: Definitions
4-13-3: Permit Required; Exemption; Application
4-13-4: Term, Renewal
4-13-5: Regulations
4-13-6: Penalties For Violation Of This Chapter
4-13-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The City of McHenry has a legitimate interest in preventing fraud,
protecting the privacy of its residents, preventing crime and conserving the
resources of its police department. This Chapter is intended to apply to the
solicitation of funds and is not intended to interfere with the exercise of
free speech and the free exercise of rights protected under the First Amendment
(i.e., religious proselytizing, anonymous political speech, the distribution of
hand bills, and freedom of the press). It is further declared to be the policy
of the City that the residents of the City have the right to determine whether
any solicitor shall be invited to their residence.
   B.   The business and operation of any solicitor in conformance with the
terms of this Article shall not be interpreted to be an endorsement of any
solicitor by the City, its elected officials or its employees.
(Ord. 21-57, 11-1-2021)
4-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
PERSON: Any individual, organization, group, association, partnership,
corporation, trust, or any combination thereof.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for dwelling purposes by one or
more persons, contained within any type of building or structure, including the
common areas inside multiple dwelling buildings.
SOLICIT or SOLICITING: The act of engaging in solicitation.
SOLICITATION: The act of seeking to a) solicit funds or b) to propose or engage
in a commercial transaction involving a sale, an offer for a sale, delivery of
a commercial good or service, or a commercial exchange, subscription, or any
similar transaction, except, as to both items a) and b) of this definition,
when such activity is conducted within a building zoned to permit such activity
and under the ownership and control of the solicitor. Solicitation does not
mean political or religious activities such as religious proselytizing or the
sale of religious materials, the collection of signatures by political
organizations or individuals in support of candidates for public office or
referendum questions to be submitted to the voters, or otherwise engaging in
political activities related to specific individuals, issues, political parties
or political action groups. Solicitation does not mean freedom of press
activities such as solicitation of newspapers or other publications.
SOLICITOR: Any person engaged in solicitation.
(Ord. 21-57, 11-1-2021)
4-13-3: PERMIT REQUIRED; EXEMPTION; APPLICATION:
   A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for
any person desiring to engage in solicitation within the City without having
applied with the City and obtained permit from the City as provided herein.
   B.   Persons under the age of nineteen (19) years engaged in charitable
solicitation within the City shall not be required to register with the City.
However, any such person shall comply with all other applicable provisions of
this section.
   C.   Application for a registration shall be made to the City upon a form
prescribed by the City and payment of an application fee of two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00). The person shall truthfully state in full all of the
required information in the application.
(Ord. 21-57, 11-1-2021; amd. Ord. 22-6, 2-7-2022; Ord. 23-26, 5-15-2023)
4-13-4: TERM; RENEWAL:
Each registration shall be in effect for no more than thirty (30) days.
(Ord. 21-57, 11-1-2021)
4-13-5: REGULATIONS:
All solicitors shall comply with the following regulations:
   A.   Duty to leave premises on request. No person shall engage in
solicitation upon any premises or at any residence after having been asked by
an owner or occupant thereof to leave such premises or residence.
   B.   Duty to honor no soliciting signs. No person shall enter upon any
premises nor engage in solicitation upon any premises or at any residence
located thereon, if such premises or residence is posted against solicitation
by means of a notice, prominently displayed, upon which is printed the legend,
“No Soliciting”, or substantially similar language. Said posting shall be
exhibited at or near the main entrance to the premises or on or near the main
door to any residence located thereon.
   C.   Fraudulent misrepresentation and misstatement prohibited. No person
shall cheat, deceive, or fraudulently misrepresent, whether through himself or
through an employee or representative, while soliciting in the City.
   D.   Duty to wear badges. Every person issued a certificate of registration
or any individual soliciting for such person shall wear conspicuously on the
outside of his or her outer garments a solicitation badge provided by the City.
Such badge shall include at least the following information printed legibly:
the name of the individual issued the badge, the organization registered with
the City, the purpose of the solicitation, and the date of the expiration of
the registration. Each badge shall also contain a statement indicating that the
card is not an endorsement by the City or any of its employees. Badges issued
under this section shall be nontransferable.
   E.   Restrictions on individuals who may solicit. No person shall use any
individual for solicitation as herein defined unless such individual is listed
on that person’s application.
   F.   Time limits. Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall
engage in solicitation as herein defined from March through September at any
time prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. and from October through February at
any time prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.
   G.   Immediate Identification. Every solicitor shall immediately identify
himself/herself and the purpose of the solicitation to each person being
solicited.
   H.   Impeding Traffic Prohibited. No person shall solicit anywhere in the
City in a manner that completely or substantially impedes the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic in, on or around any sidewalk or public
property, way or place. No person engaged in solicitation shall have the
exclusive right to any sidewalk or other public property, way or place, nor the
right to establish a permanent stationary location for such solicitation.
   I.   Soliciting from vehicles. No person shall stand on any street or
highway within the City for purposes of soliciting from the occupant of any
vehicle except as set forth in 65 ILCS 5/11-80-9.
   J.   Public Health and Safety. No person shall engage in solicitation within
the City in such a manner that creates a danger or threat of any kind to the
public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 21-57, 11-1-2021)
4-13-6: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 21-57, 11-1-2021; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 14: MOBILE FOOD TRUCK REGULATIONS
Section
4-14-1: Mobile Food Truck Vendors
4-14-2: Definition
4-14-3: Licensing And Exemptions
4-14-4: General Provisions
4-14-5: Applications
4-14-6: Penalties
4-14-1: MOBILE FOOD TRUCK VENDORS:
4-14-2: DEFINITION:
   MOBILE FOOD TRUCK VENDOR: The operator or proprietor of a vehicle (or other
temporary or portable equipment) intended or designed for the cooking or
preparation of hot and cold ready-to-eat food, prepackaged foods and drink for
sale or distribution on a temporary basis at locations that may change from
time to time. The term “Mobile Food Truck Vendor” shall include, but not be
limited to, vehicles and tents, tables, food carts and other material used for
such temporary food and drink service.
(Ord. 24-46, 9-3-2024)
4-14-3: LICENSING AND EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   No person shall do business as a Mobile Food Truck Vendor on either 1)
Public property, or 2) private property unless they have obtained a license
from the City. This restriction shall not apply to special events otherwise
approved by the City.
   B.   Possession of a Mobile Food Truck Vendor’s license is a privilege, not
a right; and the City reserves the right at the sole discretion of the City
Administrator, or his or her designee, to determine the number of Mobile Food
Truck Vendor licenses to be issued and to refuse issuance of or to rescind said
license.
   C.   Any Mobile Food Truck Vendor who violates the terms or conditions of
the license is subject to revocation of the license by the licensor.
   D.   A Mobile Food Truck Vendor’s license is valid for one (1) vehicle only
and shall not be transferable from person to person, business to business or
from place to place without the approval of the City Administrator or his or
her designee.
(Ord. 24-46, 9-3-2024)
4-14-4: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   A mobile food truck shall not be located on any parcel zoned
residential, unless approved by the City Administrator, or his or her designee,
as part of a special event.
   B.   A mobile food truck shall be situated on a suitable surface, as
determined by the City Administrator or his or her designee.
   C.   A mobile food truck shall not be located between an existing parking
lot and the street and shall not interfere with fire lanes or with vehicular or
pedestrian circulation. Any means of emergency ingress/egress to an existing
principal use on a parcel shall not be blocked. The City, at the City
Administrator’s, or his or her designee’s sole discretion, may require that
permit applications be reviewed by the Police and Public Works departments and
the McHenry Fire/Rescue District for public safety issues.
   D.   No mobile food truck shall use external signage, bollards, seating, or
any other equipment not contained within the vehicle except for one, a-frame
style sign, with a sign area no greater than 6 square feet, which must be
located within 10 feet of the mobile food truck.
   E.   Portable lights, lights which flash, and similar attention-getting
devices are not permitted. Outside amplifying equipment or noisemakers shall
not be used.
   F.    Any power required for a mobile food truck located on public property
shall be self-contained and shall not use utilities drawn from public property,
unless otherwise approved by the city.
   G.   Mobile food trucks must provide receptacles for refuse or use waste
receptacles unless otherwise authorized by the City Administrator, or his or
her designee, and must properly dispose of all waste on a daily basis.
   H.   Mobile food trucks shall not provide seating or tables for their
customers.
   I.   Overnight storage of Mobile Food Trucks shall be prohibited unless
issued a permit in connection with a City-sponsored or City-approved special
event.
   J.   Hours of operation for a Mobile Food Truck Vendor shall be limited to
between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
   K.   No mobile food truck shall offer drive-through or drive-by service.
   L.   Unless the Mobile Food Truck is issued a permit in connection with a
City-sponsored or City-approved special event permitting a longer duration, the
operation of each Mobile Food Truck on a property shall be limited to three
days in any seven-day period.
   M.   Mobile Food Trucks shall be prohibited from operating on public
property unless issued a permit in connection with a City-sponsored or City-
approved special event.
(Ord. 24-46, 9-3-2024)
4-14-5: APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Applications for a Mobile Food Truck Vendor’s license shall be made to
the Community Development Department upon forms supplied by the City, not less
than seven (7) calendar days in advance of the date for which the license is
requested. No license shall be issued unless the application is completed in
full.
   B.   In addition to the completed application, applicant must supply the
following.
      1.   Mobile Food Truck Vendors locating on private property shall provide
written permission from the property owner.
      2.   A site plan or map showing the location of the mobile food truck,
with property lines, physical improvements, existing buildings and structures,
parking areas and spaces, and similar features along with information regarding
provisions for power, potable water, and sanitary disposal.
      3.   Depiction of the appearance and design of the mobile food truck,
including exterior dimensions, signage, and exterior lighting features.
      4.   Proof of liability insurance for the activity to be licensed, naming
the City of McHenry as additional insured, in an amount not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit.
      5.   A valid copy of all necessary licenses or permits required by the
State and County health authorities for the operation of a mobile food truck.
      6.   A valid copy of the driver’s licenses for all individuals operating
the mobile food truck.
      7.   Execute an indemnification and hold harmless agreement with the City
of McHenry for any and all claims related to the activity to be licensed.
      8.   The fee for a Mobile Food Truck Vendor’s license is twenty-five
dollars ($25) for each day. Provided, however, that this fee and license
requirement shall be waived for any applicant having a brick-and-mortar
restaurant or other licensed food service establishment operating in the City.
      9.   Any and all Mobile Food Truck Vendor’s licenses shall be subject to
any restrictions or conditions deemed necessary for the public health, safety
and welfare by the City Administrator, or his or her designee, and the license
may be revoked for good cause shown by the City, including failure to comply
with any provisions of the City Code or any risk to public health, safety and
welfare.
      10.   For sales tax reporting purposes, the City of McHenry shall be the
point of sale for all sales from a mobile food truck occurring within the
corporate limits.
(Ord. 24-46, 9-3-2024)
4-14-6: PENALTIES:
The City Administrator, or his or her designee, may impose fines against any
license or any agent thereof who violates the provisions of this chapter in an
amount not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation.
(Ord. 24-46, 9-3-2024)
TITLE 5: HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
5-1-1: Definitions
5-1-2: Disposal Required
5-1-3: Container Requirements
5-1-4: Disposal Of Refuse
5-1-5: Frequency Of Collection
5-1-6: Combustible, Explosive Refuse
5-1-7: Use Of Incinerators
5-1-8: Storage Of Garbage And Refuse Containers
5-1-9: Accumulation Declared Nuisance
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, serving and nonconsumption of food.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of either:
   A.   Combustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers, yard
clippings and wood; or
   B.   Noncombustible wastes, such as metal cans, glass and crockery.
(1987 Code § 11-78)
5-1-2: DISPOSAL REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of every owner or their agent or occupant of any building,
apartment, store or other business establishments, or any person who shall
regularly accumulate refuse, rubbish and garbage within the City, to provide
for such disposal of garbage, refuse and rubbish as shall be necessary to keep
the place and premises in a clean and sanitary condition as shall be required
by the Health Department.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
5-1-3: CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Duty To Provide, Maintain: Refuse containers shall be provided by the
owner, tenant, lessee or occupant of the premises. Refuse containers shall be
maintained in good condition and any container which does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other
defect liable to injure the person collecting the contents thereof, shall be
promptly replaced upon notice.
(1987 Code § 11-79)
   B.   Construction Of Containers: Garbage containers shall be made of metal
or approved plastic equipped with suitable handles and tight fitting covers,
and shall be watertight.
(1987 Code § 11-80)
   C.   Container Capacity: Garbage containers shall have a capacity of not
more than thirty (30) gallons.
(1987 Code § 11-81)
   D.   Sanitation: Garbage containers shall be of a type approved by the
Director of Public Works and shall be kept in a clean, neat and sanitary
condition at all times.
(1987 Code § 11-82)
   E.   Rubbish Containers: Rubbish containers shall be of a kind suitable for
collection purposes, and shall be of such weight that they can be handled by
one person.
(1987 Code § 11-84)
5-1-4: DISPOSAL OF REFUSE:
   A.   Prohibitions Generally: No person shall place any refuse in any street,
alley or other public place, or other public or private property, whether owned
by such person or not, within the City except it be in proper containers for
collection or under express approval granted by the Director of Public Works.
Nor shall any person throw or deposit any refuse in any stream or other body of
water.
   B.   Unauthorized Accumulation: Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse on
any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited.
   C.   Permitting Deposit From Elements: No person shall cast, place, sweep or
deposit anywhere within the City any refuse in such a manner that it may be
carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer,
parkway or other public place, or into any other occupied premises within the
City.
   D.   Permission To Deposit In Dumpster: No person shall place or deposit any
refuse or yard waste materials in any dumpster or in any trash, refuse or
garbage receptacle or container, belonging to the City or to another person,
unless the owner, lessee or custodian of such dumpster, receptacle or container
has given express permission to such person to do so.
(1987 Code § 11-85)
5-1-5: FREQUENCY OF COLLECTION:
   A.   Residential: Refuse accumulated by residences shall be collected at
least once each week.
   B.   Commercial: Such businesses or institutions that cater to the public
shall provide suitable garbage collection service to maintain the premises in a
clean, sanitary condition, and the frequency of collection requirements shall
be in accordance with the volume of garbage and refuse accumulated and as shall
be required by the Health Department.
(1987 Code § 11-86)
5-1-6: COMBUSTIBLE, EXPLOSIVE REFUSE:
Highly combustible or explosive materials shall not be placed in containers for
regular collection but shall be disposed of as safety shall require.
(1987 Code § 11-87)
5-1-7: USE OF INCINERATORS:
It shall be unlawful to burn rubbish of any kind, other than papers, paper
goods or cardboard, anywhere in the City except in an incinerator inside a
building.
(1987 Code § 11-88)
5-1-8: STORAGE OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE CONTAINERS:
No person shall place any garbage and refuse container adjacent to any street,
alley or other public place more than twenty four (24) hours prior to the
regular and customary collection schedule established by such person’s
scavenger, nor shall any person permit such garbage and refuse containers to
remain adjacent to any street, alley or other public place more than twenty
four (24) hours after the aforesaid regular and customary collection schedule.
At all other times such garbage and refuse containers shall not be located
between the street and the principal structure.
(Ord. 17-1159, 12-4-2017)
5-1-9: ACCUMULATION DECLARED NUISANCE:
The accumulation and storage of garbage on any premises for more than a period
of two (2) weeks is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited.
(1987 Code § 11-90)
CHAPTER 2: LEAF PICK UP SERVICE
Section
5-2-1: City To Provide Fall Service
5-2-2: Placement Of Leaves
5-2-3: Curbside Yard Waste Collection
5-2-4: Unlawful Contents; Intent Presumed
5-2-5: Rejection Of Pick Up
5-2-1: CITY TO PROVIDE FALL SERVICE:
The City will provide a vacuum leaf pick up service for single-family residence
and duplex properties located within the City, during the fall season of the
year on dates and at times to be announced by the City.
(1987 Code § 11-220)
5-2-2: PLACEMENT OF LEAVES:
Piled leaves shall be placed for vacuum pick up in the parkway or within four
feet (4') of the road line or curb line of the premises making such placement.
(1987 Code § 11-221)
5-2-3: CURBSIDE YARD WASTE COLLECTION:
The City will provide a curbside yard waste collection service for single-
family residence and duplex properties located within the City on dates and
times to be announced by the City.
(1987 Code § 11-222)
5-2-4: UNLAWFUL CONTENTS; INTENT PRESUMED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place a yard waste collection bag or
container at curbside for pick up containing any garbage, trash, refuse or
other waste materials. It shall be presumed that the contents of the yard waste
collection bags or containers were known to and authorized by the owner or
occupant of the premises from which said bags or containers were deposited for
pick up.
(1987 Code § 11-223)
5-2-5: REJECTION OF PICK UP:
   A.   Conditions: No yard waste pick up will be made by the City if:
      1.   The yard waste is not contained in kraft paper bags or other
container to which is affixed the appropriate yard waste pick up sticker; or
      2.   Such kraft paper bag or container contains something other than yard
waste or leaves.
   B.   Immediate Removal By Owner, Occupant: Rejected bags or containers shall
be immediately removed by the owner or occupant of the premises from which the
pick up was offered.
(1987 Code § 11-224)
CHAPTER 3: FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS
Section
5-3-1: Definitions
5-3-2: Enforcement
5-3-3: Inspections, Samples Required
5-3-4: Unwholesome Food
5-3-5: Adulteration
5-3-6: Sanitation Of Premises
5-3-7: Flies And Vermin
5-3-8: Cleanliness, Health Of Employees
5-3-9: Revocation Of License
5-3-10: Penalty
5-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
FOOD: Shall be construed to include beverages.
FOOD DEALER: Shall be construed to mean and include every person engaged in the
business of selling food at retail for human consumption, either on or off the
premises where sold.
(1987 Code §§ 11-16, 11-17)
5-3-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The County Health Department shall, by agreement with the City, be responsible
for the enforcement of this chapter, except those provisions relating to
Municipal licenses.
(1987 Code § 11-18)
5-3-3: INSPECTIONS, SAMPLES REQUIRED:
The Health Department shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, every place,
building or establishment, used for the storage, handling, sale or preparation
of food or drink intended for human consumption. It shall be the duty of every
food dealer to give the Health Department such samples of each such food or
drink as may be necessary for the purpose of making an analysis of the same to
determine whether it is clean and wholesome.
(1987 Code § 11-21)
5-3-4: UNWHOLESOME FOOD:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of
selling or offering for sale, any food of any kind intended for human
consumption which is spoiled or tainted or is unwholesome and unfit for human
consumption for any reason.
   B.   Condemn: All tainted or unwholesome food intended for human consumption
may be condemned by the Health Department and shall thereupon be seized and
destroyed by the Health Department or any police officer.
(1987 Code § 11-24)
5-3-5: ADULTERATION:
It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or keep for such purpose, any
food or drink intended for human consumption which has been adulterated by any
material harmful in any way, or which does not comply with the State Statutes
governing the same.
(1987 Code § 11-25)
5-3-6: SANITATION OF PREMISES:
Premises used for the sale or storage of food intended for human consumption
must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall be unlawful to permit
any accumulation of refuse, or waste of any kind thereon, for more than twenty
four (24) hours; and it shall be unlawful to permit any decaying animal or
plant matter or waste to remain on any such premises at all.
(1987 Code § 11-26)
5-3-7: FLIES AND VERMIN:
Premises used for the storage of food intended for human consumption shall be
kept free from flies and vermin of all kinds.
(1987 Code § 11-27)
5-3-8: CLEANLINESS, HEALTH OF EMPLOYEES:
All persons engaged in handling or coming in contact with food intended for
human consumption shall keep themselves clean and shall keep their clothes
clean. It shall be unlawful to permit any person afflicted with a contagious or
venereal disease to handle any food intended for sale for human consumption, or
for any such person to handle any such food.
(1987 Code § 11-28)
5-3-9: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any food dealer’s license may be revoked by the City Council for repeated
violation of the provisions of this chapter, or for any violation of any other
ordinance provision relating to the conduct of the business, the condition of
the premises, the articles sold or the license required.
(1987 Code § 11-20)
5-3-10: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 11-19) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 4: MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
Section
5-4-1: Applicability
5-4-2: Enforcement
5-4-3: Standards
5-4-4: Penalty
5-4-1: APPLICABILITY:
All milk and milk products controlled by the provisions of this chapter shall
be those as defined in the Illinois Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act and as shall be
subsequently amended.
(1987 Code § 11-49)
5-4-2: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Health Department: This chapter shall be enforced by the Health
Department in accordance with applicable interpretations thereof contained in
the Illinois Compiled Statutes, as amended, pertaining to the regulation of
dairy products, an official copy of which shall be on file in the McHenry
County Health Department, except that in case any provisions or part of this
chapter does not meet the minimum requirements of the State law, then the
requirements of the State law shall apply only to that provision or part
thereof so affected.
   B.   Interpretations: The Health Department is further authorized to enforce
any part of this chapter which may not be covered by either said Code or State
law, by applying interpretations thereof which are necessary to safeguard the
public health.
(1987 Code § 11-50)
5-4-3: STANDARDS:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale within the City, any milk or
milk product which shall not have been produced and maintained until delivery
in compliance with the Grade A milk statute of the State of Illinois and which
is not labeled or branded as being in conformity with all State of Illinois
Grade A requirements or which is not produced, processed, delivered and sold by
a person, firm or corporation subject to health control of an area or
municipality approved by the State of Illinois, Department of Health, Division
of Foods and Dairies.
(1987 Code § 11-52)
5-4-4: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 11-51) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 5: FOOD DELIVERIES
Section
5-5-1: Inspections
5-5-2: Sanitation Requirements
5-5-3: Revocation Of License
5-5-1: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Health Department to make or cause to be made such
inspections as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.
(1987 Code § 11-65)
5-5-2: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Sanitary Vehicles: All vehicles used in food deliveries shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be thoroughly cleaned each day they
are so used. It shall be unlawful to permit any stale food, decaying matter, or
any other waste material or product to accumulate in or on any such vehicle
while it is so used.
   B.   Unwrapped Foodstuffs: If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any
such vehicle, such goods shall be carried in a portion or compartment of the
vehicle which is cleaned and protected against dust and insects.
(1987 Code § 11-66)
5-5-3: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the
City for any violation of any section or regulation hereof, and such revocation
shall be in addition to any fine imposed according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties.
(1987 Code § 11-64) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 6: RESTAURANTS
Section
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: Enforcement Interpretation
5-6-3: Health Department Permit; Posting; Suspension, Revocation
5-6-4: Disease Control
5-6-5: Construction, Reconstruction, Alteration Of Restaurants
5-6-6: Penalty
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
EMPLOYEE: Any person who handles food or drink during preparation or serving,
or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed
in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served.
FOOD: All articles used for food, drink, confectionery or condiment, whether
simple, mixed or compound, and all substances or ingredients used in the
preparation thereof.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT: A duly appointed Health Officer of the McHenry County Health
Department, or their authorized representative.
ITINERANT RESTAURANT: A restaurant operation which does not have a permanent
business address in the City and which pays no Sales Tax to the City, and which
operates for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus,
public exhibition, or other similar gathering.
RESTAURANT: Any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order café,
luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, drug store and soda fountain serving
food, and all other eating or drinking establishments, as well as kitchens or
other places in which food or drink is prepared for sale elsewhere.
UTENSILS: Any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, utensils, containers,
or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during storage,
preparation, or serving.
(1987 Code § 11-36; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
5-6-2: ENFORCEMENT INTERPRETATION:
This chapter shall be enforced by the Health Department in accordance with the
interpretations thereof contained in the most current edition of the U.S.
Public Health Service Food Service Sanitation Manual, a copy of which shall be
on file at the McHenry County Health Department; provided, however, that should
any provision, item or part thereof fail to meet the minimum requirements of
State law, the requirements of said State law shall apply only to that
provision, item or part.
(1987 Code § 11-37)
5-6-3: HEALTH DEPARTMENT PERMIT; POSTING; SUSPENSION, REVOCATION:
   A.   Permit Required; Posting: It shall be unlawful for any person to
operate a restaurant in the City who does not possess an unrevoked permit from
the Health Department. Such permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place. Only
persons who comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be entitled to
receive and retain such a permit. A person conducting an itinerant restaurant
shall be required to secure a permit.
   B.   Suspension, Revocation: Such a permit may be temporarily suspended by
the Health Department upon the violation by the holder of any of the terms of
this chapter, or revoked after an opportunity for a hearing by the Health
Department upon serious or repeated violation.
(1987 Code § 11-38)
5-6-4: DISEASE CONTROL:
   A.   Infected Persons: No person who is infected with a communicable
disease, or who is a carrier of any disease, shall work in any restaurant, and
no restaurant shall employ any such person suspected of a communicable disease
in any form, or of being a carrier of such a disease.
   B.   Notification To Health Department: If the restaurant manager suspects
any employee has contracted a communicable form of disease, or has become a
carrier of such a disease, he shall notify the Health Department immediately,
and said Health Department shall immediately order the employee to undergo a
physical examination as required.
   C.   Hand Washing Signs Required: Hand washing signs shall be posted in any
toilet rooms used by employees.
(1987 Code § 11-41)
5-6-5: CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION OF RESTAURANTS:
All restaurants which are hereafter constructed, reconstructed or extensively
altered, shall conform to the requirements of this chapter for Grade A
restaurants. Properly prepared plans for all restaurants which are hereafter
constructed, reconstructed or extensively altered, shall be submitted to the
Health Department for approval before work is begun.
(1987 Code § 11-42)
5-6-6: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 11-39) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 7: NUISANCES
Section
5-7-1: Posting Bills
5-7-2: Use Of Loudspeakers, Amplifiers For Advertising
5-7-3: Moving Signs
5-7-4: Penalty And Abatement
5-7-1: POSTING BILLS:
   A.   Prohibited: No person shall post, stick, stamp, paint, nail or
otherwise fix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard,
bill, card, poster, advertisement, or any other paper or device calculated to
attract the attention of the public, to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb
or curbstone, flagstone, or any other portion or part of any public way or
public place, or any lamp post, electric light, telegraph or telephone line
pole, or any railroad structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or upon the
piers, columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any public
bridge or viaduct, or other public structures or building, except as may be
authorized or required by the laws of the United States, the State of Illinois,
and the ordinances of the City.
   B.   Advertising Devices: No person shall fasten in any way any show-card,
poster or other advertising device upon public or private property in the City
unless legally authorized to do so.
(1987 Code § 3-1)
5-7-2: USE OF LOUDSPEAKERS, AMPLIFIERS FOR ADVERTISING:
The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio
receiving set, instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in the zoned
business area of the City, which sound is cast upon the public streets for the
purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to
any building or structure, other than during the hours of nine o’clock (9:00)
A.M. to six o’clock (6:00) P.M. on weekdays and Saturdays, is prohibited. This
prohibition shall not apply to any religious place of worship using direct or
amplified sound to signify a religious service.
(1987 Code § 3-2)
5-7-3: MOVING SIGNS:
The following acts and practices are defined as nuisances pursuant to section
5/11-60-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code and subject to abatement by the City
at the violator’s cost in any manner permitted by law:
   A.   Specified: Any person constituting, or acting as, a moving sign, as
defined in title 10, chapter 20 of this Code, if such moving sign is:
      1.   a.   Located in a Commercial or Business Zoning District or upon
public property adjacent and parallel to the Commercial or Business Zoning
District; and
         b.   Located within fifty feet (50') from any public roadway adjacent
and parallel to the zoning lot on which the sign is located; or
         c.   Actually visible from any public roadway or right-of-way; or
      2.   Interferes with pedestrian traffic along a right-of-way or sidewalk;
or
      3.   Interferes with vehicular traffic in a roadway or actively solicits
the attention of drivers through acts or motions specifically directed at any
vehicle or driver; or
      4.   Located within a public roadway, sidewalk or right-of-way.
   B.   Violation: It shall be a violation of this section and constitute a
nuisance for a person to: 1) act as a moving sign; or 2) for a person to direct
another to act as a moving sign in violation of this section.
(1987 Code § 3-3)
5-7-4: PENALTY AND ABATEMENT:
   A.   Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and
Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible
for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each
day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
   B.   Other: The City may abate violations of this chapter by any legal
available means.
(1987 Code § 3-4) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 8: WRECKED, JUNKED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
5-8-1: Interpretation Of Provisions
5-8-2: Inoperable Motor Vehicle Defined
5-8-3: Nuisance Declared
5-8-4: Owner Permission Required
5-8-5: Disposition Of Inoperable Motor Vehicle Upon Receipt Of Notice
5-8-6: Service, Content Of Notice
5-8-7: Impounding Vehicles
5-8-8: Disposition Of Unclaimed Vehicles
5-8-9: Redemption Of Vehicle Removed By City
5-8-10: Penalty
5-8-1: INTERPRETATION OF PROVISIONS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the power of the City to
abate a nuisance where the circumstances creating the nuisance include the
maintenance of a motor vehicle on public or private property.
(1987 Code § 27-10)
5-8-2: INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE DEFINED:
For purposes of this chapter, INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE means all motor vehicles
which, in their present state or condition, cannot be driven on a public street
or highway in full compliance with all provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code
and ordinances of the City, and which have remained in such a state or
condition for a period of seven (7) consecutive days. This definition shall not
include:
   A.   A motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being
driven under its own power in order to perform ordinary service or repair
operations;
   B.   Any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in use;
   C.   A motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the
wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
(1987 Code § 27-1)
5-8-3: NUISANCE DECLARED:
All inoperable motor vehicles, whether on public or private property and in
view of the general public within the City, are hereby declared nuisances.
(1987 Code § 27-2)
5-8-4: OWNER PERMISSION REQUIRED:
A person shall not deposit upon any public or private roadway, alley, driveway,
parking area or other place within the City limits any inoperable motor vehicle
or part thereof without first obtaining permission of the owner, occupant or
agent of private property or the Police Department.
(1987 Code § 27-3)
5-8-5: DISPOSITION OF INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE UPON RECEIPT OF NOTICE:
A person is required to dispose of any inoperable motor vehicle(s) under their
control within seven (7) days after written notice is received from the
Corporate Authorities of the City or from the Chief of Police or his designee,
commanding disposition of the inoperable motor vehicle(s).
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
5-8-6: SERVICE, CONTENT OF NOTICE:
   A.   Requirements: The written notice herein shall be served upon the
occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or if there is no occupant,
then upon the owner of the property, or their agent, giving notice of the
existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal within seven (7) days from
the date notice is received. The notice shall further state that, upon the
owner’s or occupant’s failure to comply with the notice to remove, the City or
its agent shall undertake such removal with the costs thereof to be levied
against the owner or occupant of the property.
   B.   Sufficient Notice: It shall constitute sufficient notice under this
section when a copy of the notice is posted in a conspicuous place upon the
private property on which the vehicle is located and when duplicate copies are
sent by certified mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at
their last known address.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
5-8-7: IMPOUNDING VEHICLES:
The Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee, is hereby authorized to remove or
have removed any vehicle left at any place within the City which reasonably
appears to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or which
reasonably appears to be lost, stolen or unclaimed, or which is an inoperable
vehicle, as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
5-8-8: DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES:
   A.   Procedure: The procedure to be followed by the Police Department in
regard to abandoned, lost, stolen or unclaimed vehicles shall be in accordance
with State law.
(1987 Code § 27-7)
   B.   Liability And Lien For Expenses: In the event of removal of a vehicle
under this chapter by the City, the owner or occupant of the private property
from which it was removed shall be liable for the expenses incurred. Upon the
failure of such owner or occupant to pay the unrecovered expenses incurred by
the City in such removal, a lien may be placed upon the property for the amount
of such expenses.
(1987 Code § 27-8)
5-8-9: REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE REMOVED BY CITY:
The owner of any vehicle removed by the City under the provisions of this
chapter may redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal, but prior to the
sale or destruction thereof, upon proof of ownership and payment to the Chief
of Police all such sums as he may determine and fix for the actual and
reasonable expense of removal, including any preliminary sale advertising
expense, plus forty dollars ($40.00) per day for storage of such vehicle.
(1987 Code § 27-9; amd. 2019 Code)
5-8-10: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall
be fined as provided in section 1-4A-1 of this Code for each day such violation
shall continue.
(1987 Code § 27-11)
CHAPTER 9: HANDBILLS
Section
5-9-1: Throwing In Public Places
5-9-2: Placing In Vehicles
5-9-3: Prohibited Distribution
5-9-4: Name, Address Of Printer, Distributor Required
5-9-1: THROWING IN PUBLIC PLACES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast
any commercial handbill in or upon any public place within this City; and it
shall also be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any
commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not
be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the
receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill in any public place to any person
willing to accept such noncommercial handbill.
(1987 Code § 3-16)
5-9-2: PLACING IN VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place, throw,
scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any
automobile or other vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed
to prohibit the handing, transmitting or distributing of any noncommercial
handbill to the owner or other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle, who
is willing to accept the same.
(1987 Code § 3-17)
5-9-3: PROHIBITED DISTRIBUTION:
   A.   Vacant Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute,
deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill
in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously
uninhabited or vacant.
(1987 Code § 3-18)
   B.   Where Properly Posted: It shall be unlawful for any person to
distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any commercial or
noncommercial handbill upon any premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to
do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near
the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words “No Trespassing”, “No Peddlers
or Agents”, “No Advertisement”, “No Solicitation” or any similar notice,
indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to
be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such
handbills left upon such premises.
(1987 Code § 3-19)
   C.   Inhabited Private Premises: No person shall distribute, deposit, place,
throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any
private premises which is inhabited, except by placing or depositing such
handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so
placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or
drifted about, except that mailboxes may not be used when prohibited by Federal
Postal Laws or regulations.
(1987 Code § 3-20)
5-9-4: NAME, ADDRESS OF PRINTER, DISTRIBUTOR REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, scatter, hand out
or circulate any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any place, under any
circumstances, which does not have printed on the cover, front or back thereof,
the name and address of the following:
   A.   The person who printed, wrote, compiled or manufactured the same.
   B.   The name and address of the person who caused the same to be
distributed; in addition the names and addresses of the owners, managers or
agents of the person sponsoring said handbill shall also appear thereon.
(1987 Code § 3-21)
CHAPTER 10: SMOKING
Section
5-10-1: Smoke Free McHenry Act
5-10-1: SMOKE FREE MCHENRY ACT:
The City concurs with the findings of the Illinois General Assembly in the
Smoke Free Illinois Act, 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 82/1 et seq.,
(“Act”) and adopts the Act as the Smoke Free McHenry Act. Enforcement of
violations shall be through citations or complaints filed in the Twenty Second
Judicial Circuit Court.
(Ord. 19-1198, 7-15-2019)
CHAPTER 11: ICE CREAM TRUCKS
Section
5-11-1: Definitions
5-11-2: Enforcement Interpretation
5-11-3: License Required
5-11-4: Penalty
5-11-5: Revocation Of License
5-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
   ICE CREAM TRUCK: Every motor vehicle in which ice cream, popsicles, ice
sherbets, or frozen desserts of any kind are carried for purposes of retail
sale from the motor vehicle on city streets. An ice cream truck is designed to
attract business by driving down the street and stopping for its customers.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021; amd. Ord. 24-46, 9-3-2024)
5-11-2: ENFORCEMENT INTERPRETATION:
This chapter shall be enforced by the Health Department in accordance with the
interpretations thereof contained in the most current edition of the U.S.
Public Health Service Food Service Sanitation Manual, a copy of which shall be
on file at the McHenry County Health Department; provided, however, that should
any provision, item or part thereof fail to meet the minimum requirements of
State law, the requirements of said State law shall apply only to that
provision, item or part.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
5-11-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business
of operating an ice cream truck within the City without first securing an
annual license to do so. The annual fee for such license shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) for each ice cream truck. The application for such license shall
comply with the general regulations for license applications as set forth in
this Code.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021; amd. Ord. 24-46, 9-3-2024)
5-11-4: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
5-11-5: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the
City for any violation of any section or regulation hereof, and such revocation
shall be in addition to any fine imposed.
(Ord. 21-17, 4-5-2021)
TITLE 6: PUBLIC SAFETY
CHAPTER 1: EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
Section
6-1-1: Definition
6-1-2: Created; Purpose; Composition
6-1-3: Coordinator; Acting Coordinator
6-1-4: Functions And Duties
6-1-5: Oath Of Members
6-1-6: Office Space Designated
6-1-7: Service As Mobile Support Team
6-1-8: Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
6-1-9: Cooperation With State In Exercise Of Emergency Powers
6-1-10: Compensation Of Members During State Training Time
6-1-11: Purchases And Expenditures
6-1-12: Reimbursement By State
6-1-13: Appropriations And Tax Levy For ESDA Purposes
6-1-14: Declaration Of Local Emergency
6-1-15: Local State Of Emergency
6-1-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter, the term CITY ESDA or ESDA shall mean the City of
McHenry Emergency Services and Disaster Agency created by this chapter, unless
clearly indicated to the contrary.
(1987 Code § 2-143)
6-1-2: CREATED; PURPOSE; COMPOSITION:
   A.   Created; Purpose: There is hereby created the City of McHenry Emergency
Services and Disaster Agency to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury
or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage or other
hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in accordance with the
Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act.
   B.   Membership: The ESDA shall consist of the coordinator and such
additional members as may be selected by the coordinator.
(1987 Code § 2-144)
6-1-3: COORDINATOR; ACTING COORDINATOR:
   A.   Appointment: The coordinator of the ESDA shall be appointed by the
Mayor and shall serve until removed by same.
   B.   Responsibility: The coordinator shall have direct responsibility for
the organization, administration, training and operation of the ESDA, subject
to the direction and control of the Mayor as provided by statute.
   C.   Acting Coordinator: In the event of the absence, resignation, death or
inability to serve of the coordinator, the Mayor or any person designated by
him shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided
in this section.
(1987 Code § 2-145)
6-1-4: FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES:
The City ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the City as shall be
prescribed in and by the State Emergency Management Agency plan and program
prepared by the Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be
promulgated by the Governor, and in addition, shall perform such duties outside
the corporate limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement
with any other political subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality
entered into as provided by the State Emergency Management Agency Act.
(1987 Code § 2-146)
6-1-5: OATH OF MEMBERS:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the ESDA organization shall,
before entering upon his duties, prescribe to the following oath, which shall
be filed with the coordinator:
I,           , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend and
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United States and the
Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory, institutions, and
facilities thereof, both public and private, against all enemies, foreign and
domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or
purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties
upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do
not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any political party or
organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence; and that during such time as I am
affiliated with the City of McHenry ESDA organization, I will not advocate nor
become a member of any political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence.
(1987 Code § 2-147)
6-1-6: OFFICE SPACE DESIGNATED:
The Mayor is authorized to designate space in a City building, or elsewhere, as
may be provided for by the Mayor for the City ESDA as its office.
(1987 Code § 2-148)
6-1-7: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
   A.   Designation By State: All or any members of the City ESDA organization
may be designated as members of a mobile support team created by the Director
of the State Emergency Management Agency Act as provided by law.
   B.   Leader Designated: The leader of such mobile support team shall be
designated by the coordinator of the City ESDA organization.
   C.   Compensation: Any member of a mobile support team, who is a City
employee or officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor or the State
Director of the Emergency Management Agency, shall receive the compensation and
have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employment or
office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the City,
while so serving, shall receive from the State reasonable compensation as
provided by law.
(1987 Code § 2-149)
6-1-8: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The coordinator of the ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
cities or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the Mayor and by the State Director of
the Emergency Management Agency.
(1987 Code § 2-150)
6-1-9: COOPERATION WITH STATE IN EXERCISE OF EMERGENCY POWERS:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States, or the occurrence within the State
of Illinois of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile
action, or from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the City
ESDA to cooperate fully with the State Emergency Management Agency and with the
Governor in the exercise of emergency powers as provided by law.
(1987 Code § 2-151)
6-1-10: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS DURING STATE TRAINING TIME:
Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the City, if called
for training by the State Director of the Emergency Management Agency, shall
receive, for the time spent in such training, the same rate of pay as is
attached to the position held. Members who are not such City employees or
officers shall receive for such training time, such compensation as may be
established by the Mayor.
(1987 Code § 2-152)
6-1-11: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
   A.   Authorized: The Mayor, on recommendation of the coordinator of the
ESDA, may authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the City in a
position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of any
nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and safety,
protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the case of
such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
   B.   Procurement: In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the
coordinator of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the City, to procure such
services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the exigency, without regard to the statutory procedures
or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to City contracts or
obligations, as authorized by the State Emergency Management Agency Act;
provided, that if the City Council meets at such time, he shall act subject to
the directions and restrictions imposed by that body.
(1987 Code § 2-153)
6-1-12: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund any
reimbursement by the State to the City for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of the Emergency
Management Agency, compensation for services and expenses of members of a
mobile support team while serving outside the City in response to a call by the
Governor or State Director of the Emergency Management Agency, as provided by
law, and any other reimbursement made by the State incident to ESDA activities
as provided by law.
(1987 Code § 2-154)
6-1-13: APPROPRIATIONS AND TAX LEVY FOR ESDA PURPOSES:
The City may make appropriations for ESDA purposes in the manner provided by
law and may levy, in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax not to exceed five
cents ($0.05) per one hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed value of all
taxable property in addition to all other taxes, as provided by the State
Emergency Management Agency Act; however, that amount collectable under such
levy shall in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita.
(1987 Code § 2-155)
6-1-14: DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY:
   A.   Authority: A local disaster emergency may be declared only by the
Mayor. It shall not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven (7)
days, except by or with the consent of the City Council. Any order or
proclamation shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed
promptly with the City Clerk.
   B.   Effect: The effect of a declaration of a local disaster emergency is to
activate the response and recovery aspects of any and all applicable local or
interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and to authorize the furnishing of
aid and assistance thereunder.
(1987 Code § 2-156)
6-1-15: LOCAL STATE OF EMERGENCY:
Whenever an emergency, as is defined in subsection A of this section exists, or
imminent emergency, the City Council may activate the Mayor’s extraordinary
powers, as set forth in this section, with such limitations as the City Council
deems necessary.
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CURFEW: A prohibition against any person walking, running, loitering, standing
or motoring upon any alley, street, highway, public property or vacant premises
within the corporate limits of the City except officials of any governmental
unit and persons officially designated to duty with reference to said civil
emergency.
EMERGENCY: A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force
or violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power to
execute by three or more persons acting together without authority of law; or
any natural disaster, epidemic, or manmade calamity, including outbreak of
disease, flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion, or
eminent threat of any of those events within the corporate limits of the City,
resulting in or threatening the death or injury of persons or the destruction
of property to such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to
protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   B.   Declaration: Whenever an emergency, as defined in subsection A of this
section exists, the Mayor is authorized to declare the existence of a local
state of emergency by means of a written declaration of the Mayor, under oath,
setting forth the facts which constitute the emergency, describing the nature
of the emergency and declaring that a local state of emergency exists in
accordance with the definitions set forth in this section. This declaration
must be filed with the Village Clerk as soon as practicable after issuance.
   C.   Curfew Authorized: After the declaration of a local state of emergency
by the Mayor, the Mayor may order a general curfew applicable to such
geographical areas of the City or to the City as a whole, as the Mayor deems
reasonable and advisable, and applicable during such hours of the day or night
as the Mayor deems necessary in the interest of the public safety and welfare.
   D.   Orders Authorized: After the declaration of a local state of emergency,
the Mayor may also, in the interest of public safety and welfare, and to
address this issues caused threatened by the emergency, make take any or all of
the following actions by executive order during the local state of emergency:
      1.   All actions reasonably necessary to respond to the emergency;
      2.   Approve previous expenditures of the City for the purpose of
continuing the operations of the City;
      3.   Authorize agreements for purchases and contracts that impose a
financial obligation on the City that would otherwise be required to be
authorized by the City Council;
      4.   In the event the local state of emergency extends beyond the current
fiscal year and a new budget has not been approved, the Mayor shall be
authorized to approve new spending by the City during the existence of the
local state of emergency; and
      5.   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
   E.   Duration: The declaration of a local state of emergency herein
authorized shall be effective for a period of up to thirty (30) days or until
the adjournment of the next regular or special meeting of the City Council,
whichever comes first, unless sooner terminated by a declaration of the Mayor,
or, his or her interim emergency successor, indicating that the emergency no
longer exists. The Mayor or his or her interim emergency successor, shall have
the power to re-declare the existence of an emergency at the end of each thirty
(30) day period during the time said emergency exists.
   F.   Notice: Upon issuing the declaration of a local state of emergency
herein authorized, the City Clerk shall notify the news media situated within
the City, and shall cause at least four copies of the declaration of a local
state of emergency and any curfew authorized to be posted at the following
places within the City: the City hall, the police station, the post office, and
in the area of any curfew.
   G.   Violations: Any person violating the provisions of this section or
executive orders issued pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an offense against
the City and shall be punished as provided by section 1-4A-1 of this code.
   H.   Effect On Other Ordinances: Nothing contained in this section shall be
construed to impair the powers contained in this code, giving powers to the
police and fire departments, but shall be construed together with existing
ordinances now in effect for the safety and welfare of the citizens of the
City.
(Ord. 20-13, 3-16-2020)
CHAPTER 2: POLICE
ARTICLE A: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
6-2A-1: Creation, Composition Of Department
6-2A-2: Salaries, Vacations And Sick Leaves
6-2A-3: Chief Of Police To Head Department
6-2A-4: Administrative Duties Of Chief Of Police
6-2A-5: Regulations Governing Department
6-2A-6: Serving Of Process
6-2A-7: Deputy Chief; Commanders And Sergeants
6-2A-1: CREATION, COMPOSITION OF DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby created a Police Department for the City, which shall consist
of the Chief of Police and such other officers and as may be provided for from
time to time by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2A-2: SALARIES, VACATIONS AND SICK LEAVES:
All employees of the department shall receive annual salaries, which shall be
established by the City Council at such times as are required by statute.
Salaries of all full time employees of the department shall be paid in equal
biweekly installments, unless provision is made to the contrary by the City
Council or through a collective bargaining agreement. Vacations and sick leave
shall be granted and provided as is set forth in the Personnel Policy Manual or
collective bargaining agreement when applicable. 
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2A-3: CHIEF OF POLICE TO HEAD DEPARTMENT:
The Chief of Police shall be the head of the department and shall have and be
responsible for direct supervision over all officers and employees.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2A-4: ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
   A.   The Chief of Police shall keep such records and make such reports
concerning the activities of the department as may be required by statute or by
the Council. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for the performance by
the department of all of its functions and all persons who are employees of the
department shall serve subject to the orders of the Chief of Police.
   B.   The Chief of Police, in consultation with the City Administrator, may
sell, convert, or convey personal property owned by the City pursuant to
section 1-5-3 of this code.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019; amd. Ord. MC-19-1215, 12-16-2019)
6-2A-5: REGULATIONS GOVERNING DEPARTMENT:
The Chief of Police of the department may make or prescribe such rules and
regulations as are deemed advisable. Such rules shall be binding upon all
employees of the department. The rules and regulations may cover, but are not
limited to, roles and responsibilities, organizational structure, management
and administration, personnel structure, personnel process, operations and all
other similar matters necessary or desirable for the efficiency of the
department.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2A-6: SERVING OF PROCESS:
The Chief of Police or their designee shall be the sole process server for the
City.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2A-7: DEPUTY CHIEF; COMMANDERS AND SERGEANTS:
   A.   Established: The positions of Deputy Chief (1), Commander of Field
Operations and Commander of Support Services are hereby established for the
department of the City and each shall be exempt ranks, and be appointed by and
serve at the discretion of the Chief of Police and if removed from the
position, except for cause, shall revert to the rank previously held, without
regard as to whether a vacancy exists in that rank. Such removal to a lower
rank shall not be reviewable by the commission and shall be deemed a final
action by the Chief of Police.
   B.   Deputy Chief: The Deputy Chief position shall be immediately below that
of the Chief of Police. Appointment to the rank of Deputy Chief shall be made
from within the department. A minimum of ten (10) years of service as an
officer and the prior minimum rank of nonprobationary Sergeant is required.
   C.   Commander: The Commander positions shall be equal to each other and
both shall be immediately below that of the Deputy Chief. Appointment to the
rank of Commander shall be made from within the department. A minimum of five
(5) years of service as an officer and the prior minimum rank of
nonprobationary Sergeant is required.
   D.   Sergeant: The rank of Sergeant is also hereby established for the
department and is a tested rank that is nonexempt and is immediately below the
rank of Commander. Newly promoted Sergeants are placed on probation for a
period of six (6) months in which time their performance is evaluated and
rated. The Chief of Police of the department shall have the right to remove to
a lower rank any probationary Sergeant who fails to meet the minimum
performance expectations of the agency. Promotions to the rank of Sergeant are
in accordance with article E of this chapter.
   E.   Officer: The rank of officer is hereby established of the department
and is a tested rank that is nonexempt and is immediately below the Sergeant.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
ARTICLE B: POLICE COMMISSION ADMINISTRATION
Section
6-2B-1: Created; Applicability Of Illinois Law
6-2B-2: Appointment; Terms
6-2B-3: Compensation
6-2B-4: Police Commission Rules And Regulations
6-2B-5: Source Of Authority
6-2B-6: Definitions
6-2B-7: Officers Of Board And Their Duties
6-2B-8: Meetings
6-2B-1: CREATED; APPLICABILITY OF ILLINOIS LAW:
There is hereby created a Board of Police Commissioners (“board”) consisting of
three (3) members, as provided by the Illinois Board of Fire and Police
Commissioners Act, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/10-2.1-1 et seq.
(“Act”). The provisions of the Act shall apply except to the extent modified in
this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2B-2: APPOINTMENT; TERMS:
The Board of Police Commissioners shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City,
by and with the consent of the City Council. The terms of office of the members
of the Board of Police Commissioners shall be three (3) years and until their
respective successors shall be appointed and qualified; provided, that no such
appointments shall be made by any Mayor within thirty (30) days before the
expiration of his/her term of office; and provided further, that the Mayor
shall appoint the first members of such board, one of whom is appointed to
serve until the end of the current Municipal year in which such appointment is
made, another shall serve until the end of the Municipal year next ensuing, and
the third shall serve until the end of the Municipal year second next ensuing;
provided, that each of the first members of the board shall serve until his
successor is appointed and qualified.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2B-3: COMPENSATION:
The members of the Board of Police Commissioners shall be paid an annual salary
of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00).
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2B-4: POLICE COMMISSION RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations of the Board of Police Commissioners of the City of
McHenry, State of Illinois, last revised in 2016, are hereby fully replaced by
provisions in this chapter.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2B-5: SOURCE OF AUTHORITY:
The rules and regulations of this chapter were adopted by home rule ordinance
of the City Council of the City of McHenry under Ordinance MC-09-997.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2B-6: DEFINITIONS:
The word COMMISSION and/or BOARD, wherever used, shall mean the Board of Police
Commissioners of the City of McHenry, Illinois. The word OFFICER shall mean any
person holding a permanent sworn office in the Police Department of the City of
McHenry, Illinois. The masculine noun or pronoun includes the feminine. The
singular includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2B-7: OFFICERS OF BOARD AND THEIR DUTIES:
   A.   Officers; Records: The board shall annually, at its first meeting in
May, elect a Chairperson and a Secretary. They shall hold office until the end
of the fiscal year of the Municipality and until their successors are duly
elected and qualified. The Chairperson shall be the presiding officer at all
meetings. The Secretary shall keep the minutes of all meetings of the board in
a permanent record book and shall be the custodian of all the forms, papers,
books, records and completed examinations of the board.
   B.   Duties: The Board of Police Commissioners have the four (4) primary
responsibilities: 1) creation of entry level eligibility lists from which the
Chief of Police can hire officers; 2) oral interviews of certified lateral
candidates; 3) creation of Sergeant promotional eligibility lists from which
the Chief of Police can promote; 4) and the conduct of disciplinary appeals
related to the positions of Sergeant, Commander and Deputy Chief.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2B-8: MEETINGS:
Meetings shall be held as determined necessary by the board and all meetings
shall be held in compliance with the Illinois Open Meetings Act, 5 Illinois
Compiled Statutes section 120/1.01 et seq.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
ARTICLE C: APPLICATIONS
Section
6-2C-1: Notice Of Application Process
6-2C-2: Application Blanks
6-2C-3: Disqualifications
6-2C-4: Age, Citizenship And Education Requirements
6-2C-5: Notice Of Acceptance
6-2C-6: Physical Fitness Testing, Release Of Liability
6-2C-1: NOTICE OF APPLICATION PROCESS:
The Police Department shall provide notice of all open application processes
for both the Entry Level Eligibility List and the Lateral List. All advertising
for applications shall include, job description, benefits package, application
procedure, application opening and closing dates, cost of application and
mandatory steps required in the testing process.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2C-2: APPLICATION BLANKS:
   A.   Form Furnished By City; Compliance: Applications shall be completed
using forms furnished by the City and applicants must strictly comply with the
requirements of said forms.
   B.   Sound Health And Physical Ability: All applicants must be of sound
health and be physically able to perform the duties of the position applied
for. The burden of meeting these requirements rests upon the applicant.
   C.   Information Required: The applicant shall furnish each of the following
with their application:
      1.   A copy of their military service record and discharge papers, if
applicable.
      2.   Social security card.
      3.   Birth Certificate.
      4.   High school diploma or GED Certificate.
      5.   A certified copy of their college transcripts.
   D.   False Statement: A false statement knowingly made by a person in an
application for examination, participation or awareness of any false statement
made in any certificate which may accompany such application or complicity in
any fraud or misrepresentation related thereto, shall be regarded as sufficient
basis for disqualification.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2C-3: DISQUALIFICATION:
   A.   Screening: The Police Department will screen all applications to ensure
that they are complete, accurate and that each applicant possesses the minimum
qualifications required to apply. Failure to fully and accurately complete the
application with all required attachments or meet the citizenship, minimum age
or education requirements shall be automatic grounds for disqualification.
   B.   Detailed Examination: Each applicant who has submitted a complete
application (with attachments) and meets the citizenship, age and education
requirements will then be subject to a detailed application examination.
Applicants will be deemed ineligible and applications will not be forwarded to
the board for any of the following reasons:
      1.   Lacking in any of the established preliminary requirements for the
service applied for;
      2.   Physically unable to perform the duties of the position to which he
or she seeks appointment;
      3.   Is addicted to the use of drugs or intoxicating beverages;
      4.   Has been convicted of a felony or any misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude;
      5.   Has been dismissed from any public service for cause;
      6.   Has any involvement with any deception or fraud in his or her
application;
      7.   May be found disqualified in personal qualifications or health; or
      8.   Whose character and employment references are deemed unsatisfactory.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2C-4: AGE, CITIZENSHIP AND EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Age:
      1.   Specified: Except as otherwise provided herein, applicants shall be
under thirty five (35) years of age and at least twenty one (21) years of age
at the time of application submission.
      2.   Veterans: Veterans shall be allowed to exceed the maximum age
provision of this section as follows: For every year of active duty served,
evidenced by a certified copy of the DD Form 214, Certificate of Release or
Discharge from Active Duty, one additional year will be added, not to exceed
ten (10) or an adjusted maximum age of forty five (45).
      3.   Full Time Police Officers: Full time police officers shall be
allowed to exceed the maximum age provision of this section, provided they hold
a valid full time certification with the Illinois Law Enforcement Training and
Standards Board (ILETSB) or have the capability of transferring an out of state
full time certification in accordance with ILETSB regulations.
   B.   Citizenship: Applicants for examination must be citizens of the United
States of America.
   C.   Associate Degree; Exceptions: Applicants must have obtained an
associate's degree from an accredited college or university, or have completed
sixty (60) credit hours at an accredited college or university. Exceptions:
Provided, however, this educational requirement will be reduced to a high
school diploma or GED if one or more of the following applies:
      1.   The applicant has served for thirty six (36) months of honorable
active duty in the United States Armed Forces and has not been discharged
dishonorably or under circumstances other than honorable; or
      2.   The applicant has served for one hundred eighty (180) days of active
duty in the United States Armed Forces in combat duty recognized by the
Department of Defense and has not been discharged dishonorably or under
circumstances other than honorable.
   D.   Applicability: This section shall apply to both the Entry Level
Eligibility List application process and the submission of certified lateral
candidate applications.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2C-5: NOTICE OF ACCEPTANCE:
All applicants whose applications have been successfully screened and accepted
will be notified in writing and provided detailed directions regarding the
testing process moving forward.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2C-6: PHYSICAL FITNESS TESTING, RELEASE OF LIABILITY:
In the event that a physical fitness test is required all applicants must
execute and deliver to the Police Department a release of all liability in
favor of the City of McHenry on a form provided by the Police Department at the
time of initial application.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
ARTICLE D: ENTRY LEVEL ELIGIBILITY LIST
Section
6-2D-1: Notice Of Testing Process
6-2D-2: Scoring Process
6-2D-3: Entry Level Orientation
6-2D-4: Entry Level Physical Fitness Test
6-2D-5: Entry Level Written Test
6-2D-6: Entry Level Oral Interview
6-2D-7: Initial Eligibility; Military Points
6-2D-8: Entry Level Eligibility List; Selection Of Applicants
6-2D-1: NOTICE OF TESTING PROCESS:
   A.   Notice To Eligible Applicants: The Police Department shall provide
notice to all eligible applicants of the testing process, including the
following mandatory steps of:
      1.   Orientation meeting;
      2.   Physical fitness test (when applicable);
      3.   Written examination;
      4.   Oral interviews.
   B.   Dates, Times, Locations: Dates, times and locations for all of the
mandatory steps will be provided in the notice.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2D-2: SCORING PROCESS:
The following mandatory tests shall be conducted. Failure to attend a mandatory
testing step or achieve the minimum passing grade (when applicable) will
disqualify the applicant from any further participation.
 
Step Description            Passing Requirement
1    Orientation meeting    Attendance only
2    Physical fitness test1 Pass/fail (State Power Test Standard)
3    Written exam           70 percent or higher
4    Oral interview         75 percent or higher
 
Note:
    1.    The physical fitness test shall be administered as a mandatory step
only if it was included at the time of the initial notice of testing process.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2D-3: ENTRY LEVEL ORIENTATION:
Applicants must attend the board presented orientation program. Failure to
attend will eliminate the applicant from further consideration.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2D-4: ENTRY LEVEL PHYSICAL FITNESS TEST:
Applicants may be required to submit themselves to a physical fitness test by
an agency designated by the board and suitable to determine the physical
suitability of the applicant to perform the essential function of the job.
Applicants who fail to achieve a passing grade will be notified and eliminated
from all further consideration.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2D-5: ENTRY LEVEL WRITTEN TEST:
The written exam will be conducted by an independent testing company selected
by the board and approved by the Chief of Police. Exam results will be kept
confidential by the Chief of Police or designee, until such time the board has
completed the oral interview process and assigned scoring. Applicants who fail
to achieve a passing grade will be notified and eliminated from all further
consideration.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2D-6: ENTRY LEVEL ORAL INTERVIEW:
The board shall participate in the oral examination of the applicants and the
Chief of Police and Deputy Chief of Police may choose to be present. In no
event shall less than a majority of the Commissioners conduct the oral
examination. Questions shall be asked of the applicant that will enable the
Commissioners to properly evaluate and grade the applicant on speech,
alertness, ability to communicate, judgment, emotional stability, self-
confidence, social skill and general fitness for the position. On completion of
each oral examination, the Commissioners will discuss the applicant’s abilities
using the traits listed above. Applicants who fail to achieve a passing grade
will be notified and eliminated from all further consideration.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2D-7: INITIAL ELIGIBILITY; MILITARY POINTS:
   A.   Finalize Initial Scoring: Upon the completion of all entry level
testing steps, the board will finalize the initial scoring in order to
determine which applicants will be placed on the final Entry Level Eligibility
List. Prior to finalizing the scoring process, the board will contact all
applicants who are eligible to submit for preference points based on military
experience.
   B.   Military Points: Persons who were engaged in the active military or
naval service of the United States for a period of at least one year and who
were honorably discharged are entitled to request preference points. DD Form
214 is required for verification. If any person who is entitled to military
preference points requests application of the preference points to the board,
five (5) points shall be added to the applicant’s total score.
   C.   Written Exam Scores Conversion: Written exam scores are converted
giving this step a weight of fifty percent (50%) of the total score. Oral
interview scores are converted giving this step a weight of fifty percent (50%)
of the total score. Military points are then added with a ratio weight of one
to one (1:1) or five (5) total points.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2D-8: ENTRY LEVEL ELIGIBILITY LIST; SELECTION OF APPLICANTS:
   A.   Preparation Of List: The board will prepare a “Final Entry Level
Eligibility List”, which shall include claimed preference points. Only those
applicants who have attained a total score of seventy five (75) points or
higher will be placed on the Entry Level Eligibility List.
   B.   Posted; Copy Sent: A dated copy of the Final Entry Level Eligibility
List shall be posted and a copy shall be sent to each person appearing thereon.
This list shall remain active only until such time that a new list is comprised
and posted by the board.
   C.   List In Descending Order: Eligible applicants shall be listed in
descending order from the highest score to the lowest score. Applicants shall
be selected for hire in descending order from the three (3) applicants on the
Final Entry Level Eligibility List having the highest rating. When there are
less than three (3) names on the Final Entry Level Eligibility List, as
originally posted, or remaining thereon after appointments have been made
therefrom, appointments to fill existing vacancies shall be made from those
names or the name remaining on the Final Eligibility List.
   D.   Selection Subordinate To Chief’s Choice: Selection from the Final
Eligibility List may be subordinate to the Police Chief’s choice to select a
certified lateral applicant for hire.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
ARTICLE E: CERTIFIED POLICE LATERAL APPLICANTS
Section
6-2E-1: Lateral Description
6-2E-2: Lateral Oral Interview
6-2E-3: Lateral Physical Fitness Test
6-2E-4: Lateral Selection
6-2E-1: LATERAL DESCRIPTION:
In addition to the Entry Level Eligibility List, the board reserves the right
to maintain a pool of certified police officers for accelerated entry. All
persons possessing certification from the Illinois Law Enforcement Training and
Standards Board or possessing a full time certification from another state that
will transfer in accordance with the Illinois Law Enforcement Training and
Standards Board may be considered for accelerated entry and will not be
required to participate in an orientation or written exam, provided they meet
the following conditions:
   A.   Comply with article C, “Applications”, of this chapter;
   B.   Have been previously employed and certified as a full time law
enforcement officer within the last twelve (12) months, either in the State of
Illinois or in state that Illinois will approve a transfer for certification;
and
   C.   Have been actively employed as certified, full time police officer for
a minimum of twelve (12) consecutive months with a single law enforcement
agency.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2E-2: LATERAL ORAL INTERVIEW:
Applicants who have successfully met the aforementioned conditions may be
selected by the Chief of Police for further consideration. Should a lateral
applicant be selected for consideration they will be first required to
participate in an oral interview with the board in which the Commissioners will
evaluate the applicant on speech, alertness, ability to communicate, judgment,
emotional stability, self-confidence, social skill, experience, skill set and
general fitness for the position. The Chief of Police and Deputy Chief of
Police may choose to be present during oral interview. At the conclusion of the
interview, applicants must receive a positive recommendation by the board for
advancement to receive further employment consideration.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2E-3: LATERAL PHYSICAL FITNESS TEST:
Applicants who have received a positive recommendation for advancement may be
required to submit themselves to a physical fitness test by an agency
designated by the board and suitable to determine the physical suitability of
the applicant to perform the essential function of the job. Applicants who fail
to achieve a passing grade will be notified and eliminated from all further
consideration.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2E-4: LATERAL SELECTION:
When a vacancy for full time police officer exists, the Chief of Police may
select a lateral applicant for hire, provided they have completed an oral
interview (with recommendation), completed a physical fitness test (when
applicable) and met all the aforementioned conditions.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
ARTICLE F: PROFESSIONAL EXAMINATIONS; APPOINTMENT
Section
6-2F-1: Examinations
6-2F-2: Background Investigation
6-2F-3: Polygraph Examination
6-2F-4: Psychological Examination
6-2F-5: Conditional Offer Of Employment
6-2F-6: Medical Examination
6-2F-7: Violations
6-2F-8: Probationary Appointment Of New Officers
6-2F-1: EXAMINATIONS:
Applicants (entry level eligibility and certified police lateral) who have been
selected by the Chief of Police for hire shall be required to submit to the
professional examinations as identified in this section as part of the hiring
process. All examinations will be conducted by a professional team and/or by
licensed examiners or physicians approved by the board. Such examinations shall
be scheduled not more than ninety (90) calendar days prior to hire. Results of
all examinations are submitted to the Chief of Police for review and
determination of qualification. The confidentiality of all reports and records
will be maintained.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2F-2: BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION:
The Chief of Police shall institute the background investigation through
representative Police Department investigation teams. This investigation shall
include, but not be limited to, examination of the applicant’s academic
records, investigation of any civil or criminal action involving the applicant,
verification of the applicant’s employment and personal history as described on
his or her application, and investigation of any factors which might make the
applicant unsuitable for service in the department. Each applicant must submit
to fingerprinting, as part of the background investigation, by the department.
In conducting this investigation, the City or its designee shall inspect such
records and interview such individuals as may be necessary. The applicant shall
sign authorization for such investigation, on a form prescribed by the City.
Applicants who fail to pass the background investigation will be notified and
removed from all further consideration.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2F-3: POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION:
The applicant shall submit himself or herself for a polygraph examination by a
licensed polygraph operator designated and compensated by the City at such time
and place as the Chief of Police may designate. Such test shall be given
without expense to the applicant. The examining professional shall submit a
written report of the results of the examination to the Chief of Police or
designee. Applicants who fail to pass the polygraph examination will not
automatically be disqualified from the process but the results of the
examination may be used as an investigative aid and combined with other
background investigation findings to remove the applicant from further
consideration.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019; amd. Ord. 21-19, 4-19-2021)
6-2F-4: PSYCHOLOGICAL EXAMINATION:
The applicant shall submit himself or herself for a psychological examination
by a licensed psychologist designated and compensated by the City, at such time
and place as the Chief of Police may designate. Such test shall be given
without expense to the applicant. The examining professional shall submit a
written report of the results of the examination to the Chief of Police or
designee. The eligible applicant shall sign a waiver allowing the psychological
report to be reviewed by City Police Administration. Failure to sign such a
waiver shall eliminate the applicant from any further consideration. Applicants
who fail to pass the psychological examination will be notified and removed
from all further consideration.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2F-5: CONDITIONAL OFFER OF EMPLOYMENT:
Upon the passing of the background investigation, polygraph test and
psychological examination, the Chief of Police shall make a determination
whether to make a conditional offer of employment to the applicant, subject to
successfully passing a medical examination.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2F-6: MEDICAL EXAMINATION:
An applicant, on receipt of a conditional offer of employment from the City,
shall submit himself or herself for a medical examination (which may include a
test of the applicant’s vision and hearing, tests to ensure proper agility and
mobility, a test for the presence of communicable diseases, as well as a test
to screen for the use of drugs and/or narcotics) by a licensed physician, as
the City may designate. The examining professional shall be designated and
compensated by the City and shall submit a written report of the results of the
examination to the Human Resources Director (“Director”) of the City of
McHenry. The applicant shall sign a waiver allowing the medical examination
report to be reviewed by the Director and Chief of Police. Applicants who
successfully pass will be extended a final offer of employment.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2F-7: VIOLATIONS:
Applicants who knowingly divulges or receives test questions or answers before
a written examination, or otherwise knowingly violates or subverts any
requirement of these rules and regulations, commits a violation of the rules
and regulations and may be subject to immediate disqualification from the
examination process. Applicants who are the knowing recipient of test
information in advance of the examination shall be disqualified from the
appointment examination process.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2F-8: PROBATIONARY APPOINTMENT OF NEW OFFICERS:
   A.   Specified: Employment of all entry level appointments to the department
shall be subject to a probationary period of fifteen (15) months. Employment of
lateral certified Illinois Police Officers shall be subject to a probationary
period of twelve (12) months. Any newly hired officer, regardless of experience
or certification, may have their probationary period extended an additional
three (3) months at the discretion of the Chief of Police. The probationary
period of all appointed police officers shall commence as of the first date
said individual reports for work with the department.
   B.   Reimbursement Contract: A signed reimbursement contract shall be on
file with the City prior to or on the first date of employment.
   C.   Declining Appointment: Any applicant may decline appointment. It shall
be the option of the City to strike from or maintain upon the register the name
of such applicant without otherwise altering the applicant’s original position
on the Final Eligibility Register.
   D.   Dismissal: Probationary employees may be summarily dismissed from
employment by the Chief of Police, for any reason or no reason at all, and are
not entitled to the employment protection afforded to other full time police
officers by statute, these rules and regulations or collective bargaining
agreement.
   E.   Basic Training Course: All probationary police officers, not previously
certified, shall successful complete the basic training course as mandated by
the State of Illinois within the prescribed probationary period. Failure to
successfully complete this course shall result in dismissal from the department
employment.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
ARTICLE G: SERGEANT PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATIONS
Section
6-2G-1: General
6-2G-2: Examination And Scoring Process; Minimum Grade
6-2G-3: Initial Total Scoring
6-2G-4: Final Scoring/Sergeant Promotional Eligibility List
6-2G-5: Promotional Vacancy
6-2G-1: GENERAL:
   A.   Scope Of Promotions: Promotion in the department is provided for herein
on the basis of ascertained merit and seniority in service and examination. All
examinations for promotion shall be competitive among such members of the next
lower rank who desire to apply.
   B.   Board Responsible For Development Of List: The board shall be
responsible for the development of all promotional lists associated with the
rank of Sergeant.
   C.   Minimum Experience: Probationary police officers shall be ineligible to
test for promotion during their probationary period. An officer must have a
minimum of three (3) years of full time law enforcement experience before being
eligible for testing for the rank of Sergeant.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2G-2: EXAMINATION AND SCORING PROCESS; MINIMUM GRADE:
All applicants who are eligible for promotional participation shall be invited
to participate in the examination and scoring process for the Sergeant
Promotional Eligibility List. The following tests shall be conducted. Failure
to attend a mandatory step or achieve the minimum passing grade (when
applicable) will disqualify the applicant from any further participation.
   A.   Step 1; Written Exam: Each applicant must obtain a score of seventy
percent (70%) or higher on the written promotional exam in order to move to
step 2.
   B.   Step 2; Oral Interview: Each applicant must participate in an oral
interview with the board. In no event shall less than a majority of the
Commissioners conduct the oral examination. Questions shall be asked of the
promotional applicant that will enable the Commissioners to properly evaluate
and grade the applicant on leadership skills, management skills, speech,
alertness, ability to communicate, judgment, emotional stability, self-
confidence, social skill, experience, skill set and general fitness for the
position. On completion of each oral examination, the Commissioners will
discuss the applicant’s abilities using the traits listed above. Applicants
must receive an interview score of seventy percent (70%) or higher in order to
move to step 3.
   C.   Step 3; Issuance Of Seniority Points: At this step a one-half (1/2) of
a point per year for each full year of service as a police officer with the
McHenry Police Department will be calculated and awarded to the applicant.
   D.   Step 4; Merit And Performance Points: At this step, up to ten (10)
total merit and performance points may be issued to each applicant by the Chief
of Police at his/her sole discretion.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2G-3: INITIAL TOTAL SCORING:
   A.   Specified: Upon the completion of steps 1 through 4 in section 6-2G-
2 of this article, the board will calculate each applicant’s total score.
Scoring is based upon a total of one hundred (100) points. Written exam scores
are converted giving this step a weight of forty percent (40%) of the total
score. Oral interview scores are converted giving this step a weight of forty
five percent (45%) of the total score. Seniority points (step 3) and merit/
performance points (step 4) are then added as a ratio of one to one (1:1). The
score is then totaled.
   B.   Military Points: Persons who were engaged in the active military or
naval service of the United States for a period of at least one year and who
were honorably discharged are entitled to request preference points. DD Form
214 is required for verification. If any person who is entitled to military
preference points requests application of the preference points to the board,
seven-tenths (7/100 of a point for each year of active military service, up to
three and five-tenths (3.5) total points, shall be added to the applicant’s
total score.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2G-4: FINAL SCORING/SERGEANT PROMOTIONAL ELIGIBILITY LIST:
   A.   List: The board will prepare a “Final Sergeant Promotional Eligibility
List”, which shall include claimed and eligible qualifying preference points.
Only those applicants who have attained a total score of seventy five (75)
points or higher will be placed on the Final Sergeant Promotional Eligibility
List.
   B.   Rank Of Order: Applicants shall take rank upon a promotional
eligibility list in the order of the relative excellence as determined by their
total score. In the event of a tie score, the placement of the tied applicants’
names on the promotional eligibility list shall be determined by lot, in the
presence of a quorum of the board, in whatever manner the Board deems
appropriate.
   C.   Posting; Copy Sent: A dated copy of the Final Sergeant Promotional
Eligibility List shall be posted and a copy shall be sent to each person
appearing thereon. This list shall remain active for a period of three (3)
years from the date of posting.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2G-5: PROMOTIONAL VACANCY:
Upon determination of a vacancy by the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police
shall select the individual to be promoted. All promotions shall be made by the
Chief of Police. All promotions shall be made from the current promotional
eligibility list and from the three (3) individuals having the highest rating,
and where there are less than three (3) names on the promotional eligibility
list, as originally posted, or remaining thereon after appointments have been
made therefrom, appointments to fill existing vacancies shall be made from
those names or the name remaining on the promotional eligibility list.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
ARTICLE H: OATH OF OFFICE
Section
6-2H-1: Oath Of Office
6-2H-1: OATH OF OFFICE:
Before entering duty, any person about to become a member of the department
shall take the following oath, before any person authorized to administer oaths
in the State of Illinois:
I                    , do solemnly swear or affirm that I will support the
Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution of the State of
Illinois, and the ordinances of the City of McHenry, and that I will faithfully
discharge the duties of Police Officer of the City of McHenry according to the
best of my ability.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
ARTICLE I: HEARING OF CHARGES, REMOVAL TO LOWER RANK, SUSPENSIONS AND DISCHARGE
Section
6-2I-1: Applicability
6-2I-2: Alternative Discipline
6-2I-1: APPLICABILITY:
Sworn officers who are not guaranteed the right of arbitration through their
respective collective bargaining agreement are subject to the disciplinary
provisions of the Act as modified by the following provisions.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
6-2I-2: ALTERNATIVE DISCIPLINE:
   A.   Removal To Lower Rank; Appeal: The Chief of Police of the department
shall have the right to remove to a lower rank as part of the disciplinary
process. Except for the Deputy Chief and Commander positions, any police
officer removed to a lower rank may appeal to the board for a review of the
removal to a lower rank within five (5) days after receiving notice of such
action by the Chief of Police by filing notice of such appeal in writing with
the Secretary of the Board of Police Commissioners.
   B.   Suspension; Appeal: The Chief of Police of the department shall have
the right to suspend any officer, under his/her command, for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days, providing no charges on the same offense have been
filed and are pending before the board, and the Chief shall notify the board in
writing within twenty four (24) hours of the time of such suspension. Any
police officer may appeal to the board for a review of the suspension within
five (5) days after receiving notice of such action by the Chief of Police by
filing notice of such appeal in writing with the Secretary of the Board of
Police Commissioners.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
   C.   Hearing; Notice: A hearing shall be had upon all such appeals, and due
notice given to the Chief of Police and to the employee. The burden of
establishing that a removal to the lower rank or suspension was unwarranted
shall be upon the individual bringing the appeal. Upon such appeal and
depending on the evidence presented, the board may sustain the action of the
Chief of Police, may reverse it and order that the employee receive their pay
for the period involved, may suspend the employee for a period of not more than
thirty (30) days or discharge the employee.
(Ord. 19-1199, 7-15-2019)
CHAPTER 3: POLICE ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Police/Fire Alarms
6-3-3: Wireless Alarm Network
6-3-4: Fire Alarm Systems
6-3-5: Renewal Of Monitoring And Registration Fees
6-3-6: Network Equipment
6-3-7: Automatic Dialer Alarms
6-3-8: Audible Security Alarms
6-3-9: False Alarms
6-3-10: Limitation On City Liability
6-3-11: Penalties
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALARM SYSTEM: An assembly of equipment arranged to signal the presence of a
life or property threatening hazard, requiring urgent attention, and to which
the Police Department is expected to respond.
ALARM USER OR USER: Any person or business on whose premises an alarm system is
maintained, other than alarm systems on a motor vehicle.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic
failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the owner,
user or lessee of an alarm system, or their employees or agents, except that
the following shall not be considered false alarms:
   A.   Alarms caused by the failure or malfunction of the equipment located in
the McHenry Municipal Center.
   B.   Alarms caused by an attempted or actual illegal entry.
   C.   Alarms caused by an on premises fire.
   D.   Alarms intentionally caused by a person acting under a reasonable
belief that a need exists to call the Police Department.
   E.   Alarms caused by tornadoes, earthquakes, major floods or other natural
disasters.
POLICE ALARM SYSTEM: The alarm monitoring and control system located in the
McHenry Municipal Center onto which any person or business (a “subscriber”) may
connect the alarm system of their premises for a fee.
(1987 Code § 18-90; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
6-3-2: POLICE/FIRE ALARMS:
   A.   Code Compliance: Fire alarm systems shall be designed and installed in
accordance with the provisions of the International Building Code (IBC), as
adopted by the City and amended from time to time, International Fire Code
(IFC), as adopted by the City and amended from time to time, and this chapter.
Devices, appliances and equipment shall be listed and approved for the purpose
for which they are installed. Automatic fire detection shall be by smoke
detectors, except that an approved alternative type of detector shall be
installed where a smoke detector is inappropriate.
   B.   Approved System Required: An approved fire alarm and detection system
shall be provided within the City where required by the IBC/IFC.
   C.   Station Smoke Detection: Single and multiple station smoke detection
shall be provided in accordance with the IFC, as amended from time to time.
   D.   Connection To Remote Supervising Station: Where a fire alarm system
control unit is provided for the required supervision of fire protection system
as indicated in the IBC or IFC, as adopted and amended from time to time,
alarm, supervisory (where applicable) and trouble signals shall be transmitted
to the remote supervising station at the City Police Department ("Police
Department") in accordance with the IBC or IFC. The method of connection to the
remote supervising station shall be in accordance with section 6-3-3 of this
chapter.
   E.   Existing Systems:
      1.   All existing required fire alarm and security systems connected to
the City’s remote station by phone line as of May 1, 2011, shall convert to the
City’s network on or before December 1, 2011.
      2.   All existing required fire alarm and security systems not connected
to the City’s remote station by phone line as of May 1, 2011 shall convert to
the City’s network in accordance with section
6-3-3 of this chapter on or before May 1, 2016.
   F.   Nonrequired Systems: Where a nonrequired fire alarm system is directly
connected to the City’s remote station, the method of connection shall be in
accordance with section
6-3-3 of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 18-95)
6-3-3: WIRELESS ALARM NETWORK:
   A.   Connection: The method of connecting directly to the remote supervising
station shall be by the City’s wireless alarm network (“network”), or other
alternate connection means as approved by the Director of Community
Development. All fire alarm system control panels connected to a network radio
transceiver shall be provided with at least one reverse polarity output, except
that fire alarm control panels monitoring supervisory signals (tamper switches,
fire pump conditions, etc.) shall be provided with two (2) reverse polarity
outputs. All fire alarm control panels shall be UL listed for remote station
signaling of manual, automatic, waterflow (where applicable) and supervisory
(where applicable) signals by the reverse polarity method. Other listed and
supervised methods of connection between the fire alarm control unit and the
radio transceiver shall be permitted. A minimum 12V filtered DC signal shall be
provided from the fire alarm control unit to the radio transceiver.
   B.   Primary Power Required: The fire alarm contractor shall provide a 1900
box directly above and within three feet (3') of the fire alarm control unit.
The 1900 box shall house the A/C primary power source for the fire alarm
control panel. Sufficient additional wire shall be left in the 1900 box to
allow for the City’s radio vendor to splice into the A/C conductors to obtain
power for the radio. When the 1900 box and A/C primary power source is not
provided, other wiring methods may be permitted by the City.
   C.   Application Process: All connections to the network shall be preceded
by an application process. The City shall provide to owners, agents or
occupants of buildings within the City, requiring or requesting connection to
the City’s network, appropriate forms and contracts which shall be completed
and returned to the City prior to the approval of such a connection.
   D.   Fire System Monitoring Fees: Fees for the monthly monitoring of signals
shall be as follows:
      1.   Fire, supervisory, trouble signals from fire alarm control units:
Ninety dollars ($90.00) per month.
      2.   The monthly fees for City buildings will be waived.
      3.   Connections made to the network on the 1st through the 15th of the
month will be charged the applicable full monthly monitoring fee for the first
month of service. Connections made on the 16th through the last day of the
month will be charged one-half (1/2) of the applicable monthly fee for the
first month.
      4.   Invoices will be mailed monthly and are required to be paid within
thirty (30) days. All fees shall be paid to the City. A late payment penalty of
ten percent (10%) will be assessed to any delinquent invoices. The Wireless
Alarm Board may deny alarm monitoring service if a customer falls more than
sixty (60) days delinquent on any outstanding invoice. If the Wireless Alarm
Board decides to temporarily suspend the fire alarm monitoring to a given
building, specifically in cases where this monitoring is required by the IFC or
IBC, this action may result in the City revoking the building’s certificate of
occupancy until the condition has been corrected.
(1987 Code § 18-96)
6-3-4: FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS:
   A.   Registration: This section shall apply to all fire alarm systems
connected to the City’s network. Each fire alarm and security system within the
City shall be registered if connected to the City’s network. Registration of
the fire alarm system is intended to provide the City with current information
related to the fire alarm system, including, but not limited to, its owner, the
responsible party, night/after hour call information, fire alarm system
maintenance contractor, and the results of the required annual fire alarm
inspection. Each fire alarm and security system owner shall complete a
registration form provided by the City at the time of initial connection to the
network, and annually when the connection to the network is renewed.
   B.   Fees: All fees charged for the registration of radios as determined by
Council shall be paid to the City.
   C.   City Buildings Waived: Annual registration fees for City buildings will
be waived.
(1987 Code § 18-97)
   D.   Initial Connection Fees; Waiver: A one time connection fee as
determined by the Council shall be charged for all new fire alarm systems
connected to the network. This fee shall be collected by the City prior to the
initial connection to the network. Connection fees for City buildings shall be
waived.
(1987 Code § 18-98)
6-3-5: RENEWAL OF MONITORING AND REGISTRATION FEES:
Subscribers to the network will be invoiced by the City quarterly for
monitoring services. Annually, the cost for the renewal registration fee will
be invoiced. All annual monitoring and registration fees shall be paid prior to
the start of the new annual renewal period. All fees shall be paid to the City.
A late payment penalty of ten percent (10%) will be applied to all invoices
that are delinquent.
(1987 Code § 18-99)
6-3-6: NETWORK EQUIPMENT:
   A.   City Owner: The City is the owner of all equipment associated with the
network. Subscribers to the network will be provided with a radio transceiver
that replaces the traditional phone circuit for connection to the remote
supervising station. The subscriber, through the quarterly monitoring fee, is
leasing the radio transceiver from the City.
   B.   Installation, Maintenance: The installation, annual and necessary
maintenance, testing and repair of the radio transceiver at the subscriber’s
premises will be completed solely by a fire alarm company chosen by the City.
The City will contract with a single vendor to provide this service.
Subscribers to the network will be advised of the City’s vendor identity.
Subscribers shall allow the City’s vendor access to the radio transceiver
during normal business hours for all required or necessary installation, annual
maintenance, testing and repair.
   C.   Costs, Fees: The City will install the necessary radio transceiver at
the subscriber’s location at no cost to the subscriber, other than those
indicated in sections 6-3-2 through 6-3-4 of this chapter, when a standard
installation can be accomplished by the City’s vendor. The Wireless Alarm Board
is responsible for determining the components that must be provided within a
standard installation. When the City’s vendor cannot perform a standard
installation, and an antenna other than the one provided on the radio must be
used to permit network connectivity, the subscriber will be invoiced a
nonstandard installation fee by the City in accordance with a fee schedule
agreed to with the City’s vendor. Fees for nonstandard installations shall be
paid to the City within thirty (30) days of installation.
   D.   Inspection, Testing, Maintenance: All fire alarm systems shall be
subject to inspection, testing and maintenance. Inspection, testing and
maintenance shall be documented. Documented annual test results shall be
provided to the City as part of the annual registration renewal. While the City
will repair and maintain its network equipment, including the radio transceiver
at the subscriber’s location, it is the responsibility of owner of the fire
alarm system within the premises to provide the required inspection, testing
and maintenance at their own expense.
(1987 Code § 18-100)
6-3-7: AUTOMATIC DIALER ALARMS:
Automatic dialer alarms that dial directly into the Police Department are not
allowed to be used within the corporate limits of the City, with the exception
of those used by the City and those authorized by the Chief of Police or the
Chief’s designee based upon special facts involving medical and/or life
threatening circumstances.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
 
6-3-8: AUDIBLE SECURITY ALARMS:
Any security alarm that emits an audible alarm is required to have a cutoff
timer that will shut the alarm off automatically after thirty (30) minutes.
(1987 Code § 18-102)
6-3-9: FALSE ALARMS:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly activate
an alarm system for the purpose of summoning the police if such person knows or
suspects that there is no actual or prospective emergency.
(1987 Code § 18-91)
   B.   Charges: When six (6) or more false alarms are received from any
subscriber’s premises during any calendar year by the alarm monitoring and
control system, a service charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for the
seventh false alarm and twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each and every false
alarm thereafter shall be assessed and billed to the subscriber.
(1987 Code § 18-92)
   C.   Subscriber Request To Reconsider Service Charges: Within fifteen (15)
days after receiving a bill for false alarm charges, the subscriber may file a
written request with the Chief of Police to reconsider whether such alarm was
false. Such request shall state the subscriber’s opinion with respect to the
cause of the alarm and shall indicate the facts upon which the subscriber bases
said opinion. Within five (5) days after the receipt of such a request from a
subscriber, the Chief of Police, or the Chief’s designee, shall make a
determination whether the alarm was false or not and shall notify the
subscriber of that decision in writing by personal delivery or by mail.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   D.   Disconnection Of Subscriber Premises From Police Alarm System:
      1.   If more than ten (10) false alarms are received from the same
premises in any calendar year, the Chief of Police may initiate proceedings to
disconnect said premises from the police alarm system by forwarding a written
request for such disconnection proceedings, along with any and all reports of
false alarms at such premises in such calendar year, to the City Council.
      2.   Upon receipt of such request from the Chief of Police, the City
Council shall set a date for hearing to consider whether or not the
subscriber’s premises should be disconnected from the police alarm system. A
written notice of such hearing and hearing date shall be mailed to the
subscriber at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing date.
      3.   The City Council shall conduct the aforesaid disconnection hearings
and the Chief of Police and subscriber shall be permitted to present evidence
in support of or in opposition to such disconnection. At said hearing, a
determination by a majority vote of the Corporate Authorities, shall be made
whether or not to disconnect the subscriber’s premises from the police alarm
system and the City Clerk shall notify the subscriber of the Council’s decision
in writing within seven (7) days of the hearing date.
      4.   In determining whether or not to disconnect any subscriber’s
premises from the police alarm system, the City Council may consider the
following factors:
   a.   The number of false alarms from the subscriber’s premises.
   b.   Whether or not the subscriber responded to deactivate the false alarms
within one hour after such false alarms began.
   c.   The efforts made, if any, by the subscriber to control, direct and
instruct the subscriber’s employees with regard to the proper use of the
subscriber’s alarm system.
   d.   The efforts made by the subscriber to repair and maintain the alarm
system in proper working order.
   e.   Any other matter the City Council deems relevant.
(1987 Code § 18-94)
6-3-10: LIMITATION ON CITY LIABILITY:
   A.   Specified: The City shall take reasonable precautions to assure that
the alarm signals and alarm activations received by the City, either directly
or indirectly, are given appropriate attention and are acted upon by the
McHenry Police Dispatch Center. Nevertheless, the City shall not be liable for:
      1.   Any defects in the operation of an automatic signaling device;
      2.   Any failure or neglect to respond appropriately upon receipt of an
alarm from any source;
      3.   For failure or neglect of any person in connection with the
installation and operation of equipment, the transmission of alarm signals and/
or prerecorded alarm messages or the relaying of such signals and messages.
   B.   No Liability For Disconnection: In the event the City finds it
necessary to disconnect a defective alarm detection system, the City shall
incur no liability for such action.
(1987 Code § 18-103)
6-3-11: PENALTIES:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 18-106) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 4: ANIMAL CONTROL
Section
6-4-1: Policy And Purpose
6-4-2: Definitions
6-4-3: Dog License And Registration By County
6-4-4: Owner Duties For Care
6-4-5: Vaccination Required
6-4-6: Cruel Treatment
6-4-7: Keeping Animals Other Than Household Pets
6-4-8: Running At Large Prohibited
6-4-9: Places Where Animals Prohibited
6-4-10: Nuisance Animals
6-4-11: Biting Dogs, Cats And Other Animals
6-4-12: Impoundment
6-4-13: Limitation On Number Of Dogs; Grandfathering
6-4-14: Penalties
6-4-1: POLICY AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide protection for the people of McHenry,
to ensure their health, safety and welfare, and to provide harmonious
relationships between people and animals by:
   A.   Providing security to residents from annoyance, intimidation and injury
from dogs and other animals;
   B.   Protecting animals from improper use, abuse, neglect, inhumane
treatment and health hazards;
   C.   Encouraging responsible pet ownership.
(1987 Code § 6-1)
6-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ANIMAL: Every living creature, other than human, which may be affected by
rabies.
ANIMAL, COMPANION: An animal that is commonly considered to be, or is
considered by the owner to be, a pet.
ANIMAL CONTROL OR RESTRAINT: Any owned animal that is either secured by a leash
or lead or under voice control or within the premises of its owner or confined
within a crate or cage or confined within a vehicle or on the premises of
another person with the consent of that person.
ANIMAL, DOMESTIC: Dogs, cats, rabbits, rodents, birds, reptiles and any other
similar species of animals that are sold or retained as household pets.
ANIMAL, EXOTIC: Shall include, but is not limited to, the following: Felis
concolor (i.e., cougar, mountain lions, panther, puma, catamount, Florida
panther); panthers (i.e., lion, tiger, leopard, jaguar, snow leopard); Neofelis
(i.e., clouded leopard); Acinonyx (i.e., cheetah); Felis wiedi (i.e., margay);
Felis lynx (i.e., lynx); Felis rufus (i.e., bobcat); Leopardus pardalis (i.e.,
ocelot); Yagouaroundi (i.e., Jaguarundis); Hyaenidae (i.e., hyenas); Canis
Lupus (i.e., gray wolf, timber wolf, white wolf); Canis Rufus (i.e., red wolf);
Alopex lagopus (i.e., Arctic fox, polar fox, white fox, blue fox); Uracyon
cineroargenteus (i.e., gray fox); Canis latrans (i.e., coyote); Ursidae (i.e.,
black bear, brown or grizzly bear, polar bear); Proboscides (i.e., elephant);
non-human primate; Crocodylis (i.e., crocodiles, alligator); all species of the
following families or genera of Squamata (snakes and lizards): Helodermatidae
(i.e., gila monsters); Elapidae (i.e., cobras, coral snakes); Hydrophiidae
(i.e., sea snakes); Viperidae (i.e., vipers and pit vipers); Atractaspidae
(i.e., twig snake); Rhabdophis (i.e., keelback snakes); Eunectes murinus (i.e.,
Gree anaconda); Python sebae (i.e., African rock python); Python molurus (i.e.,
Burmese python); Python reticulates (i.e., reticulated python); Liasis
amethstinus (i.e., Amethystine python); or any other animal or reptile deemed
dangerous by the McHenry County Health Department, Illinois Department of
Aquiculture or Illinois Department of Conservation.
ANIMAL, FARM: Species of fowl, ovine (i.e., sheep), caprine (i.e., goat),
bovine (i.e., cattle), porcine (i.e., pig) and equine (i.e., horse).
ANIMAL, STRAY: Any domestic animal that is not under control and constraint.
BITE: Seizure of a person with the jaws or teeth of any animal capable of
transmitting rabies so that the person so seized has been wounded or pierced,
and further includes contact of the saliva of such animal with any break or
abrasion of the skin.
CAT: Any member of the family Felidae.
DOG: Any member of the family Canidae.
FERAL CAT: A cat that: a) is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned
or feral cat and is not socialized; or b) is a formerly owned cat that has been
abandoned and is no longer socialized; or c) lives on a farm.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more animals commonly used as
household pets that are more than four (4) months of age are bred, groomed,
boarded, trained, placed or sold for commercial or humane purposes and which
offers provisions for minor medical treatment, including animal shelters.
LEASH: A cord rope, strap, nylon strap or chain which shall be securely
fastened to the collar or harness of a dog or other animal and shall be of
sufficient strength to keep such dog or other animal under control.
OWNER (Also Including PERSON IN POSSESSION): Any person having a right of
property in an animal or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who has it in their
care, or acts as its custodian, or who knowingly permits a dog or other
domestic animal to remain on any premises occupied by them for a period of
seven (7) days. Owner does not include a feral cat caretaker who participates
in a trap spay/neuter, return or release program.
RESTRAINT: Within the meaning of this chapter, require a dog or animal, off the
premises of the dog owner’s owned or real property to be controlled by a leash
and held by a competent person capable of controlling such animal; at “heel” of
a competent person; within a vehicle being driven, parked or stopped;
accompanied by a person competent in commonly accepted methods of control.
(1987 Code § 6-2; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
6-4-3: DOG LICENSE AND REGISTRATION BY COUNTY:
All dogs kept, harbored or maintained by their owners within the City shall be
licensed and registered by the County of McHenry.
(1987 Code § 6-12)
6-4-4: OWNER DUTIES FOR CARE:
No person or owner shall fail to provide any animal in their charge or custody,
as owner or otherwise, with the following:
   A.   Food, Water: Sufficient quantity of good quality, wholesome, food and
water (Outdoor animals must have a constant supply of fresh water available.);
   B.   Shelter, Protection: Adequate shelter and protection from the weather;
   C.   Veterinary Care: Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and
   D.   Humane Care: Humane care and treatment.
(1987 Code § 6-4)
6-4-5: VACCINATION REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in possession of any dog to keep
or maintain such dog unless it shall have been vaccinated by a licensed
veterinary surgeon with antirabies vaccine, within one year preceding the date
on which such dog is kept, maintained or allowed to run at large.
(1987 Code § 6-13)
6-4-6: CRUEL TREATMENT:
   A.   Abuse: No person or owner may beat, cruelly treat, torment, starve,
overwork or otherwise abuse an animal.
   B.   Abandon: No owner may abandon any animal where it may become loose in
the public or may suffer injury, hunger or exposure.
(1987 Code § 6-3)
6-4-7: KEEPING ANIMALS OTHER THAN HOUSEHOLD PETS:
   A.   Prohibition: Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall keep
or harbor any animal, except domestic animals, within the corporate limits of
the City.
   B.   Farm Animals: Except as authorized by the issuance of a conditional use
permit in the A-M Agricultural and Mining Overlay District, no person shall
keep or harbor, within the corporate limits of the City, any farm animals,
including chickens sold as “household pets”.
   C.   Exotic Animals: No person shall keep or harbor, within the corporate
limits of the City, any exotic animals.
(1987 Code § 6-5)
6-4-8: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
   A.   Prohibition: The owner of any dog, cat or other domestic animal shall
not permit such animal to run at large within the City, with the exception of
dogs in a designated City dog park.
   B.   Restraint, Owner Permission Required: No person shall cause or permit
any dog, cat or other domestic animal owned by them, unless under restraint, to
be on any public place or on any privately owned premises other than those of
the owner, without that property owner’s consent, with the exception of dogs in
a designated City dog park.
   C.   Nuisance: Any dog, cat or other domestic animal found running at large
is hereby declared a nuisance, and it shall be presumed that such animal is
running at large with the permission of the owner, keeper or person in control
of such animal, with the exception of dogs in a designated City dog park.
(1987 Code § 6-6)
6-4-9: PLACES WHERE ANIMALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to permit any animals to enter any place where food is
stored, prepared, served or sold to the public; provided, however, this section
shall not apply to dogs leading blind persons, the hearing impaired or support
dogs for the physically handicapped.
(1987 Code § 6-9)
6-4-10: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
No owner or person in the custody or control of animals shall fail to exercise
proper care and control of such animals to prevent them from becoming a public
nuisance. The following actions shall be deemed a public nuisance:
   A.   Barking Dogs: No owner or person in the possession, custody or control
of a dog shall allow the dog to bark, whine or howl continuously for a period
longer than fifteen (15) minutes, intermittently for a period in excess of two
(2) hours, or between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:
00) A.M., so as to disturb the peace, quiet or repose, or be audible to another
person of ordinary sensibility.
   B.   Entry Upon The Private Property Of Another: The owner or person in
possession of any dog or cat shall not permit such dog or cat to enter upon the
premises or property which is located within the City of another person without
permission of the owner of such premises or property.
   C.   Damage To Property: The owner of any dog, cat or other domestic animal
shall not permit such dog, cat or other domestic animal to injure, destroy or
carry any vegetable, plant, fruit, shrub, tree, flower or other thing which may
be on or which may be planted or seeded on the property of another or on public
property. These provisions do not exclude any civil liability for damage to
property by a dog, cat or other domestic animal.
   D.   Accumulation Of Feces: No person shall allow animal feces to accumulate
in any yard, pen or premises in or upon which an animal shall be confined or
kept so that it becomes offensive to those residing in the vicinity or a health
hazard to the residing animal.
   E.   Removal Of Feces: No person shall fail to remove feces deposited by
their animals, except support dogs, upon the public ways or within the public
places of the City, or upon the premises of any person other than the owner
without that person’s consent.
   F.   Female Animals In Heat: All dogs and cats in heat (estrus) shall be
confined in a building or secure enclosure and attended in such a manner that
such female cat or dog cannot come into contact with a male of the same
species, except for planned breeding.
(1987 Code § 6-8)
6-4-11: BITING DOGS, CATS AND OTHER ANIMALS:
   A.   Notification Required: It is unlawful for any person having direct
knowledge that any person has been bitten by a dog, cat or other animal capable
of transmitting rabies to refuse to notify the McHenry County Health Department
immediately.
   B.   Disposal Prior To Release: It is unlawful for the owner or person in
possession of such dog or other animal to euthanize, sell, give away or
otherwise dispose of any such dog or other animal known to have bitten a
person, until it is released by the Health Department.
   C.   Failure To Comply: It is unlawful for the owner or person in possession
of such dog or other animal to refuse or fail to comply with the written or
printed instructions made by the Health Department. If such instructions cannot
be delivered in person, they shall be mailed to the owner of such dog or other
animal by regular mail.
   D.   Expenses Borne By Owner: Any expense incurred in the handling of any
dog or other animal under this chapter shall be borne by the owner. For the
purpose of this section, the word “immediately” means by telephone, in person,
or by means other than use of mail.
(1987 Code § 6-10)
6-4-12: IMPOUNDMENT:
The City may apprehend any dog, cat or other domestic animal found running at
large, with the exception of dogs in a designated City dog park. The impounded
animals will be held at the Police Department until transported to the McHenry
County Health Department for disposition.
(1987 Code § 6-7)
6-4-13: LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF DOGS; GRANDFATHERING:
No person shall permit more than three (3) dogs, excluding puppies under four
(4) months of age, to be or remain in or about any dwelling unit, including,
but not limited to, any garage, yard or other structure associated with said
dwelling unit. This provision shall not be applicable to kennels which are
properly zoned. Any person with more than three (3) dogs at the time of
adoption of this chapter shall be permitted to maintain all the dogs for the
life of the dogs. After which, a maximum of three (3) dogs shall be permitted
to be or remain in or about any dwelling unit, including, but not limited to,
any garage, yard or other structure associated with said dwelling unit. For the
purposes of this section, addresses with four (4) or more dogs shall be those
registered with the McHenry County Department of Health as of the date of
adoption of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 6-11)
6-4-14: PENALTIES:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 6-14) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 5: OFFENSES
ARTICLE A: GENERALLY
Section
6-5A-1: Compounding A Crime
6-5A-2: Accountability For Conduct Of Another
6-5A-3: Nuisance Businesses
6-5A-4: Disorderly Conduct
6-5A-5: Disturbing Religious Worship
6-5A-6: Noise
6-5A-7: Vagrancy
6-5A-8: Loitering
6-5A-9: Assault
6-5A-10: Battery
6-5A-11: Reckless Conduct
6-5A-12: Resisting Or Obstructing Peace Officer
6-5A-13: Refusing To Aid Officer
6-5A-14: Employee And Subcontractor Work Crews Of Public Utility Or Franchise
6-5A-15: Criminal Trespass To Vehicles
6-5A-16: Criminal Trespass To Land
6-5A-17: Taking Materials From Public Property
6-5A-18: Maintenance Of Streets During Construction
6-5A-19: Abandoned Refrigerators, Air Tight Containers
6-5A-20: Obstructing Passageways
6-5A-21: Littering
6-5A-22: Retail Theft
6-5A-23: Deceptive Practices
6-5A-24: Theft
6-5A-25: Unlawful Restraint
6-5A-26: Gambling
6-5A-27: Graffiti And Damage To Property
6-5A-28: Theft, Defacement, Destruction, Alteration Or Removal Of Government
Signs
6-5A-29: Street Gang Activity
6-5A-30: Alcoholic Beverages
6-5A-31: Tobacco Accessories And Use Regulations
6-5A-32: Nuisance Gatherings
6-5A-1: COMPOUNDING A CRIME:
A person compounds a crime, which is a misdemeanor, when he receives or offers
to another any consideration for a promise not to prosecute or aid in the
prosecution of an offender.
(1987 Code § 14-1)
6-5A-2: ACCOUNTABILITY FOR CONDUCT OF ANOTHER:
A person is responsible for conduct which is an element of an offense if the
conduct is either that of the person personally, or that of another and the
person is legally accountable for such conduct as provided in subsection A of
this section, or both.
   A.   When Accountability Exists: A person is legally accountable for the
conduct of another when:
      1.   Having a mental state described by the ordinance defining the
offense, the person causes another to perform the conduct, and the other person
in fact or by reason of legal incapacity lacks such a mental state; or
      2.   The ordinance defining the offense makes the person so accountable;
or
      3.   Either before or during the commission of an offense, and with the
intent to promote or facilitate such commission, the person solicits, aids,
abets, agrees or attempts to aid, such other person in the planning or
commission of the offense. However, a person is not so accountable, unless the
ordinance defining the offense provides otherwise, if:
         a.   The person is a victim of the offense committed; or
         b.   The offense is so defined that their conduct was inevitably
incident to its commission; or
         c.   Before the commission of the offense, the person terminates their
effort to promote or facilitate such commission, and does one of the following:
wholly deprives their prior efforts of effectiveness in such commission; or
gives timely warning to the proper law enforcement authorities; or otherwise
makes proper effort to prevent the commission of the offense.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   B.   Separate Conviction Of Person Accountable: A person who is legally
accountable for the conduct of another which is an element of an offense may be
convicted upon proof that the offense was committed and that he was so
accountable, although the other person claimed to have committed the offense
has not been prosecuted or convicted, or has been convicted of a different
offense or degree of offense, or is not amenable to justice, or has been
acquitted.
(1987 Code § 14-2)
6-5A-3: NUISANCE BUSINESSES:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to
a nuisance in fact.
(1987 Code § 14-3)
6-5A-4: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 25-6,
adopted 2-3-25). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when the
ordinance is codified.
No person shall engage in disorderly conduct in the City. A person commits
disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   A.   Acts To Provoke Breach Of Peace: Does any act in such unreasonable
manner as to alarm or disturb another and to provoke a breach of the peace:
      1.   Transmits in any manner to the Fire Department of any municipality
or fire protection district a false alarm or fire, knowing at the time of such
transmission that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such fire
exists;
      2.   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that
a bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is
concealed in such place;
      3.   Transmits in any manner to any peace officer, public officer or
public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been committed,
knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable ground for
believing that such an offense has been committed;
      4.   Enters upon the property of another for a lewd or unlawful purpose
and deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or
other opening in it;
(1987 Code § 14-4)
      5.   With the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder,
nuisance, the person commits any of the following acts in a public place:
         a.   Commits an act in a violent manner toward another whereby that
other person is placed in danger of their life or health;
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
         b.   Commits an act in a violent manner toward another whereby the
property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged;
         c.   Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous
conduct so as to endanger the life, health or property of another;
         d.   Interferes with another’s pursuit of a lawful occupation by acts
of violence;
         e.   Obstructs, either singly or together with other persons, the flow
of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when
ordered to do so by a peace officer or other lawful authority;
         f.   Incites, attempts to incite or is involved in attempting to
incite a riot or unlawful disturbance;
         g.   Uses abusive language or threats to any peace officer or any
other person when such words have a direct tendency to cause acts of violence.
Words merely causing displeasure, annoyance or resentment are not prohibited;
         h.   Makes or causes to be made any loud, boisterous and unreasonable
noise or disturbance to the annoyance of any other persons nearby, or near to
any public highway, road, street, lane, alley, park, square or common, whereby
the public peace is broken or disturbed, or the traveling public annoyed;
         i.   Fails to obey a lawful order to disperse by a peace officer where
one or more persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate
vicinity, and the public health and safety is threatened;
         j.   Uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture in
public;
         k.   Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of using
force or violence to disturb the public peace;
         l.   Assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose of
violating any provision of this Code; and
(1987 Code § 14-4)
         m.   Appears in any public place, or on any private street, road or
drive that is the subject of a written request from the property owner pursuant
to Illinois Compiled Statutes, and is under the influence of alcohol or
controlled substance, to the degree that they may endanger themselves or other
persons or property, or alarm or disturb other persons in the vicinity.
      6.   Permits any assembly of two (2) or more persons for the purpose of
committing any unlawful act or breach of the peace, or any riotous, offense or
disorderly conduct, in or upon any premises owned or occupied by them or under
their control;
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      7.   Interrupts or disturbs any lawful assemble of people by making any
loud or unusual noise, or by rude or indecent behavior, or by profane, obscene
or improper discourse or conduct;
      8.   Engages in mob action. Mob action consists of any of the following:
         a.   The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two
(2) or more persons acting together and without authority of law;
         b.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons to commit an unlawful
act; or
         c.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons, without authority of
law, for the purpose of doing violence to the persons or property of anyone
supposed to have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of
exercising correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by
violence;
(1987 Code § 14-4)
      9.   Disturbs, tends to disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of others
by violent, tumultuous or offensive conduct, and no person shall knowingly
permit such conduct upon any premises owned or possessed by them or under their
control;
      10.   Loiters or strolls in, about or upon any street, alley or other
public way or public place, or in any public gathering or assembly, or in or
around any store, shop or business or commercial establishment, or on any
private property or place without lawful business or conduct themselves in a
lewd, wanton or lascivious manner in speech or behavior;
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   B.   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be fined according to
the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, for
each offense and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution, including
attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be
made to any property damaged or destroyed or person injured.
(1987 Code § 14-4; amd. 2019 Code; amd. Ord. 25-6, 2-3-2025)
6-5A-5: DISTURBING RELIGIOUS WORSHIP:
No person in the City shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly
for religious worship by making a noise or by rude or indecent behavior, or
profane discourse within their place of worship, or so near the same as to
disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting.
(1987 Code § 14-7)
6-5A-6: NOISE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made, create or
maintain, loud, unnecessary, unnatural or unusual noises which are prolonged,
unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use, and which affect and are a
detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and
prosperity of the residents of the City, or which annoys, disturbs, injures or
endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the
limits of the City. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but said
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
   A.   Horns, Signaling Devices, Etc.: The sounding of any horn or signaling
device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public
place of the City, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any
such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding
of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use
of any signaling device, except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of
any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of
any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
   B.   Radios, Boom Boxes, Personal Music Devices, Etc.:
      1.   The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated
any radio receiving set, musical instrument, personal musical device or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as
to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at
any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the
person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine
or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto.
      2.   The operation of any such set, instrument, machine or device between
the hours of eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. in such
a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet (50') from the
building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this section.
   C.   Loudspeakers, Amplifiers, For Advertising: The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set,
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifiers, or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public
streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention
of the public to any building or structure, except as otherwise provided in
section 5-7-2 of this Code.
   D.   Exhausts: The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle
except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises therefrom.
   E.   Defect In Vehicle Or Load: The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
   F.   Construction, Alteration Or Repair:
      1.   No activities in connection with construction, alteration, repair or
demolition, shall be carried on other than during the following hours:
   HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION
 
Weekdays              Saturdays             Sundays And Legal Holidays
7:00 A.M. - 8:00 P.M. 8:00 A.M. - 8:00 P.M. 8:00 A.M. - 6:00 P.M.
 
      2.   Exceptions:
         a.   These activities may be conducted outside the specified times in
the event of emergencies in order to protect the health, safety, or welfare of
the public.
         b.   The hours may be extended when involving City projects when it
serves the best interest of the public good provided the affect on the public
health, comfort, convenience, peace, safety and welfare are minimized.
   G.   Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals: The creation of any excessive
noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or
court while the same are in use or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably
interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly
annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in
such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street.
   H.   Drums: The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show
or sale.
   I.   Pile Drivers, Hammers, Etc.: The operation between the hours of ten
o’clock (10:00) P.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. of any pile driver, steam
shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electrical hoist or other
appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise.
   J.   Blowers: The operation of any noise creating blower or power fan or any
internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the
explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or
fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to
deaden such noise.
   K.   Internal Combustion Engines; Penalty: Without the prior written permit
of the Director of Community Development, the operation of or the permitting of
the operation of internal combustion engines between the hours of six o’clock
(6:00) P.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M., in subdivisions under construction,
is prohibited. Any person, firm or corporation violating this subsection shall
be fined not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense
and be responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution, including attorney fees
incurred. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
   L.   Machinery:
      1.   Definition: For the purposes of this subsection, “machinery” shall
be defined as any equipment that is used for the purpose of excavating,
scraping, moving, filling or leveling of earth in connection with construction
or land development.
   HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION
 
Weekdays              Saturdays             Sundays And Legal Holidays
7:00 A.M. - 8:00 P.M. 8:00 A.M. - 4:00 P.M. Prohibited
 
      2.   Exceptions:
         a.   The operation of machinery may be conducted outside the specified
times in the event of emergencies in order to protect the health, safety or
welfare of the public.
         b.   The hours may be extended when involving City projects when it
serves the best interest of the public good provided the affect on the public
health, comfort, convenience, peace, safety and welfare are minimized.
         c.   The operation of motorized garden equipment for the purpose of
preparing the soil for planting.
(1987 Code § 14-8)
6-5A-7: VAGRANCY:
No person in the City shall have the status or condition of a “vagrant”. The
following persons shall be deemed vagrants:
   A.   No Lawful Means Of Support: Any person having no lawful means of
employment and having no lawful means of support realized solely from lawful
occupations or sources; or any person who lives idly and without visible means
of support.
(1987 Code § 14-9)
   B.   Unlawful Occupancy: Any person wandering abroad and occupying, lodging
or sleeping in any vacant or unoccupied barn, garage, shed, shop, or other
building or structure, or in any automobile, truck, railroad car or other
vehicle, without owning the same or without permission of the owner or person
entitled to the possession of the same, or sleeping in any vacant lot during
the hours of darkness and not giving a satisfactory account of themselves.
   C.   Begging: Any person wandering abroad and begging; or any person who
goes about from door to door of private homes or commercial and business
establishments, or places themselves in or upon any public way or public place
to beg or receive alms for themselves.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   D.   Fraudulent Schemes: Any person who shall engage in any fraudulent
scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing from others; or
any person who aids or assists such trick, device or scheme.
   E.   Common Law Vagrants: All persons who by the common law are vagrants,
whether embraced in any of the foregoing classifications or not.
(1987 Code § 14-9)
6-5A-8: LOITERING:
   A.   Loitering Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in
or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public or near any public or
private place in a manner under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage
in drug related activity contrary to any of the provisions of this Code or the
State of Illinois Criminal Code, as amended.
   B.   Determination: Among the circumstances which may be considered in
determining whether such purpose is “manifested” shall include, but not be
limited to:
      1.   Such person is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller. For
purposes of this provision, a “known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller”
is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been
convicted in any court within this State of any violation involving the use,
possession or sale of any of the controlled substances referred to in the
Illinois Criminal Code, as amended, or such person who has been convicted of
any violation of the provisions of said Illinois Criminal Code, as amended, or
substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this State or of any
other state; or a person who displays the physical characteristics of drug
intoxication or usage, such as “needle tracks” or a person who possesses drug
paraphernalia as defined in the Illinois Criminal Code, as amended; or
(1987 Code § 14-10)
      2.   Such person is currently subject to an order prohibiting their
presence in a high drug activity geographic area; or
      3.   Such person behaves in a manner as to raise reasonable suspicion
that they are about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug related
activity including, by way of example only, such person acting as a “lookout”;
or
      4.   Such person is physically identified by the officer as a member of a
"gang" or association which has, as one of its purposes, illegal drug activity;
or
      5.   Such person transfers small objects or packages for currency in a
secret manner; or
      6.   Such person takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer; or
(1987 Code § 14-10)
      7.   Such person manifestly endeavors to conceal upon themselves any
object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug related activity;
or
      8.   The area involved is by public repute known to be an area of
unlawful drug use and trafficking; or
      9.   The premises involved have been reported to law enforcement as a
place of suspected gang activity; or
      10.   Such person possesses any instrument, article or thing whose
customary or primary purpose is for the sale, administration or use of
controlled substances, such as, but not limited to, crack pipes, hand scales,
hypodermic needles, razor blades or other cutting tools; or
      11.   Any vehicle involved is registered to a known unlawful drug user,
possessor or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a
crime involving drug related activity.
   C.   Penalty: Any person violating this section shall be fined according to
the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, for
each offense and be responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including
attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall
be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be
made to any property damaged or destroyed or person injured.
(1987 Code § 14-10) (amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
6-5A-9: ASSAULT:
A person commits an assault, which is a misdemeanor, when, without lawful
authority, he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable
apprehension of receiving a battery.
(1987 Code § 14-12)
6-5A-10: BATTERY:
A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly without legal
justification and by any means:
   A.   Causes bodily harm to an individual; or
   B.   Makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature with an
individual.
(1987 Code § 14-13)
6-5A-11: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily safety of any
individual by any means, commits reckless conduct, if he performs, recklessly
the acts which cause the harm or endangers safety, whether they otherwise are
lawful or unlawful.
(1987 Code § 14-14)
6-5A-12: RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING PEACE OFFICER:
A person who knowingly resists or obstructs the performance by one known to the
person to be a peace officer of any authorized act within the peace officer’s
official capacity shall be guilty of the offense of resisting or obstructing a
peace officer.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
6-5A-13: REFUSING TO AID OFFICER:
Whoever upon command refuses or knowingly fails reasonably to aid a person
known by them to be a peace officer in: a) apprehending a person whom the
officer is authorized to apprehend; or b) preventing the commission by another
of any offense, shall be guilty of the offense of refusing to aid an officer.
(1987 Code § 14-16; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
6-5A-14: EMPLOYEE AND SUBCONTRACTOR WORK CREWS OF PUBLIC UTILITY OR FRANCHISE:
   A.   English Speaking Person: Every employee and subcontractor work crew of
any public utility or cable television franchise or their agents, providing
service to any customer or working on any utility or main trunk lines in the
City, shall have not less than one English speaking person.
   B.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(1987 Code § 14-17) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
6-5A-15: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO VEHICLES:
Whoever knowingly and without authority enters any vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft, or any part thereof, of another without their consent shall be
guilty of criminal trespass to vehicles.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
6-5A-16: CRIMINAL TRESPASS TO LAND:
Whoever enters upon the land or any part thereof of another, after receiving,
immediately prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant that such
entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land of another after receiving notice
from the owner or occupant to depart, commits the offense of criminal trespass
to land.
(1987 Code § 14-19)
6-5A-17: TAKING MATERIALS FROM PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No person shall move, disturb, or take any earth, stone or other material from
any public street, alley, park or other public ground, except as is otherwise
provided in this Code.
(1987 Code § 14-20)
6-5A-18: MAINTENANCE OF STREETS DURING CONSTRUCTION:
The owner, developer and general contractor (“responsible parties”) of each
subdivision under construction shall have the following duties, the violation
of which they shall be jointly and severally liable:
   A.   Maintenance: The responsible parties shall keep and maintain the
streets and ways in and around the subdivision clean and free from all dirt,
mud, construction material and other debris during the period of construction;
   B.   Streets: The responsible parties shall scrape each street every day
during the period of construction, and shall sweep or cause the streets to be
swept once every week. In addition to the foregoing, the responsible parties
shall be required to scrape, sweep or remove debris from the streets as from
time to time directed by the Department of Public Works, the Mayor or the City
Engineer.
   C.   Applicability: The duties imposed by this section shall apply to all
streets within the subdivision, all streets designated as construction traffic
routes and all perimeter streets or streets adjacent to the subdivision.
   D.   Penalty: The responsible parties violating any provision of this
section shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties, said
penalties being cumulative and in addition to any other penalties that may be
imposed:
      1.   A fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for
each offense, plus the City’s cost of prosecution, including attorney fees,
incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
      2.   The City may undertake the necessary cleaning as required herein and
then assess the costs and expenses for such cleaning, including reasonable
attorney fees incurred by the City, against the responsible parties for
violating this section and may take action against the performance or
construction bond or letter of credit for payment thereof.
      3.   “Stop work orders” for the subdivision may be issued by the City
until the responsible parties comply with the requirements of this section. No
work shall be done in the subdivision while the stop work order is in effect.
      4.   The City may withhold the issuance of Certificate of Occupancy for
all residences within the subdivision until the responsible parties comply with
the requirements of this section.
(1987 Code § 14-21)
6-5A-19: ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS, AIR TIGHT CONTAINERS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or permit to remain outside of any
dwelling, building or other structure, or within any unoccupied or abandoned
building, dwelling or other structure under their control, in a place
accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded refrigerator or
other container which has an air tight door or lid, snaplock or other locking
device which may not be released from the inside, without first removing said
door or lid, snaplock or other locking device from said refrigerator or
container.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
6-5A-20: OBSTRUCTING PASSAGEWAYS:
No person shall place or erect upon public way or passageway to any building an
obstruction of any type; provided, that this section shall not prevent the duly
authorized or required placing of temporary barriers or warning signs for the
purpose of safeguarding the public.
(1987 Code § 14-23)
6-5A-21: LITTERING:
No person in the City shall throw or permit to be deposited or scattered upon
any sidewalk, alley, street, bridge or public passageway, or upon any private
property, any waste or other material of any kind.
(1987 Code § 14-24)
6-5A-22: RETAIL THEFT:
A person commits the offense of retail theft when they knowingly obtain or
exert unauthorized control over merchandise from a mercantile establishment
intending to deprive the mercantile establishment of the property without
paying for it.
(1987 Code § 14-25)
6-5A-23: DECEPTIVE PRACTICES:
A person commits a deceptive practice when with intent to obtain control over
property or to pay for property, labor or services of another, he issues or
delivers a check or other order upon a real or fictitious depository for the
payment of money, knowing that it will not be paid by the depository. Failure
to have sufficient funds or credit with the depository when the check or other
order is issued or delivered is prima facie evidence that the offender knows
that it will not be paid by the depository.
(1987 Code § 14-26)
6-5A-24: THEFT:
A person commits theft, which is a misdemeanor, when he knowingly:
   A.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner; or
   B.   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
   C.   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
(1987 Code § 14-27)
   D.   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have been
stolen by another or under such circumstances as would reasonably induce them
to believe that the property was stolen and:
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      1.   Intends to deprive the owner of the use or benefit of the property;
or
      2.   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as
to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
      3.   Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
(1987 Code § 14-27)
6-5A-25: UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT:
A person commits the offense of unlawful restraint when he knowingly without
legal authority detains another.
(1987 Code § 14-28)
6-5A-26: GAMBLING:
   A.   Engaging In: No person in the City shall engage in a game of chance
prohibited by the Statutes of the State or ordinances of this City.
(1987 Code § 14-29)
   B.   Possession Of Materials: No person in the City shall have in their
possession any evidence of illegal gambling in the nature of policy or pool
tickets, slips or checks or memoranda of any combination or bet, or any policy
wheel, dice implement, apparatus or material of any form of illegal gambling or
lottery.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
6-5A-27: GRAFFITI AND DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
   A.   Graffiti Defined: Graffiti is any permanent display of any name,
identification, letter, numeral, figure, emblem, insignia, picture, outline,
character, spectacle, delineation, illustration, symbol or any combination
thereof, which without authorization, or, despite advance authorization, is
marked, written, drawn, painted, scratched, inscribed or affixed, and which is
a different color from the color of the exterior of those objects or structures
described above and to which is affixed. Graffiti shall not include any sign,
marking or communication permitted or required to be permitted by law and
inscribed, placed or otherwise displayed with the permission of the landowner.
   B.   Graffiti And Damage To Property Prohibited: It shall be unlawful, and
is hereby declared a nuisance to place graffiti upon any public or private curb
stone, flagstone, brick, sidewalk or any portion of any part of any sidewalk or
street, or upon any tree, lamp post, telephone pole, utility box, utility pole,
stanchion, postal mail receptacle, sign, hydrant, fence, door, wall, window,
garage or enclosure, vehicle, bridge, pier or upon any other public or private
structure or building. It shall also be unlawful, and is hereby declared a
nuisance, to actively damage, befoul, disturb, destroy or deface any City
property or any public or private property without permission of the owner.
   C.   Removal Of Graffiti By Property Owner Or The City:
      1.   Property Owner Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any person
who is the owner or who has primary responsibility for control of the property
or for repair or maintenance of property in the City to permit property that is
defaced with graffiti or otherwise damaged in violation of subsection B of this
section to remain defaced or damaged for a period of two (2) days after written
notice of the defacement violation has been provided by the City with the
ability of a time extension being granted if the property owner contacts the
Community Development Department within the specified time frame. Said written
notice shall contain the following information:
         a.   The street address or legal description of the property
sufficient for identification of the property;
         b.   A statement that the graffiti must be removed or the damage fixed
within two (2) days after receipt of the written notice; and
         c.   If the graffiti or damage is not abated within the specified time
frame, the City will declare the property to be a public nuisance, subject to
abatement procedures.
      2.   Exception To Property Owners Responsibility: The removal requirement
of subsection C1 of this section shall not apply if, in the City’s discretion,
the property owner has demonstrated that:
(1987 Code § 14-32)
         a.   An extension of the time is needed due to weather, temperature or
physical limitations. An extension of time may be granted by the City upon
application of the property owner to and approval by the Director of Community
Development and/or their designee; or
         b.   The property owner or responsible party has an active program for
the removal of graffiti and has scheduled the removal of the graffiti as part
of the program; however, it shall be unlawful to permit such property to remain
defaced for a period of seven (7) days after service of written notice; or
         c.   The property damage in question is not the result of an
intentional act of property damage but rather due to general neglect in
maintaining the property, or due to a weather event or other natural or
accidental cause. In such a case, the City shall determine if the property
otherwise violates City codes on property maintenance, and shall determine
whether to issue a citation to the owner based on the above violation.
      3.   Abatement By The City Upon Noncompliance:
         a.   Any property owner who fails to remove graffiti or otherwise
repair property damage within two (2) days after receiving written notice from
the City shall receive a nontraffic citation and notice to appear at an
adjudication hearing for a violation of subsection C1 of this section.
         b.   Upon the failure of any owner or agent so notified to remove
graffiti or otherwise repair property damage, the Director of Community
Development is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the removal or to
order the removal by the City; upon which the City will use all powers
available to recoup expenses/costs incurred by said abatement for
noncompliance.
   D.   Penalty; Restitution: A violation of this section is an ordinance
violation with a fine according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15,
Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties. Restitution by the violator shall also be made
to the owner of any property damaged or destroyed. Nothing herein shall
preclude such additional civil remedies available to the person whose property
has been damaged or destroyed.
(1987 Code § 14-32) (amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
6-5A-28: THEFT, DEFACEMENT, DESTRUCTION, ALTERATION OR REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENT
SIGNS:
   A.   Prohibition: It shall be unlawful for any person to steal or to
intentionally deface, destroy, alter or remove any street name sign, traffic or
parking sign, legal notice, warning of hazards or other informational signs or
displays maintained by the City, or any other governmental body.
   B.   Penalty; Restitution: Any person violating this section shall be
punished by a fine according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15,
Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties and, in addition thereto, shall be required to
make restitution for the total material and labor costs of replacing such sign
or signs.
(1987 Code § 14-33) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
6-5A-29: STREET GANG ACTIVITY:
   A.   City Council Findings:
      1.   The City Council hereby finds and declares that it is the right of
every person, regardless of race, color, creed, religion, national origin, sex,
age or disability to be secure and protected from fear, intimidation and
physical harm caused by the activities of violent groups and individuals. It is
not the intent of this section to interfere with the exercise of the
constitutionally protected rights of freedom of expression and association. The
City Council hereby recognizes the constitutional right of every citizen to
harbor and express beliefs on any lawful subject whatsoever, to lawfully
associate with others who shall have similar beliefs, to petition lawfully
constituted authority for a redress of perceived grievances, and to participate
in the electoral process.
      2.   The City Council finds, however, that urban, suburban and rural
communities, neighborhoods and schools throughout the State are being
terrorized and plundered by street gangs. The City Council finds that there are
now several hundred street gangs operating in Illinois, and that while their
terrorism is most widespread in urban areas, street gangs are spreading into
suburban and rural areas of Illinois, including McHenry County.
      3.   The City Council further finds that street gangs are often
controlled by criminally sophisticated adults who take advantage of our youth
by intimidating and coercing them into membership by employing them as drug
couriers and runners, and by using them to commit brutal crimes against persons
and property to further the financial benefit to and dominance of the street
gang.
      4.   Street gang activity presents a clear and present danger to public
order and safety and is not constitutionally protected. No society is or should
be required to endure such activities without redress. Accordingly, it is the
intent of the City Council, by enacting this section, to prohibit street gang
related activity.
   B.   Definition: For the purpose of this section, STREET GANG or GANG is
defined as any ongoing organization, association in fact or group of three (3)
or more persons, whether formally or informally organized, or any subgroup or
affiliated group thereof, having as one of its activities the commission of
criminal or illegal acts, including by way of example only and not in any way
limiting or specifying, illegal drug distribution, and whose members
individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal
or illegal acts, and which group frequently, though not necessarily, claim one
or more particular geographic territory or “turf” exclusively as its realm of
influence and operations.
   C.   Colors, Emblems Or Insignia: It shall be unlawful for any person within
the City to knowingly use, display or wear colors, emblems or insignia on or
about their person in public for the purpose of promoting any street gang
activity.
   D.   Act, Utterance, Gesture Or Display: It shall be unlawful for any person
within the City to knowingly do or make any act, utterance, gesture or display
for the purpose of communicating membership of, affiliation with, association
with, support of, identification with, sympathy toward or affront or insult
toward any street gang, or with actual knowledge that the subject act,
utterance, gesture or display is used and recognized as communicative of street
gang membership, affiliation, association, support, identification, sympathy or
affront.
   E.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(1987 Code § 14-35) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
6-5A-30: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
   A.   Public Property: Except as specifically provided in other sections of
this Code, consumption or possession of any alcoholic liquors, at any time in
any public park, street, alley or public place owned, controlled or operated by
the City is prohibited.
   B.   Businesses Open To The Public: The consumption or possession of any
alcoholic liquors by a person, at any time in an establishment or business that
is open to the public is prohibited unless said business holds a valid liquor
license in accordance with title 4, chapter 2 of this Code.
   C.   Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and
Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible
for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each
day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 14-36) (amd. Ord. 19-1193, 5-20-2019; Ord. 19-1200, 7-15-2019;
Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
6-5A-31: TOBACCO ACCESSORIES AND USE REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions: Terms used in this section are defined as follows:
   ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means. Alternative nicotine product does not include:
cigarettes as defined in section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act (35 ILCS 130/1) and
tobacco products as defined in section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act (35 ILCS 130/
1) and tobacco products as defined in section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax
Act (35 ILCS 143/10-5); tobacco product and electronic cigarette as defined in
this section; or any product approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product; as a tobacco dependence
product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely
for that approved purpose.
   BIDI CIGARETTE: A product that contains tobacco that is wrapped in temburni
or tendu leaf or that is wrapped in any other material identified by rules of
the Illinois Department of Public Health that is similar in appearance or
characteristics to the temburni or tendu leaf.
   ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE OR E-CIGARETTE: Any device that employs a battery or
other mechanism to heat a solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol
intended for inhalation; any cartridge or container of a solution or substance
intended to be used with or in the device or to refill the device; or any
solution or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended for use in
the device. Electronic cigarette includes, but is not limited to, any
electronic nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo,
electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or device, and
any components or parts that can be used to build the product or device.
Electronic cigarette does not include: cigarettes as defined in section 1 of
the Cigarette Tax Act (35 ILCS 143/10-5) and tobacco products as defined in
section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act (35 ILCS 143/10-5); tobacco
products and alternative nicotine product as defined in this section; any
product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose; any asthma inhaler prescribed by a physician for that condition and is
being marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; or any therapeutic
product approved for use under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.)
   LIQUID NICOTINE: Any liquid product composed either in whole or part of
nicotine, propylene glycol and/or other similar substances and manufactured for
use with an e-cigarette to be converted into gas for inhaling.
   NICOTINE: Means any form of the chemical nicotine, including any salt or
complex, regardless of whether the chemical is naturally or synthetically
derived.
   SMOKELESS TOBACCO: Any finely cut, ground, powdered or leaf tobacco that is
intended to be placed in the oral cavity; any tobacco product that is suitable
for dipping or chewing.
   SMOKING HERBS: All substances of plant origin and their derivatives,
including, but not limited to, broom, calea, California poppy, damiana, hops,
ginseng, lobelia, jimson weed and other members of the Datura genus, passion
flower and wild lettuce, which are processed or sold primarily for use as
smoking materials.
   TOBACCO ACCESSORIES: Cigarette papers, pipes, holders of smoking materials
of all types, cigarette rolling machines and other items, designed primarily
for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products or of substances made illegal
under any statute or of substances whose sale, gift, barter or exchange is
unlawful.
   TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any product containing or made from tobacco that is
intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed,
dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means,
including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing
tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product
which contains tobacco that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and
intended to be placed in the oral cavity. Tobacco product includes any
component, part or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold
separately. Tobacco product does not include: an electronic cigarette and
alternative nicotine product as defined in this section; or any product that
has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as
a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
   B.   Tobacco, Electronic Cigarette, Alternative Nicotine Product Or Liquid
Nicotine Dealer’s License:
      1.   Mayor Designated Tobacco Control Commissioner; Assistants: The Mayor
shall act as a local Tobacco Control Commissioner of the City and, in the event
of a conflict preventing the Mayor from so acting, the designated Tobacco
Control Commissioner is the City Administrator.
      2.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at
retail, to give away or keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving
away or delivering tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or their components,
alternative nicotine products or liquid nicotine and smoking herbs within the
City without having first obtained a tobacco dealer’s license. Such license
shall be in addition to any other license required by this Code.
      3.   Applications For Licenses: Applications for licenses required by
this section shall be verified in writing and on a form provided by the City.
Such application shall be completed in full and be true and accurate by the
person signing the application. The approval and authority to issue tobacco
dealer licenses is the responsibility of the Tobacco Control Commissioner or
their designee.
      4.   License Period; Fee: The license period shall be from May 1 to the
following April 30. The annual license fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00), payable to the City on or before May 1 of each year.
      5.   Personal Nature Of License: A license is a purely personal
privilege, good for the license period, unless revoked. No such license shall
be transferrable.
      6.   Responsibility For Agents And Employees: Any act of omission
constituting a violation of any provision of this section by any officer,
director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed
and held to be the act of such licensee and such licensee shall be punishable
in the same manner as if such act or omission has been done or omitted by the
licensee personally.
   C.   Purchase And Use Of Tobacco Products Prohibited:
      1.   Sting Operation For Purchase: No person under twenty one (21) years
of age shall purchase any tobacco product in any of its forms, electronic
cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine products or liquid
nicotine. No person shall sell, purchase for, distribute samples of or furnish
any tobacco product in any of its forms, an electronic cigarette or their
components, alternative nicotine products or liquid nicotine, to any person
under twenty one (21) years of age. Tobacco products, electronic cigarettes,
alternative nicotine products and liquid nicotine may not be sold through a
vending machine. It is not a violation of this subsection C for a person under
twenty one (21) years of age to purchase a tobacco product, electronic
cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine products or liquid
nicotine if the person under the age of twenty one (21) purchases the tobacco
product, electronic cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine
products or liquid nicotine in any of its forms from a retail seller of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine
products or liquid nicotine or an employee of the retail seller pursuant to a
plan or action to investigate, patrol or otherwise conduct a “sting operation”
or enforcement action against a retail seller of tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine products or liquid
nicotine or a person employed by the retail seller of tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine products or
liquid nicotine or on any premises authorized to sell tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine products or
liquid nicotine are being sold or given to persons under twenty one (21) years
of age if the "sting operation" or enforcement action is approved by, conducted
by, or conducted on behalf of the Department of State Police, the County
Sheriff, a Municipal Police Department, the Department of Revenue, the
Department of Public Health, or a local Health Department.
      2.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this subsection C is
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined according to the Fines and
Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, plus costs
associated with the City's cost of prosecution, including attorney fees.
   D.   Possession Of Tobacco Products, Electronic Cigarettes And Their
Components, Alternative Nicotine Products Or Liquid Nicotine:
      1.   Sting Operation For Possession: No person under eighteen (18) years
of age shall possess any tobacco product in any of its forms, any electronic
cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine products or liquid
nicotine. It is not a violation of this subsection D for a person under
eighteen (18) years of age to possess a tobacco product, electronic cigarettes
or their components, alternative nicotine products or liquid nicotine if the
person under the age of eighteen (18) possesses or is given the tobacco
product, electronic cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine
products or liquid nicotine in any of its forms from a retail seller of tobacco
products, electronic cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine
products or liquid nicotine or an employee of the retail seller pursuant to a
plan or action to investigate, patrol or otherwise conduct a “sting operation”
or enforcement action against a retail seller of tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine products or liquid
nicotine or a person employed by the retail seller of tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine products or
liquid nicotine or on any premises authorized to sell tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes or their components, alternative nicotine products or
liquid nicotine are being sold or given to persons under eighteen (18) years of
age if the "sting operation" or enforcement action is approved by, conducted
by, or conducted on behalf of the Department of State Police, the County
Sheriff, a Municipal Police Department, the Department of Revenue, the
Department of Public Health, or a local Health Department.
      2.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this subsection D is
guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined according to the Fines and
Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, plus costs
associated with the City's cost of prosecution, including attorney fees.
   E.   Tobacco Accessories, Smoking Herbs, Tobacco Products, Electronic
Cigarettes, Alternative Nicotine Products Or Liquid Nicotine:
      1.   Sale To Minors Prohibited: No person shall knowingly sell, barter,
exchange, deliver or give away or cause or permit or procure to be sold,
bartered, exchanged, delivered or given away tobacco accessories, or smoking
herbs, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or components, alternative
nicotine products or liquid nicotine to any person under twenty one (21) years
of age.
      2.   Sale Of Bidi Cigarettes: No person shall knowingly sell, barter,
exchange, deliver or give away a bidi cigarette to another person, nor shall a
person cause or permit or procure a bidi cigarette to be sold, bartered,
exchanged, delivered or given away to another person.
      3.   Sale Of Cigarette Paper: No person shall knowingly offer, sell,
barter, exchange, deliver or give away cigarette paper or cause, permit or
procure cigarette paper to be sold, offered, bartered, exchanged, delivered or
given away except from premises or an establishment where other tobacco
products are sold.
      4.   Use Of Identification Cards: No person in the furtherance or
facilitation of obtaining tobacco accessories, smoking herbs, tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products and liquid nicotine shall
display or use a false or forged identification card or transfer, alter or
deface an identification card.
      5.   Warning To Minors:
         a.   Any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation operating a
place of business where tobacco accessories, smoking herbs, tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes, alternative nicotine products or liquid nicotine are
sold or offered for sale shall post in a conspicuous place upon the premises a
sign which there shall be imprinted the following statement:
SALE OF TOBACCO ACCESSORIES, SMOKING HERBS, ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES, ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE PRODUCTS AND LIQUID NICOTINE TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE OR THE
MISREPRESENTATION OF AGE TO PROCURE SUCH A SALE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
         b.   The sign shall be printed on a white card in red letters at least
one-half inch (1/2") in height.
      6.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this subsection E shall be subject to license suspension or revocation,
alteration of hours on a temporary or permanent basis, and fines according to
the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, for
each offense committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues, plus reimbursement of legal fees incurred by the City in the
prosecution of violations of this subsection E against the licensee.
   F.   Availability: No person, firm or corporation shall sell or distribute
individual cigarettes or samples of cigarettes except in its original
packaging, and no package shall contain less than twenty (20) cigarettes.
Tobacco products, electronic cigarettes and their components, alternative
nicotine products and liquid nicotine shall be sold only in direct, face to
face exchange. Self-service displays or vending machines shall not be
permitted.
   G.   Enforcement Of School District Personnel: The following appointed
officials of any public school shall have the authority to sign all complaints
and charge all violators of this section that take place on school property:
principal, assistant principal and dean of students.
(Ord. 19-1198, 7-15-2019; amd. Ord. 19-1208, 10-7-2019; Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
6-5A-32: NUISANCE GATHERINGS:
   A.   Definitions: Terms used in this section are defined as follows:
   NUISANCE GATHERING: An assembly, gathering, meeting, or party of three (3)
or more persons on any property located in the City where one (1) or more
persons committed, is committing, or intends to commit one (1) or more of the
following offenses under the City’s Municipal Code:
      1.   Section
6-5A-1: Compounding A Crime
      2.   Section
6-5A-2: Accountability For Conduct Of Another
      3.   Section
6-5A-4: Disorderly Conduct
      4.   Section
6-5A-5: Disturbing Religious Worship
      5.   Section
6-5A-6: Noise
      6.   Section
6-5A-8: Loitering
      7.   Section
6-5A-9: Assault
      8.   Section
6-5A-10: Battery
      9.   Section
6-5A-11: Reckless Conduct
      10.   Section
6-5A-12: Resisting Or Obstructing Peace Officer
      11.   Section
6-5A-13: Refusing To Aid Officer
      12.   Section
6-5A-15: Criminal Trespass To Vehicles
      13.   Section
6-5A-16: Criminal Trespass To Land
      14.   Section
6-5A-17: Taking Materials From Public Property
      15.   Section
6-5A-20: Obstructing Passageways
      16.   Section
6-5A-21: Littering
      17.   Section
6-5A-22: Retail Theft
      18.   Section
6-5A-23: Deceptive Practices
      19.   Section
6-5A-24: Theft
      20.   Section
6-5A-25: Unlawful Restraint
      21.   Section
6-5A-26: Gambling
      22.   Section
6-5A-27: Graffiti And Damage To Property
      23.   Section
6-5A-28: Theft, Defacement, Destruction, Alteration Or Removal Of Government
Signs
      24.   Section
6-5A-29: Street Gang Activity
      25.   Section
6-5A-30: Alcoholic Beverages
      26.   Section
6-5A-31: Tobacco Accessories And Use Regulations
      27.   Section
6-8-2: Permit Required (Parades, Processions, Public Gatherings)
   B.   Declaration Of Nuisance: A Nuisance Gathering shall be a public
nuisance. No person including, but not limited to, an owner, occupant, tenant,
or other person who has lawful possession or possessory control, individually
or jointly with others, of any property shall knowingly, negligently, or
recklessly allow a Nuisance Gathering on their property or public property.
   C.   Order To Cease And Disperse: A Nuisance Gathering shall cease upon the
order of a police officer, and all persons not residing at the site of the
Nuisance Gathering shall disperse immediately. No person shall knowingly or
willfully fail or refuse to obey such an order.
   D.   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section or who
fails to perform an act required by this section shall be fined according to
the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, plus
costs associated with the City’s cost of prosecution, including attorney fees,
and the City’s costs to abate the Nuisance Gathering.
(Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
ARTICLE B: IMMORALITY
Section
6-5B-1: Public Indecency
6-5B-2: Obscene Literature, Pictures, Performances
6-5B-1: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
No person shall commit an act of public indecency in a public place. Public
indecency shall consist of any of the following acts:
   A.   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct as defined in the
Criminal Code.
   B.   An exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy the
sexual desire of the person.
(1987 Code § 14-45)
6-5B-2: OBSCENE LITERATURE, PICTURES, PERFORMANCES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, deliver, offer for sale,
distribute, publish, print, exhibit or possess with intent to distribute, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
any obscene writing, picture, moving picture, record or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene, or to present or to direct an obscene play or other
performance or to perform an obscene act or otherwise present an obscene
exhibition or to advertise or otherwise promote obscene material.
   B.   For the purpose of this section, a thing shall be deemed to be obscene
if the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find
that the work taken as a whole appeals to a prurient interest, and the work
depicts or describes patently offensive representations or descriptions of nude
persons, ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted sexual conduct, whether
actual or simulated, or patently offensive representations or descriptions of
masturbation, excretory functions, and lewd exhibition of the human genitals.
The work, taken as a whole, must lack serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
   C.   It shall be an affirmative defense to a charge of disseminating
material in violation of this section that the dissemination:
      1.   Was in the privacy of the home, not for gain, and was made to
personal associates other than children under eighteen (18) years of age;
      2.   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material;
      3.   Was made by a parent to the parent's child or children.
(1987 Code § 14-54)
ARTICLE C: WEAPONS
Section:
6-5C-1: Definitions
6-5C-2: Concealing Or Displaying Weapons
6-5C-3: Discharge Of Firearms
6-5C-4: Display And Sale Of Specified Weapons
6-5C-5: Penalty; Restitution
6-5C-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AMMUNITIONS: Any self-contained cartridge or shotgun shell, by whatever name
known, which is designed to be used or adaptable to use in a firearm, except as
provided in the definition of firearm ammunition contained in 430 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/1.1.
FIREARM: Any device, by whatever name known, which is designed to expel a
projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion of gas or
escape of gas, as defined in 430 Illinois Compiled Statutes 65/1.1, and any bow
and arrow, including, but not limited to a longbow, recurve bow, compound bow,
cross bow or other similar device.
FIREARMS DEALER: Any person or business engaged in the business of selling or
renting firearms and/or ammunition who possesses a valid Federal and/or State
license.
SECURITY CABLING: A metal cabling system designed to be securely anchored to a
wall or floor and strung through the triggering guards or firing chambers of a
firearm so that they cannot be removed from the display table.
(Ord. 18-1161, 2-5-2018)
6-5C-2: CONCEALING OR DISPLAYING WEAPONS:
Unless expressly authorized by law, no person shall wear under their clothing,
or conceal about their person, or display in a threatening like manner, any
dangerous or deadly weapon including, but not limited to any pistol, revolver,
long gun, sling shot, knuckles, any bowie or similar knife, or any knife with a
switchblade device whereby the blade or blades can be opened by a button,
pressure on the handle or other mechanical contrivance.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
6-5C-3: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
No person shall discharge any firearm in the City except sworn police officers
acting in the line of duty or during training authorized by the Chief of Police
or their designee. Events or programs sponsored or approved by the City may be
exempted from this section under the authorization and approval of the Chief of
Police or their designee.
(Ord. 18-1161, 2-5-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
6-5C-4: DISPLAY AND SALE OF SPECIFIED WEAPONS:
No pawnbroker, secondhand dealer or other person engaged in business in the
City shall display or place on exhibition in any show window or other window
facing upon any street, any pistol, revolver or other firearm, with a barrel
less than twelve inches (12") in length, or any brass or metal knuckles, or any
club loaded with lead or other weight, or any blackjack or billy club. Firearm
dealers in the City may sell firearms and ammunition so long as the following
conditions are met:
   A.   Permits, Licenses Required: All required permit and licensing by City,
State and Federal government is met.
   B.   Customers Permitted To Examine: Only customers who have a valid State
issued firearm owners identification card or permitted by law to possess
firearms shall be permitted to physically examine firearms and/or ammunition.
   C.   Employee Present: An employee shall be present at all times when a
customer is physically examining firearms and/or ammunition.
   D.   Weapons Incapable Of Firing: Weapons displayed for sale or rent shall
be incapable of firing.
   E.   Storing During Nonbusiness Hours: During nonbusiness hours weapons
shall be stored in a secured manner in one of the following ways:
      1.   Use of a safe.
      2.   Use of a vault.
      3.   Use of a security box or cabinet (security boxes/cabinets must be
capable of locking and if they are constructed partially of glass, the glass
must be shatter resistant and/or the box/cabinet should have its own alarm
feature).
      4.   Use of security cabling.
      5.   Through the implementation of building improvements that would
enhance the overall building security to meet or exceed the level of a stand
alone safe or vault.
   F.   Inspection: All businesses authorized in the sale of firearms shall
allow the City access to inspect both display and storage procedures to ensure
compliance. Inspections shall occur at least once per calendar year by City
staff.
(Ord. 18-1161, 2-5-2018)
6-5C-5: PENALTY; RESTITUTION:
Any person violating this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and
Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, for each offense
and be responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including attorney fees,
incurred by the City. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense. Restitution by the violator shall also be made for any
property damaged or destroyed or to any person injured.
(Ord. 18-1161, 2-5-2018; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
ARTICLE D: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA; POSSESSION OF CANNABIS
Section
6-5D-1: Drug Paraphernalia
6-5D-2: Unlawful Possession Of Cannabis
6-5D-3: Persons Responsible For Unlawful Activities On Premises
6-5D-1: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Drug Paraphernalia Defined: For purposes of this section, drug
paraphernalia is defined as in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 600/2(d), as
amended, and includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      2.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled
substance;
      3.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;
      4.   Testing equipment used, intended for use or signed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength effectiveness or purity of controlled
substances;
      5.   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      6.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      7.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
      8.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used, intended
for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled
substances;
      9.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for
use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      10.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, or intended
for use, in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body;
      11.   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing, controlled substances into the human body,
such as:
         a.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal
bowls;
         b.   Water pipes;
         c.   Carburization tubes and devices;
         d.   Smoking and carburization masks;
         e.   Chamber pipes;
         f.   Carburetor pipes;
         g.   Electric pipes;
         h.   Air-driven pipes;
         i.   Chillums; and
         j.   Ice pipes or chillers.
   B.   Determining If Drug Paraphernalia: In determining whether an object is
drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to
all other logically relevant factors, the following:
      1.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      2.   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled
substances;
      3.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this section;
      4.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      5.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;
      6.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or
should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
this section; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object,
as to a direct violation of this section, shall not prevent a finding that the
object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;
      7.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      8.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      9.   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      10.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      11.   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      12.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      13.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community; and
      14.   Expert testimony concerning its “use”.
   C.   Possession Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly
possess any drug paraphernalia as it relates to controlled substances, within
the corporate limits of the City.
   D.   Medical Use Of Cannabis: Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be
unlawful for any individual to possess drug paraphernalia consistent with the
Recreational Use of Cannabis Law Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot
Program Act (410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.), as amended, and the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act (Act).
   E.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(Ord. 19-1205, 10-7-2019; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
6-5D-2: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF CANNABIS:
   A.   Definitions: The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CANNABIS: Hashish and other substances which are identified as including any
parts of the plant Cannabis Sativa and including derivatives or subspecies,
such as indica, of all strains of cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds
thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and any compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its
seeds, or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and all other naturally
produced cannabinol derivatives, whether produced directly or indirectly by
extraction; however, CANNABIS does not include the mature stalks of such plant,
fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant,
any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of
such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake,
or sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. CANNABIS
does not include industrial hemp as defined and authorized under the Industrial
Hemp Act. CANNABIS also means concentrate and cannabis-infused products.
CANNABIS CONTAINER: A sealed, traceable, container, or package used for the
purpose of containment of cannabis or a cannabis-infused product during
transportation.
CANNABIS-INFUSED PRODUCT: A beverage, food, oil, ointment, tincture, topical
formulation, or another product containing cannabis that is not intended to be
smoked.
CONSUMPTION: The inhalation, absorption or ingestion of CANNABIS or CANNABIS
INFUSED PRODUCTS.
PUBLIC PLACE: Any place where a person could reasonably be expected to be
observed by others, including all parts of buildings owned in whole or part, or
leased, by the State, the City, or a unit of local government and all areas in
a park, recreation area, wildlife area, or playground owned in whole or in
part, leased, or managed by the State, the City, or a unit of local government.
PUBLIC PLACE does not include a private residence unless the private residence
is used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar social
service care on the premises.
(1987 Code § 14-76)
   B.   Unlawful Possession Of Cannabis: The following constitutes the offense
of unlawful possession of cannabis by any person within the City:
      1.   Purchase, possession, consumption, or use of cannabis under the age
of twenty one (21), except as authorized by the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Program Act or by the Community College Cannabis Vocational Pilot
Program.
      2.   Any parent or guardian to knowingly authorize or permit his or her
residence, any other private property under his or her control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under his or her control to be unlawfully used for
consumption of cannabis by persons under the age of twenty one (21).
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   C.   Unlawful Consumption: Unlawful consumption cannabis in or about any
public place.
   D.   Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating
any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and
Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible
for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each
day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 14-76) (Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. MC-19-1214, 12-16-2019;
Ord. 20-11, 3-16- 2020; Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
6-5D-3: PERSONS RESPONSIBLE FOR UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES ON PREMISES:
   A.   Scope: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons who are the
owners or occupants of any premises to allow, initiate or maintain any
gathering on that premises in which tenants, invitees, visitors or trespassers
engage in any unlawful activity. Unlawful activity shall include, but not be
limited to, violations of any sections of this article. A person will be deemed
to have permitted the gathering if that person is on the premises while the
unlawful activity is occurring and has not informed the police thereof. For
purposes of this section only, a gathering shall consist of two (2) or more
persons who are not occupants or owners of the premises.
   B.   Violation; Penalty; Restitution: Any person violating this section
shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter
1: Fines and Penalties for each offense and be responsible for the City's cost
of prosecution, including attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the
violator shall also be made to any property damaged or destroyed or person
injured.
(1987 Code § 14-77) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
ARTICLE E: MINORS
Section
6-5E-1: Parental Responsibility
6-5E-2: Curfew
6-5E-3: Truancy
6-5E-1: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Permitting Minor To Violate: It shall be unlawful for a parent or legal
guardian of an unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian
to knowingly allow or permit said minor to commit any violation of a City
ordinance or State Statute concerning vandalism, battery, fireworks, obscene
conduct, trespass, possession of weapons or alcoholic liquor, curfew,
disorderly street gang conduct, suspicious activity, or any other offense or
wilful or malicious acts to persons or property.
   B.   Restitution: The parent or guardian responsible for the wilful or
malicious acts of the minor child pursuant to this section, shall make full
restitution to the injured or damaged party or parties within ten (10) days
after notification of liability. Parents and guardians shall be responsible
individually and jointly.
(1987 Code § 14-34)
   C.   Penalty: Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be fined
according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and
Penalties for each offense and be responsible for the City's cost of
prosecution, including attorney fees, incurred by the City. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
shall preclude such additional civil remedies available to the person whose
property has been damaged or destroyed.
(1987 Code § 14-34) (amd. 2019 Code; Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
6-5E-2: CURFEW:
   A.   Definitions: The following definitions are applicable to this section:
   EMERGENCY: An unforeseen combination of circumstances for the resulting
state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit
to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of
amusement or entertainment.
   GUARDIAN: A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of
a minor, or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
   MINOR: A person less than seventeen (17) years of age.
   OPERATOR: Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
   PARENT: A person who is:
      1.   A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person;
or
      2.   At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or
guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
   REMAIN: To linger or stay, or fail to leave premises when requested to do so
by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the
premises.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY: Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss
or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
   B.   Curfew: Except as provided in subsection C of this section, it is
unlawful for any person less than seventeen (17) years of age to be present or
upon any public road, street, alley or park, or other land used for public
purposes, or in any public place of business or amusement in the City, at the
following times:
      1.   Between one minute after twelve o’clock (12:01) A.M. and six o’clock
(6:00) A.M. on Saturday;
      2.   Between one minute after twelve o’clock (12:01) A.M. and six o’clock
(6:00) A.M. on Sunday; and
      3.   Between eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday,
inclusive, and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   C.   Exceptions: The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the
operation of the curfew:
(1987 Code § 14-11)
      1.   At any time when accompanied by their parent, guardian or other
adult person responsible for or having the legal care, custody and control of
the individual, or an authorized adult;
      2.   If participating in, going to, or returning from, without any detour
or stop:
         a.   An emergency as defined in subsection A of this section;
         b.   Lawful employment;
         c.   Attending an official school, religious or other social or
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by a unit of
government, civic organization, or other similar entity that takes
responsibility for the attendees;
         d.   An errand at the direction of a parent or guardian;
         e.   An activity involving the exercise of First Amendment Rights
protected by the United States Constitution (or those similar rights protected
by the State of Illinois Constitution), such as free exercise of religion,
freedom of speech and the right of assembly.
      3.   Is married or had been married or is an emancipated minor under the
Emancipation of Mature Minors Act, as amended.
      4.   If in a motor vehicle when the travel begins and ends outside the
corporate limits of the City.
   D.   Establishments: The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment
commits an offense if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours, or fails to promptly notify
the Police Department that a minor is present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refuses to leave.
   E.   Enforcement: Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a
police officer shall ask the suspected offender’s age and reason for being in
the public place or on the premises. The police officer shall not issue a
citation or make an arrest under this section unless the police officer
reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any
response and other circumstances, no exception in this section applies.
   F.   Penalty; Restitution: Any person violating this section shall be fined
according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and
Penalties for each offense and be responsible for the City's cost of
prosecution, including attorney fees incurred by the City. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Restitution by the
violator shall also be made for any property damaged or destroyed or person
injured.
(1987 Code § 14-11) (amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
6-5E-3: TRUANCY:
   A.   Definitions:
   LEGAL GUARDIAN: Any foster parent, or any person appointed guardian, or
otherwise awarded custody of a minor by a court of law in this State, or any
person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor under the Juvenile Court
Act (705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.), but shall not include any person appointed
guardian only to the estate of a minor.
   PARENT: The father or mother of a minor child, whether by birth or adoption.
In the event that the minors’ parents are divorced or separated within the
meaning of the Illinois Marriage and Dissolution of Marriage Act (750 ILCS 5/
101 et seq.), the parent having lawful physical custody of the minor shall be
deemed to be the parent authorized to give consent as required by this section.
   VALID CAUSE: For absence shall be illness, observance of a religious
holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency, and shall include
such other situations beyond the control of the student as determined by the
Board of Education in each district, or such other circumstances which cause
reasonable concern to the parent for the safety or health of the student.
(1987 Code § 14-78)
   B.   Truancy Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person who is required
by law to attend school and who is subject to the compulsory attendance
requirements of the Illinois School Code and enrolled in grades 1 through 12 in
a public, private (including a home school), or parochial school to absent
themselves from attendance at school during the hours in which they are
enrolled without valid cause or the permission of a parent, legal guardian, or
the school in which they are enrolled. Any person who shall so absent
themselves shall be guilty of the offense of truancy and shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in this section.
   C.   Exemptions: In addition to being absent for valid cause, as defined in
subsection A of this section, a minor shall not be considered truant where he
or she is:
      1.   Accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or school official;
      2.   Engaged in approved school related activities;
      3.   Engaged in lawful employment; provided, that the School Board of the
public school district in which that child resides has recommended the
employment and has certified the facts concerning such employment;
      4.   Physically or mentally unable to attend school due to a disability
and such disability has been certified in accordance with section 26-1(2) of
the Illinois School Code; or
      5.   Subject to any other defense and/or exception set forth in the
Illinois School Code (105 ILCS 5/1-1 et seq.) for compulsory attendance or
enrollment in school.
(1987 Code § 14-80)
   D.   Parental Responsibility: It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal
guardian or other person to permit a person in their custody or control to
commit the offense of truancy.
   E.   Contributing To Delinquency: It shall be unlawful for any person
eighteen (18) years of age or older to perform any act of commission or
omission which encourages or contributes to the truancy of any person.
(1987 Code § 14-82)
   F.   Penalty: A truant who is thirteen (13) years of age or older, or their
parent(s), guardian(s) or legal custodian(s), but not both, who violate the
provisions of this section is subject to a fine according to the Fines and
Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties. The parent(s),
guardian(s) or legal custodian(s) of a truant who is under thirteen (13) years
of age is subject to a fine according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title
15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties if the minor, or their parent(s), guardian
(s) or legal custodian(s), violate the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 6: FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
6-6-1: Fireworks Defined
6-6-2: License Required For Discharge
6-6-3: Public Displays
6-6-4: Sale, Storage And Possession Prohibited
6-6-5: Exemption For Signaling Devices
6-6-1: FIREWORKS DEFINED:
The term fireworks shall mean and include any explosive composition, or any
substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by
explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank
cartridges and toy cannons, in which explosives are used, the type of balloons
which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes,
skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, or other fireworks of like construction and
any fireworks containing any explosive compound, or any tablets or other device
containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances
producing visual effect; provided, however, that the term fireworks shall not
include snake or glow worm pellets; smoke devices; trick noisemakers known as
“party poppers”, “booby traps”, “snappers”, “trick matches”, “cigarette loads”
and “auto burglar alarms”; sparklers; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or
other devices in which paper or plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths
(0.25) grains or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so
constructed that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for
the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than
twenty hundredths (0.20) grains of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which
shall be permitted at all times.
(1987 Code § 10-32)
6-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED FOR DISCHARGE:
It shall be unlawful to discharge or set off any squib, rocket, cracker,
torpedo, grenade, gun, revolver, pistol, cap or cartridge, or other combustible
firecrackers or fireworks of any kind, without first obtaining a permit
therefor as is provided herein.
(1987 Code § 10-33)
6-6-3: PUBLIC DISPLAYS:
The public exhibition of fireworks or pyrotechnics shall not be given unless a
permit therefor shall be first secured from the City Council and all such
public displays and exhibitions shall be under the supervision of a competent
person as approved by the City Council. The conduct of such exhibition shall be
superintended by the Chief of Police or a member of the Police Department
assigned by the Chief of Police to this duty.
(1987 Code § 10-34)
6-6-4: SALE, STORAGE AND POSSESSION PROHIBITED:
No person shall store, exhibit or have in their possession with intent to give
away, or sell, or offer for sale within the City, any squib, rocket, cracker,
torpedo, grenade or other combustible firecracker or fireworks of any kind, or
similar fireworks device.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
6-6-5: EXEMPTION FOR SIGNALING DEVICES:
The prohibition against the use and sale of fireworks and explosives, as
defined herein, shall not apply to the sale, storage or use of railroad track
torpedoes, or other signaling devices used by railroads or by other persons in
the interest of public safety.
(1987 Code § 10-36)
CHAPTER 7: OPEN FIRES
Section
6-7-1: Scope; Applicability
6-7-2: Proximity To Structures, Flammables
6-7-3: Prohibited Burning
6-7-4: Outdoor Cooking
6-7-5: Recreational Burning
6-7-6: Controlled Burning
6-7-1: SCOPE; APPLICABILITY:
It shall be unlawful to light or maintain any fire in the City, except in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The term “fire”, as used in
this chapter, shall not be construed to mean or include a fire in a furnace,
stove, boiler or fireplace.
(1987 Code § 10-1)
6-7-2: PROXIMITY TO STRUCTURES, FLAMMABLES:
Notwithstanding any provision herein, it shall be unlawful to light or maintain
any fire in the City so close to any building or structure, or any flammable
material other than that to be burned so as to cause a fire hazard.
(1987 Code § 10-2)
6-7-3: PROHIBITED BURNING:
The open burning of any materials or substances is hereby prohibited within the
City limits, except for a fire kindled for outdoor cooking, recreational
burning and controlled burning for prairie or forest ecology management
purposes, subject to the conditions and limitations contained herein.
(1987 Code § 10-3)
6-7-4: OUTDOOR COOKING:
A fire kindled for outdoor cooking shall be allowed within the City limits,
provided such fire is contained in a permanent fireplace, portable grill or
other appliance designed for the preparation of food and used in the manner it
was intended by its manufacturer.
(1987 Code § 10-4)
6-7-5: RECREATIONAL BURNING:
Recreational burning shall be permitted within the City limits, subject to the
conditions and limitations contained herein.
   A.   Defined: Recreational burning shall be defined as follows:
      1.   A fire within an enclosed fireplace designed for outdoor use.
      2.   A bonfire used for ceremonial purposes and conducted by responsible
individuals or organizations, but only upon special permit issued by the City.
Unless otherwise approved by the City, a bonfire shall not exceed five feet by
five feet (5' x 5') in size, shall not burn longer than three (3) hours, and
shall not be closer than fifty feet (50') from any structure. Adequate
provision shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within fifty feet
(50') of any structure.
   B.   Conditions: Recreational burning shall be subject to the following
conditions:
      1.   Private Property: Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council,
recreational fires shall occur on private property and at no time shall a
person start or maintain any fire in any street, sidewalk, park or public
right-of-way.
      2.   Permanent Outdoor Fire Pits: Each permanent outdoor fire pit shall
be dug into the ground in a manner that will prevent the burn materials from
falling out of the pit. The above grade portion of the pit shall be constructed
of stone, masonry, metal or other similar noncombustible materials. The bottom
of the pit shall be below grade and shall be comprised of gravel, stone or
dirt. The total open area of the pit shall be no more than forty eight inches
(48") across and no more than twenty four inches (24") in depth from the bottom
of the pit to the top of the above grade materials. The pit shall be surrounded
by a noncombustible barrier.
      3.   Portable Fireplaces: Portable fireplaces shall be located on a
noncombustible, hard, level surface when in use, such as, but not limited to,
concrete, paver bricks or asphalt.
      4.   Attendance: A recreational fire shall be attended at all times by an
adult.
      5.   Extinguishing Equipment: A garden hose connected to a water supply
or other fire extinguishing equipment shall be readily available for use.
      6.   Seasoned Dry Firewood: Only seasoned dry firewood shall be used for
a recreational fire, provided, however, a small amount of paper and/or brush
may be used to start the fire as kindling.
      7.   Extinguish When Unattended: The fire shall be extinguished when
unattended.
      8.   Control Of Smoke: Any smoke from a recreational fire shall not flow
into an adjacent or nearby building.
      9.   Nuisances: If at any time, the fire is found to be a nuisance to
persons on neighboring properties, the fire shall be immediately extinguished.
(Ord. 18-1175, 7-10-2018)
6-7-6: CONTROLLED BURNING:
Controlled burning of areas within the City for prairie or forest ecology
management shall be allowed; provided, that all necessary permits from the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency and any other agency charged with such
review are properly secured and submitted to the City at least forty eight (48)
hours prior to the date of such burning.
(1987 Code § 10-6)
CHAPTER 8: PARADES, PROCESSIONS, PUBLIC GATHERINGS
Section
6-8-1: Definitions
6-8-2: Permit Required
6-8-3: Exceptions
6-8-4: Application For Permit
6-8-5: Filing Period For Application
6-8-6: Contents Of Application
6-8-7: Late Applications
6-8-8: Permits From Other Jurisdictions
6-8-9: Time For Action On Application; Notice Of Denial
6-8-10: Standards For Permit Issuance
6-8-11: Appeal From Denial
6-8-12: Alternative Permits
6-8-13: Contents Of Permit
6-8-14: Compliance Required
6-8-15: Duty To Carry Permit
6-8-16: Interference
6-8-17: Driving Through Parades
6-8-18: Parking On Parade Route
6-8-19: Penalty
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   CAR MEETUPS: Activities that involve the unauthorized gathering of people
and their vehicles upon any private property without permission or upon any
public street (including street parking), park, municipal parking lot, or other
public place in the City, including, but not limited to, the deliberate
blocking of roads and intersections by groups of vehicles and pedestrians.
   CHIEF OF POLICE: The Chief of Police of the City.
   EVENT: A car meetup or parade, as those terms are defined herein.
   PARADE: Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession
of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other
public place in the City.
   PERMIT: A permit as required by this chapter for any event.
(1987 Code § 15-1; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any event, unless
a permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of Police or designee.
(1987 Code § 15-2; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-3: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Funeral processions;
   B.   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities;
   C.   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
(1987 Code § 15-3)
6-8-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
A person seeking issuance of a permit shall file an application with the Chief
of Police or designee on forms provided by such officer.
(1987 Code § 15-4; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-5: FILING PERIOD FOR APPLICATION:
An application for a permit shall be filed with the Chief of Police or designee
not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days before the date on
which it is proposed to conduct the event.
(1987 Code § 15-5; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-6: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
The application for a permit shall set forth the following information:
   A.   Applicant: The name, address and telephone number of the person, or
organization seeking to conduct such event;
   B.   Organization: If the event is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf
of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the
headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads
of such organization shall be provided;
   C.   Chairperson Information: The name, address and telephone numbers of the
person who will be the event Chairperson and who will be responsible for its
conduct;
   D.   Date: The date when the event is to be conducted;
   E.   Map: A map indicating the location of the event, the route to be
traveled, the starting point and the termination point, as applicable;
   F.   Numbers: The approximate number of persons attending the event. For a
parade, include the number of animals and vehicles which will constitute such
parade and the type of animals and description of the vehicles;
   G.   Hours: The hours when such event will start and terminate;
   H.   Street Occupancy: A statement as to whether the event will occupy all
or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;
   I.   Assembly Areas: The location by streets of any assembly areas for such
event;
   J.   Time Of Assembly: The time at which units of the event will begin to
assemble at any such assembly area or areas;
   K.   Space Interval: The interval of space to be maintained between units of
a parade;
   L.   Other Person Than Applicant: If the event is designed to be held by,
and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for
such permit shall file with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from
the person proposing to hold the event, authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on their behalf;
   M.   Insurance Certificate: A certificate of insurance in the amount of one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) general liability and bodily injury, for each
occurrence, naming the City as additionally insured shall be provided;
   N.   Additional Information: Any additional information which the Chief of
Police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a
permit should issue.
(1987 Code § 15-6; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-7: LATE APPLICATIONS:
The Chief of Police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the
authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than thirty
(30) days before the date such event is proposed to be conducted.
(1987 Code § 15-7; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-8: PERMITS FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
In the event any State or other government agency permit shall be required to
conduct the event, it shall be the applicant’s responsibility to secure such
permit, and not the responsibility of the City.
(1987 Code § 15-8; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-9: TIME FOR ACTION ON APPLICATION; NOTICE OF DENIAL:
The Chief of Police or designee shall act upon the application for a permit
within ten (10) days after the filing thereof. If the Chief of Police or
designee disapproves the application, the Chief or designee shall mail to the
applicant, within fifteen (15) days after the date upon which the application
was filed, a notice of the Chief’s action, stating the reasons for the Chief’s
denial of the permit.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-10: STANDARDS FOR PERMIT ISSUANCE:
The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a
consideration of the application and from such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he finds that:
   A.   Traffic Movement: The conduct of the event will not substantially
interfere or interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic
contiguous to its route;
   B.   Police Protection: The conduct of the event will not require the
diversion of so great a number of police officers of the City to properly
police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent
normal police protection to the City;
   C.   Ambulance Service: The conduct of such event will not require the
diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance
service to portions of the City;
   D.   Concentration Of Persons, Animals, Vehicles: The concentration of
persons and vehicles (and for a parade, animals) at assembly points of the
event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection for, or
ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas;
   E.   Firefighting Equipment: The conduct of such event will not interfere
with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
   F.   Injuries, Disorderly Conduct: The conduct of the event is not
reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provide disorderly
conduct or create a disturbance;
   G.   Movement: For a parade, the parade is scheduled to move from its point
of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable
delays en route;
   H.   Advertising, Profit: The event is not to be held for the sole purpose
of advertising any product, goods or event and is not designed to be held
purely for private profit.
(1987 Code § 15-10; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-11: APPEAL FROM DENIAL:
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit to
the City Council. The appeal shall be taken prior to the next regular meeting
of the City Council, and the City Council shall act upon the appeal at its next
such regular meeting.
(1987 Code § 15-11; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-12: ALTERNATIVE PERMITS:
The Chief of Police, in denying an application for a permit, shall be empowered
to authorize the conduct of the event on a date, at a time, or over a route
different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an
alternate permit shall, within ten (10) days after notice of the action of the
Chief of Police, file a written notice of acceptance with the Chief of Police.
An alternate permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the
effect of a permit under, this chapter.
(1987 Code § 15-12; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-13: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
Each permit shall state the following information:
   A.   Starting time;
   B.   Minimum speed for a parade;
   C.   Maximum speed for a parade;
   D.   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
   E.   The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the
event;
   F.   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
   G.   The anticipated duration of the event, including the proposed
concluding time;
   H.   Such other information as the Chief of Police shall find necessary to
the enforcement of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 15-13; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-14: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
(1987 Code § 15-14; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-15: DUTY TO CARRY PERMIT:
The event Chairperson or other person heading or leading shall carry the event
permit upon their person during the conduct of the event.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-16: INTERFERENCE:
No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any
event or event assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or
used in a event.
(1987 Code § 15-16; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-17: DRIVING THROUGH PARADES:
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a
parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
(1987 Code § 15-17; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-18: PARKING ON PARADE ROUTE:
The Chief of Police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to
prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof
constituting a part of the route of parade. The Chief of Police shall post
signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave
unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for
parking on a street unposted in violation of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 15-18; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
6-8-19: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this section or who fails to perform an
act required by this section shall be fined according to the Fines and
Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, plus costs
associated with the City’s cost of prosecution, including attorney fees.
(Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
TITLE 7: MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1: TRAFFIC CODE, DEFINITIONS
Section
7-1-1: Vehicle Code Statutes Adopted
7-1-2: Definitions Of Words And Phrases
7-1-3: Display Of License Tag
7-1-1: VEHICLE CODE STATUTES ADOPTED:
Pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/20-204, the City hereby
adopts and incorporates by reference the following sections of the Illinois
Vehicle Code and subsequent amendments, as the Vehicle Code for the City. The
section numbers used in the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be identical to those
section numbers in the McHenry Vehicle Code:
5/1 et seq.  Title and definitions, excluding paragraph 1-100
5/6 et seq.  The Illinois Driver Licensing Law
5/11 et seq. Rules of the road
5/12 et seq. Equipment of vehicles
5/15 et seq. Size, weight, load and permits
5/16 et seq. Enforcement, penalties, and disposition of fines and forfeitures
5/20 et seq. Miscellaneous provisions, effect of act and repeal of named acts
25/1 et seq. Child Passenger Protection Act
Act 40       Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-1-2: DEFINITIONS OF WORDS AND PHRASES:
The following words and phrases when used in this title shall, for the purpose
of this title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter,
except when the context otherwise requires and except where another definition
set forth in another chapter of this title and applicable to that chapter or a
designated part thereof is applicable.
ABANDONED VEHICLE: A motor vehicle standing or parked on the public way which
vehicle is either: a) in such state of disrepair as to be incapable of being
driven in its present condition; or b) has not been moved or used for more than
seven (7) consecutive days and is apparently deserted.
ALLEY: A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of lots
or buildings and not used for general traffic circulation.
ANNUAL PERMIT: A permit issued to a single truck, truck-tractor power unit, or
piece of special mobile equipment which is valid for unlimited moves for a
period not to exceed one year from the date of issuance.
ARTERIAL STREET: Any U.S. or State numbered route, controlled access highway,
or other major radial or circumferential street or highway designated by local
authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part of a major arterial
system of streets or highways.
AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE: Emergency vehicles of Municipal departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by proper local
authorities; police vehicles; vehicles of the Fire Department and ambulances.
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride,
having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is more than sixteen inches (16")
in diameter.
BUS: Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for carrying more
than ten (10) passengers and used for the transportation of persons; and every
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation
of persons for compensation.
BUS STOP: A fixed area in the roadway parallel and adjacent to the curb to be
occupied exclusively by buses for layover in operating schedules or waiting for
passengers.
BUSINESS DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within any six hundred feet (600') along such highway there are buildings in
use for business or industrial purposes, including, but not limited to, hotels,
banks or office buildings, railroad stations and public buildings which occupy
at least three hundred feet (300') of frontage on one side or three hundred
feet (300') collectively on both sides of the highway.
CAMPER: A recreational motor vehicle of the second division converted or
equipped and primarily used for living quarters or for human habitation, rather
than for the transportation of freight, goods, wares and merchandise and not
used as a commercial vehicle.
CITY: The City of McHenry.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle operated for transportation of persons or
property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for
hire or not for hire, not including, however, a commuter van or a recreational
vehicle not being used commercially.
CONTROLLED ACCESS HIGHWAY: Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of
access to or from the same except at such points only, and in such manner, as
may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such
highway, street or roadway.
CROSSWALK:
   A.   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway;
   B.   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
CURB LOADING ZONE: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
DEALER: Every person engaged in the business of buying, selling or exchanging
vehicles and who has an established place of business for such purpose in this
City.
DRIVER: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
FOR HIRE: The operation of a vehicle for compensation and subject to Federal
regulation by the Interstate Commerce Commission or to State regulation by the
Illinois Commerce Commission.
GROSS WEIGHT: The weight of a vehicle whether operated singly or in combination
without load, plus the weight of the load thereon.
HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
HOUSE CAR: A recreational motor vehicle of the first division converted or
equipped and primarily used for living quarters or for human habitation, rather
than as a passenger car and not used as a commercial vehicle.
HOUSE TRAILER:
   A.   A recreational trailer or semitrailer equipped and used for living
quarters or for human habitation (temporarily or permanently) rather than for
the transportation of freight, goods, wares, and merchandise; or
   B.   A house trailer or a semitrailer which is used commercially
(temporarily or permanently), that is, for the advertising, sales, display or
promotion of merchandise or services, or for any other commercial purpose,
except the transportation of property for distribution by a private carrier.
INTERSECTION:
   A.   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two
(2) highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways joining at any
other angle may come in conflict.
   B.   Where a highway includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) or more feet
apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
   C.   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not constitute
an intersection.
LANED ROADWAY: A roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
LOCAL AUTHORITY: Every County, Municipal and other local board or body having
authority to enact laws relating to traffic under the Constitution and laws of
this State.
MERGING TRAFFIC: A maneuver executed by the drivers of vehicles or converging
roadways to permit entry into the junction thereof, wherein the driver of each
vehicle involved is required to adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position
so as to avoid a collision with any other vehicle.
MOTOR DRIVEN CYCLE: Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than one
hundred forty (140) cubic centimeter piston displacement, including motorized
pedalcycles.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is
propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not
operated upon rails. For this title, motor vehicles are divided into two (2)
divisions:
   First Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for the carrying of
not more than ten (10) persons.
   Second Division: Those motor vehicles which are designed for carrying more
than ten (10) persons, those designed or used for living quarters and those
motor vehicles which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo, and
those motor vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as motor
vehicles of the second division.
MOTORCYCLE: Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider and designed to travel on no more than three (3) wheels in contact with
the ground, but excluding a tractor.
MOTORIZED PEDALCYCLE: A bicycle type vehicle, which has tires with an overall
inflated diameter of nineteen inches (19") or more, with fully operative pedals
for propulsion by human power, equipped with a power drive system that
functions directly or automatically only and not requiring clutching or
shifting by the operator after the drive system is engaged, and a helper motor
with a cylinder capacity not exceeding fifty (50) cubic centimeter piston
displacement, which produces no more than 2.0 brake horsepower, and is capable
of propelling the vehicle at a maximum speed of no more than thirty (30) miles
per hour on level ground.
MULTI-PURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE: A passenger carrying vehicle which is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off road operation.
NONCOMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle.
NONDIVISIBLE: A vehicle and load will be considered nondivisible when further
separating or dismantling the vehicle or load:
   A.   Would require more than eight (8) work hours to dismantle using
appropriate equipment. The applicant has the burden of proof as to the number
of work hours required to dismantle the load.
   B.   Will compromise or destroy the intended use of the load only. A load
can be either permanently mounted or temporarily secured equipment. Any parts,
fluids or material necessary to the operation of only the power unit portion of
the vehicle shall be deemed nondivisible.
   C.   Would prohibit the vehicle from hauling one attachment that is
necessary to the operation of the load. To be considered nondivisible, the
attachment must be securely mounted to the load in the manner it is to be used
and not carried as a separate object on the hauling vehicle. It is the duty of
the applicant to declare such an attachment in the permit application.
NOT FOR HIRE: Operation of a commercial vehicle in furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise but not for hire.
OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD: Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this
City.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES: All signs, signals, markings and devices
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
ONE-WAY OR SINGLE TRIP PERMIT: One move from the point of origin to the point
of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the point
of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are valid for five
(5) consecutive days from the date of issuance unless otherwise directed by the
Police Department.
ONE-WAY STREET: A public way upon the roadway of which traffic is permitted to
travel in only one direction.
PARK OR PARKING: The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise
or passengers.
PARKING METER: A mechanical device located upon a public street or sidewalk in
a place regularly designed as a parking zone, as defined herein, which device
shall record a certain number of minutes by the use of a clock mechanism
determining the period of time for which parking privileges may be extended to
the person depositing a coin into said device.
PASSENGER CAR: A motor vehicle of the first division, including a multipurpose
passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than ten (10)
persons.
PEDESTRIAN: Any person afoot.
PERSON: Every natural person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation.
PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PERSON: Every natural person who has permanently lost
the use of a leg or both legs or an arm or both arms, or any combination
thereof, or any person who is so severely disabled as to be unable to move
without the aid of crutches or a wheelchair.
POLICE DEPARTMENT: The City of McHenry Police Department.
POLICE OFFICER: Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS: The place where any person transacts his principal
business, or where he makes up and approves his payroll, maintains a central
file of records and maintains his principal executive offices. In the event
that not all of these functions are performed in one place, then that place
where such person does in fact principally transact and control his business
affairs.
PRIVATE LIVING COACH: A recreational motor vehicle of the second division
equipped and primarily used for living quarters, human habitation or for mobile
living, rather than for the transportation of persons, with direct access to
the living quarters from the driver’s seat and not used as a commercial
vehicle.
PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY: Every way or place in private ownership and used for
vehicular travel by the owner, but not by other persons.
QUARTERLY PERMIT: A permit issued to a single truck, truck-tractor power unit,
or piece of special mobile equipment which is valid for unlimited moves for a
period not to exceed three (3) months from the date of issuance.
RAILROAD: A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNALS: Any sign, signal or device other than an official
traffic control device erected in accordance with the laws governing same and
intended to give notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a
railroad train.
RAILROAD TRAIN: A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars
coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Every vehicle originally designed or permanently
converted and primarily used for living quarters or for human habitation and
not used as a commercial vehicle, including any house car, house trailer,
camper or private living coach.
REGISTERED WEIGHT: Registration weight paid to the Illinois Secretary of State
or the state in which the vehicle is registered.
RESIDENCE DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a Business District when the property on such highway for a distance
of three hundred feet (300') or more is in the main improved with residence or
residences and buildings in use for business.
RESIDENT:
   A.   Every natural person who resides in this City shall be deemed a
resident of the City.
   B.   In the case of a firm, copartnership, association or corporation, if
the principal place of business of such firm, copartnership, association or
corporation is located in the City of McHenry, Illinois, then such firm,
copartnership, association or corporation shall be deemed a resident of the
City of McHenry, Illinois.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision unless one grants precedence to the other.
ROADWAY: That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein
shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways
collectively.
ROUND TRIP MOVEMENT: Two (2) trips over the same route in opposite directions.
Round trip permits are valid for ten (10) consecutive days from the date of
issuance.
SCHOOL BUS:
   A.   Every motor vehicle, except as provided in subsection B of this
definition, owned or operated by or for any of the following entities for the
transportation of persons regularly enrolled in any such entity as students in
grade 12 or below in connection with any activity of the entity: a school
operated by a religious institution or a public or private nursery, primary or
secondary school.
   B.   This definition does not include the following: 1) a bus operated by a
public utility, Municipal corporation or common carrier authorized to conduct
local or interurban transportation or passengers when the bus is on a regularly
scheduled route for the transportation of other fare paying passengers or
furnishing charter service for the transportation of groups on field trips or
other special trips or in connection with special events or for shuttle service
between attendance centers or other educational facilities and not over a
regular or customary school bus route; 2) a motor vehicle of the first
division.
SEMITRAILER: Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load
rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines
of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by pedestrians.
SITUS OR BASE OF VEHICLE: The place where a vehicle is principally garaged, or
from whence it is principally dispatched, or where the movements of such
vehicle usually originate.
STAND OR STANDING: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers.
STOP: When required, means complete cessation from movement.
STOP OR STOPPING: Any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied
or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or
signal.
STREET: The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
TAXICAB STAND: A fixed area in the roadway alongside and parallel to the curb
set aside for taxicabs to stand or wait for passengers.
THROUGH HIGHWAY: Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is
given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield right-of-way to
vehicles on such through highway in obedience to either stop sign or a yield
sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this title.
TRAFFIC: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for purposes of
travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL: Any official traffic control device, whether manually,
electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed
to stop and permitted to proceed.
TRUCK: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for transportation of
property.
TRUCK-TRACTOR: Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
VEHICLE: Every device, in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be
transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power,
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks and snowmobiles. For
this title, vehicles are divided into the following divisions:
   First Division: Those vehicles which are designed for the carrying of not
more than ten (10) persons.
   Second Division: Those vehicles which are designed for carrying more than
ten (10) persons, those designed or used for living quarters and those vehicles
which are designed for pulling or carrying property, freight or cargo, those
vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of
the second division, and those vehicles of the first division used and
registered as school buses.
YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY: When required by an official sign, the act of granting the
privilege of the immediate use of the intersection roadway to traffic within
the intersection and to vehicles approaching from the right or left, but when
the roadway is clear may proceed into the intersection.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-1-3: DISPLAY OF LICENSE TAG:
The City license tag shall be placed and positioned to be clearly visible and
maintained in a clearly legible condition and shall be placed on the front
windshield in the lower right hand corner farthest removed from the driver’s
position approximately one inch (1") from the right and lower edge of said
windshield, except application of the metal tag issued to motorcycles, or
motorized pedalcycles shall be made in a permanent manner to the rear license
plate of such motorcycle or motorized pedalcycle so as not to obstruct any part
of the number of such license plate.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
CHAPTER 2: GENERAL REGULATIONS
Section
7-2-1: Skateboards
7-2-2: Snowmobiles Prohibited In City Park Property
7-2-3: Motorized Recreational Devices
7-2-4: Compression/Release Engine Brake Use
7-2-5: Operation Of Non-Highway Vehicles On City Streets
7-2-1: SKATEBOARDS:
   A.   Prohibited In Commercial Zoning Districts:
      1.   No person shall ride a skateboard upon any sidewalk or highway
located within any Commercial Zoning District within the City.
      2.   The Director of Public Works is authorized to have signs erected in
such Commercial Zoning District prohibiting the riding of skateboards therein.
   B.   Park, Bike Paths Prohibited: No person shall ride or operate a
skateboard within any City park or bike path, except at such places as may be
designated by the Director of Parks and Recreation and then only in accordance
with the rules, regulations and restrictions promulgated and posted.
   C.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(Ord. 18-1177, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
7-2-2: SNOWMOBILES PROHIBITED IN CITY PARK PROPERTY:
   A.   Prohibition; Exception:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any snowmobile in any
City park, on any nature trail in the City, or on any City owned property.
      2.   This section shall not apply to City employees performing their
official duties.
   B.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(Ord. 18-1177, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
7-2-3: MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL DEVICES:
   A.   Definition:
      LOW-SPEED ELECTRIC SCOOTER. A device weighing less than one hundred
pounds (100 lbs.), with two (2) or three (3) wheels, handlebars, and a
floorboard that can be stood upon while riding, that is solely powered by an
electric motor and human power, and whose maximum speed, with or without human
propulsion, is no more than ten (10) miles per hour. A "low-speed electric
scooter" does not include a moped or motor driven cycle.
      MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL DEVICE. Any device that has a deck or platform on
which a person may stand or sit, with two (2) or more wheels, and that is self-
propelled by any type of motor or engine. This shall include all-wheeled
vehicles not licensed for use on public roads, and which are powered by gas or
electric motors, without any type of pedal assist, for which the state of
Illinois does not issue a title document and does not issue license plates or
regulation documents. By way of illustration and not limitation, motorized
recreational devices include all-terrain vehicles, golf carts, non-highway
vehicles, go-carts, minibikes and off-road motorcycles; provided, however, that
the term “motorized recreational device” shall not include the following:
      1.   Motor vehicle (as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-146);
      2.   Motorcycle (as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-147);
      3.   Motor driven cycle (as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-147);
      4.   Motorized pedacycle (as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-148.2);
      5.   Motorized low-speed electric bicycles with pedal assist capabilities
(as defined in 625 ILCS 1-140.10); or
      6.   Motorized wheelchair (as defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-148.3) or other
device designed and used to transport a person with a disability.
      NON-LOW-SPEED SCOOTER. A device with two (2) or three (3) wheels,
handlebars, and a floorboard that can be stood upon while riding, that is
solely powered by an electric motor or gas motor, with speed capabilities in
excess of ten (10) miles per hour. A "non-low-speed scooter" does not include a
moped or motor driven cycle.
   B.   Limitations On Use of Motorized Recreational Devices: With the
exception of authorized City employees and officers, United States Postal
Service employees, and other authorized governmental employees performing
official business, no person shall operate or ride a motorized recreational
device upon any private property within the City limits without the express
consent of the property owner, or within any of the following places in the
City:
      1.   Private streets and rights-of-way;
      2.   Public streets and rights-of-way;
      3.   Public sidewalks;
      4.   Public parking lots or areas;
      5.   Public parks; and
      6.   Any other public property not identified in this section.
   C.   Limitations on Low-Speed Electric Scooter Use: Any person who operates
a low-speed electric scooter must comply with the following:
      1.   A person may not operate a low-speed electric scooter on a highway
with a posted speed limit in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour.
      2.   A person may not operate a low-speed electric scooter unless he or
she is eighteen (18) years of age or older.
      3.   A low-speed electric scooter may be parked in the same manner and at
the same locations as a bicycle may be parked.
      4.   A low-speed electric scooter may be operated on public sidewalks,
but must yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians. Failure to yield is a
violation of this code.
      5.   A low-speed electric scooter may be operated in City parks, but only
on paved surfaces and must yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians. Failure
to yield is a violation of this code.
      6.   Every low-speed electric scooter when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front that emits a white light visible from a
distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red
reflector on the rear that is visible from all distances from one hundred feet
(100') to six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful
lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp emitting a
steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet
(500') to the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the red reflector.
      7.   A low-speed electric scooter shall not be equipped with nor shall
any person use upon a low-speed electric scooter any siren. This subsection
does not apply to any electric scooter that is a police vehicle or fire
department vehicle.
      8.   Every low-speed electric scooter shall be equipped with a brake that
will adequately control movement of and stop and hold the low-speed electric
scooter.
      9.   A person may not operate a low-speed electric scooter while carrying
any package, bundle, or article that prevents the operator from keeping at
least one hand upon the handlebars.
      10.   A person may not use a low-speed electric scooter to carry more
than one person at a time.
      11.   A person operating a low-speed electric scooter may not attach
himself or herself or the scooter to any other vehicle being operated on the
public right-of-way.
      12.   A person may not operate a low-speed electric scooter upon any
public highway in the State while under the influence of alcohol or any drug.
      13.   The use of low-speed electric scooters is not permitted on State
highways.
   D.   Limitations on Non-Low-Speed Scooter Use: Any person who operates a
non-low-speed scooter must comply with the following:
      1.   A person may not operate a non-low-speed scooter on a highway with a
posted speed limit in excess of thirty-five (35) mph.
      2.   A person may not operate a non-low-speed scooter unless he or she
holds a valid driver's license.
      3.   A person operating a non-low-speed scooter under the age of eighteen
(18) must wear a helmet.
      4.   A person may not operate a non-low-speed scooters on public
sidewalks.
      5.   A non-low-speed scooter may be parked in the same manner and at the
same locations as a bicycle may be parked.
      6.   A non-low-speed scooter may be operated in City parks, but only on
paved parking lots and must yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians. Failure
to yield is a violation of this code.
      7.   Every non-low-speed scooter when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front that emits a white light visible from a
distance of at least five hundred feet (500') to the front and with a red
reflector on the rear that is visible from all distances from one hundred feet
(100') to six hundred feet (600') to the rear when directly in front of lawful
lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except that a lamp emitting a
steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of five hundred feet
(500') to the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the red reflector.
      8.   A non-low-speed scooter shall not be equipped with nor shall any
person use upon a non-low-speed scooter any siren. This subsection does not
apply to a non-low-speed scooter that is a police vehicle or fire department
vehicle.
      9.   Every non-low-speed scooter shall be equipped with a brake that will
adequately control movement of and stop and hold the non-low-speed scooter.
      10.   A person may not operate a non-low-speed scooter while carrying any
package, bundle, or article that prevents the operator from keeping at least
one hand upon the handlebars.
      11.   A person may not use a non-low-speed scooter to carry more than one
person at a time.
      12.   A person operating a non-low-speed scooter may not attach himself
or herself or the scooter to any other vehicle being operated on the public
right-of-way.
      13.   A person may not operate a non-low-speed scooter upon any public
highway in the State while under the influence of alcohol or any drug.
      14.   The use of non-low-speed scooters is not permitted on State
highways, including, but not limited to Illinois Route 31 and Illinois Route
120.
   E.   Fine; Impoundment And Redemption:
      1.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty
of violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the
Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City’s cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
      2.   Any person who has been issued three (3) or more citations for
violations of this section within a twelve (12) month period shall be required
to surrender, at the time of issuance of a citation, the motorized recreational
device to the police officer or other authorized official who issues the
citation. The motorized recreational device shall be impounded and held by the
Police Department and shall be returned to its owner only after one of the
following sets of conditions has been met:
         a.   The person against whom the citation was issued shall have paid
or caused to be paid: 1) all outstanding fines; and 2) the fees and costs of
the City in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); or
         b.   The person against whom the citation was issued shall have paid
or caused to be paid all outstanding fines, and presented to the City proof
that a determination of not guilty was made for the cited offense.
(Ord. 18-1177, 8-6-2018; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022; Ord. 25-35, 8-4-2025)
7-2-4: COMPRESSION/RELEASE ENGINE BRAKE USE:
No person shall operate or cause to be used or operated within the City any
compression/release engine brake on any vehicle for any reason. For purposes of
this section, compression/release engine brake is defined as any mechanical
exhaust device designed to aid in the braking or deceleration of any vehicle by
converting engine power to compressed air which results in excessive, loud,
unusual or explosive noise from such vehicle, otherwise known as “Jake-
braking”.
(Ord. 04-857)
7-2-5: OPERATION OF NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLES ON CITY STREETS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, NON-HIGHWAY VEHICLE
means a motor vehicle not specifically designed to be used on a public highway,
including:
GOLF CART: As defined in 625 ILCS 5/123.9.
RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE: As defined in 625 ILCS 5/1-168.8.
   B.   Operation: No person shall operate a non-highway vehicle on a City
street except as set forth in this section.
   C.   Registration: Each non-highway vehicle operating on a City street shall
be registered with the City and display a City registration stickers and plate.
This registration shall be valid from April 1 through November 1 of the year it
was issued. Registrations shall not be transferable in the event of a change in
ownership of the non-highway vehicle. Prior to issuance of a registration by
the City, a non-highway vehicle must comply with the requirements set forth
below.
      1.   An initial safety inspection shall be conducted by the Police
Department or a designee authorized by the Chief of Police. Vehicles being
renewed by the same owner are not required to be inspected in following years.
      2.   A non-highway vehicle must have, at minimum, the following operating
equipment:
         a.   Brakes;
         b.   A steering apparatus;
         c.   Tires;
         d.   A rearview mirror;
         e.   Red reflectorized warning devices in the front and rear;
         f.   Seatbelts;
         g.   A slow moving emblem (as required of other vehicles in 625 ILCS
5/12-709) on the rear of the non-highway vehicle;
         h.   A headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of
five hundred feet (500') to the front and a tail lamp that emits a red light
visible from at least one hundred feet (100') from the rear;
         i.   Brake lights; and
         j.   Turn signals.
      3.   A non-highway vehicle shall not have a modified exhaust system which
will amplify or increase the noise of the non-highway vehicle above that
emitted by the muffler originally installed on the non-highway vehicle.
      4.   Proof of valid insurance, as identified in 625 ILCS 5/7-601 et seq.,
must be provided for the non-highway vehicle and the registrant must agree to
insure the non-highway vehicle while in use on City streets.
      5.   The registrant must agree and sign an indemnification form,
releasing the City, its elected officials and its employees from liability and
indemnifying and holding them harmless from any and all claims resulting from
the operation of the non-highway vehicle.
      6.   A fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid for the initial
annual safety inspection of each non-highway vehicle. A fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) for renewing the same non-highway vehicle under the same ownership
each year thereafter shall be paid.
   D.   Location: No person shall operate a non-highway vehicle except on a
City street as permitted in this section and no person shall operate a non-
highway vehicle on the streets and locations specifically prohibited in this
section. The City approved interactive GIS Golf Cart / UTV Map can be found on
the City’s website (www.cityofmchenry.org) which identifies the prohibited
streets and locations along with permitted intersection crossings.
      1.   Permitted Streets: The operation of a non-highway vehicle shall be
permitted on all City owned streets with a posted speed limit of twenty five
(25) mph or less. In addition, the operation of a non-highway vehicle shall be
permitted on the following streets at the specified locations:
         a.   McCullom Lake Road from Blake Boulevard to Olde Mill Lane;
         b.   McCullom Lake Road between Pine Street and Kennedy Drive;
         c.   Crystal Lake Road between Front Royal and Lillian Street;
         d.   Cunat Drive between Bull Valley Road and Crystal Lake Road; and
         e.   Municipal Drive.
      2.   Prohibited Streets And Locations: The operation of a non-highway
vehicle at the following locations is strictly prohibited:
         a.   Green Street between John Street and Pearl Street;
         b.   Main Street between Front Street and Crystal Lake Road;
         c.   Pearl Street between Green Street and Richmond Road;
         d.   Pearl Street between Park Street and Lincoln Road (including
Pearl Street Bridge);
         e.   Riverside Drive between Miller Riverfront Park and Broad Street;
         f.   Waukegan Road east between Green Street and the end of the
property located at 1110 N. Green Street;
         g.   All City-owned municipal parking lots within the Downtown
Business District;
         h.   All City-owned parks, sidewalks, walking paths and bicycle paths;
         i.   All County roads;
         j.   All Township roads; and
         k.   All State highways.
      3.   Designated Approved Intersections: It shall be unlawful for a non-
highway vehicle to cross a prohibited street unless done so at one of the
following authorized intersection crossings:
         a.   Curran Road and Dartmoor Drive;
         b.   Front Royal Road and Crystal Lake Road;
         c.   Lillian Street and Crystal Lake Road;
         d.   Winding Creek Drive and Crystal Lake Road;
         e.   Dartmoor Drive and Crystal Lake Road;
         f.   Meadow Avenue and Elm Street (IL Route 120);
         g.   Lillian Street and Front Street (IL Route 31);
         h.   Biscayne Road and Barreville Road; and
         i.   McCullom Lake and Riverside Drive.
   E.   Time: A person may operate a non-highway vehicle on permitted streets
from April 1 through November 1 each year from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to nine
thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. The use of non-highway vehicles on City streets
between November 2 and March 31 and afterhours is prohibited.
   F.   Operation Regulations: The operation of a non-highway vehicle is
subject to the following requirements:
      1.   Ability to travel at a speed of nineteen (19) miles per hour;
      2.   a.   Display of registration decals and rear registration plate;
         b.   Non-highway vehicles registered with the City are issued two
registration decals. The decals must be displayed on both sides of the machine
by its own adhesive, in a position which is forward of the operator and visible
to law enforcement. Operators should carry all necessary registration cards and
paperwork with them for display to a law enforcement officer upon request.
         c.   In addition, all non-highway vehicles registered as public use
will be required to furnish a rear plate that displays the registration number.
Plates can be created or purchased at owner’s expense.
         d.   Plate Specifications:
            (1)   The plate must be a minimum of four inches (4") in height and
seven and one-half (7-1/2") wide and made of white material.
            (2)   The registration number must be made of black lettering a
minimum of one and one-half inches (1-1/2") high with a minimum three
sixteenths inches (3/16") stroke.
            (3)   Only the four registration numbers and two letters need to be
on the plate. The registration number can be found on both the decals issued by
the City.
            (4)   The owner must maintain the plate so it is in legible
condition; and the plate shall be attached to the rear of the vehicle.
      3.   Valid driver’s license by the operator of the non-highway vehicle
issued in his or her name by the Illinois Secretary of State or by a foreign
jurisdiction;
      4.   The operator shall yield the right of way to all pedestrian and
vehicular traffic which constitutes a hazard;
      5.   Compliance with the provisions of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625
ILCS 5/1-100 et seq., as amended) to include all speed limits and rules of the
road;
      6.   No operation shall occur when visibility is impaired by weather,
smoke, or other conditions or at any time when there is insufficient light to
clearly see persons and vehicles on the roadway at a distance of five hundred
(500) feet;
      7.   The number of occupants shall not exceed the number of seatbelts in
the non-highway vehicle; and
      8.   Headlight and tail lamps must be lighted at all times when operating
on City streets.
   G.   Driving Under The Influence: A person who operates or is in actual
physical control of a non-highway vehicle while under the influence of alcohol,
drugs or a combination thereof shall be subject to enforcement through the
Illinois Vehicle Code.
   H.   Violation; Penalty:
      1.   Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
      2.   Any person who is cited for a violation of the Illinois Criminal
Code or Illinois Vehicle Code while using their non-highway vehicle in the
City, including no valid license, suspended/revoked license, reckless driving
and driving under the influence which results in arrest shall result in an
automatic temporary suspension of any City registrations and, upon a finding of
guilty of a violation, shall result in an automatic revocation of any City
registration.
      3.   Any person who has been issued two (2) or more citations for
violations of this section within a twelve (12) month period shall result in an
automatic temporary suspension of any City registrations, and, upon a finding
of guilty of a violation, shall result in an automatic revocation of any City
registrations for a minimum of twelve (12) months.
(Ord. 20-10, 3-2-2020; amd. Ord. 21-8, 2-16-2021; Ord. 21-20, 4-19-2021; Ord.
22-40, 6-20-2022; Ord. 23-29, 6-5-2023)
CHAPTER 3: SPEED RESTRICTIONS
Section
7-3-1: Speed Limits Established
7-3-2: School Speed Zones Established
7-3-1: SPEED LIMITS ESTABLISHED:
The speed limit on all streets and highways within the corporate limits of the
City is hereby established at twenty five (25) miles per hour, with the
following exceptions:
   A.   The speed limit in all alleys within the corporate limits of the City
is hereby established at ten (10) miles per hour.
   B.   A speed limit of twenty (20) miles per hour is hereby established in
the following areas:
 
All park roads             
Green Street              Pearl Street to Waukegan
Kresswood Drive           Along its entire length
Main Street               Crystal Lake Road to Front Street
Municipal Center driveway Along the entire length
Oak Drive                 North from Orleans Street to Prairie Avenue
Riverside Drive           From the north side of Boone Creek to Pearl Street
 
   C.   A speed limit of thirty (30) miles per hour is hereby established in
the following areas:
 
Crystal Lake Road       IL Route 120 to Lillian Street
Cunat Drive             From Bull Valley Road to Crystal Lake Road
Elm Street-IL Route 120 From Front Royal Drive to Charles Street
Front Street            Elm Street to Kane Avenue
McCullom Lake Road      Within the corporate limits
Municipal Drive         For its entire length between Knox Drive and Green
                        Street
Riverside Drive         That portion of Riverside Drive which is located in the
                        City between Orchard Beach Road and Kama Avenue
 
   D.   A speed limit of thirty five (35) miles per hour is hereby established
in the following areas:
Crystal Lake Road       Lillian Street to Bull Valley Road
Curran Road             IL Route 120 south to the City limits
Eastbound IL Route 120  Beach Avenue to Front Royal Drive
Elm Street-IL Route 120 From Charles Street to east property line of 2804 Elm
                        Street (for eastbound traffic)
Elm Street-IL Route 120 From east property line of 2803 Elm Street (for
                        westbound traffic) to Charles Street
Green Street            From Bull Valley Road south to the southern corporate
                        limits
Martin Road             Ringwood Road to IL Route 120
Richmond Road           Elm Street to a point 500 feet north of Maple Avenue
Ringwood Road           IL Route 120 north to Shore Drive
Westbound IL Route 120  Front Royal Drive to a point 500 feet west of Beach
                        Avenue
 
E.   A speed limit of forty (40) miles per hour is hereby established in the
following areas:
 
                        From a point located at the northeast corner of section
Curran Road             32 and the northwest corner of section 33 south to Bull
                        Valley Road
Elm Street-IL Route 120 From Chapel Hill Road to east property line of 2804 Elm
                        Street (westbound traffic)
Elm Street-IL Route 120 From east property line of 2803 Elm Street to Chapel
                        Hill Road (eastbound traffic)
Front Street            Kane Avenue to Anne Street
Richmond Road           From a point 500 feet north of Maple Avenue to McCullom
                        Lake Road
 
F.   A speed limit of forty five (45) miles per hour is hereby established in
the following areas:
 
Bull Valley Road       From Lawrence Parkway to IL State Route 31
Bull Valley Road       From the western City limits to Crystal Lake Road
Front Street           Anne Street to 1,000 feet south of High Street
Westbound IL Route 120 From a point 500 feet west of Park Street to Dot Street
 
   G.   A speed limit of fifty (50) miles per hour is hereby established in the
following areas:
 
Front Street 1,000 feet south of High Street to south City limits
 
   H.   A speed limit of fifty five (55) miles per hour is hereby established
in the following areas:
 
IL Route 120  Dot Street to west City limits
Richmond Road McCullom Lake Road to north City limits
Ringwood Road Martin Road north to the corporate limits of the City
 
(Ord. 18-1178, 8-6-2018)
7-3-2: SCHOOL SPEED ZONES ESTABLISHED:
School speed zones are hereby established in the following areas:
Courtland Trail     Cross Trail to Driftwood Trail
Cross Trail         Glenbrook Trail to Courtland Trail
Crystal Lake Road   Glenbrook Trail to Malibu Court
Crystal Lake Road   300 feet north of Kensington Avenue to Royal Drive
Driftwood           Courtland Trail to Glenbrook Trail
Front Street        300 feet north of Kane Avenue to 300 feet south of Kane
                    Avenue
Glenbrook Trail     Crystal Lake Road to Cross Trail
Green Street        Anne Street to 100 feet north of Kane Avenue
Green Street        John Street to Waukegan Road
IL State Route 120  300 feet east of Beach Avenue to 300 feet west of Beach
                    Avenue
John Street         Green Street to the western edge of McHenry Country Club
Kane Avenue         Green Street to Front Street
Richmond Road       Maple Avenue to Elm Street
Washington Street   Richmond Road to Park Street
Waukegan Road       Third Street to the east boundary of McHenry High School
                    east campus
Winding Creek Drive Crystal Lake Road to Driftwood Trail
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
CHAPTER 4: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
7-4-1: Stopping, Standing Or Parking In Alleys
7-4-2: Parking Limited During Snow Removal
7-4-3: Parking For Certain Purposes Prohibited
7-4-4: No Parking Two O’Clock A.M. To Six O’Clock A.M.
7-4-5: Downtown Business District No Parking Three O’Clock A.M. To Six O’Clock
A.M.
7-4-6: Angle Parking Only
7-4-7: Permit Parking Only
7-4-8: Trailer Parking Prohibited
7-4-9: No Parking At Any Time
7-4-10: Parking In Front Of Any McHenry Utility Facility Prohibited
7-4-11: No Parking Six O’Clock A.M. To Six O’Clock P.M.
7-4-12: No Parking Seven O’Clock A.M. To Seven O’Clock P.M. On Weekdays
7-4-13: No Parking Eight O’Clock A.M. To Four O’Clock P.M. On School Days
7-4-14: No Parking On Fridays Between Four O’Clock P.M. And Twelve O’Clock
Midnight
7-4-15: No Parking Or Standing Between Eight O’Clock A.M. To Four O’Clock P.M.
On School Days
7-4-16: No Parking Seven O’Clock A.M. To Nine O’Clock A.M. On School Days
7-4-17: No Parking Ten O’Clock P.M. To Four O’Clock A.M.
7-4-18: Parking For Persons With Disabilities
7-4-19: Two Hour Parking Eight O’Clock A.M. To Four O’Clock P.M. On School Days
7-4-20: Four Hour Parking Six O’Clock A.M. To Six O’Clock P.M., Except
Saturday, Sunday And Holidays
7-4-21: Four Hour Parking Six O’Clock A.M. To Six O’Clock P.M.
7-4-22: Loading Zones
7-4-23: School Bus Loading Zones
7-4-24: [Reserved]
7-4-25: Fifteen Minute Parking Eight O’Clock A.M. Until Six O’Clock P.M. On
Monday Through Saturday
7-4-26: Fifteen Minute Parking Spaces Only
7-4-27: Miller Riverfront Park Boat Launch Parking
7-4-28: Downtown Business District Parking Lots
7-4-1: STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING IN ALLEYS:
   A.   Reasonable Time: No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle in any
alley for a period of time longer than is necessary for the reasonable
expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicles.
   B.   Width Required For Movement: No person shall stop, stand or park a
vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave
available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway for the free
movement of vehicular traffic.
   C.   Blocking: No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley
in such position as to block the driveway or entrance to any abutting property.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-4-2: PARKING LIMITED DURING SNOW REMOVAL:
It is unlawful to park any vehicle for a period of time longer than three (3)
minutes for loading or unloading of passengers or thirty (30) minutes for
loading or unloading of property in any place, whether designated as a loading
zone or not so designated on the paved portion of any roadway, at any time
after snow begins to fall and for a period of eight (8) hours after snow stops
falling, if the snow on the street exceeds two inches (2") in depth; provided,
that said eight (8) hour parking restriction shall continue during snow removal
operations until completed.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-4-3: PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED:
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:
   A.   Display For Sale: Displaying such vehicle for sale.
   B.   Washing, Repairing: Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, except
such repairs necessitated by an emergency.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-4-4: NO PARKING TWO O’CLOCK A.M. TO SIX O’CLOCK A.M.:
To make possible the cleaning of streets and removal of snow and ice, it shall
be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such motor vehicle
between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) A.M. to six o’clock (6:00) A.M. in any
of the following locations, except as regulated in section
7-4-5 of this chapter:
The paved portion of any roadway.
Any City owned or controlled park and parking lots, whether paved or unpaved.
(Ord. 17-1157, 11-20-2017)
7-4-5: DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT NO PARKING THREE O’CLOCK A.M. TO SIX O’CLOCK
A.M.:
To meet the needs of those downtown businesses with late operating hours,
parking hours in the Downtown Business District, only in locations specified,
shall be three o’clock (3:00) A.M. to six o’clock (6:00) A.M. on Saturday and
Sunday mornings and those specific holidays tied to extended liquor license
hours, which are the mornings of Thanksgiving Day, Memorial Day (observed), New
Year’s Day and Independence Day in any of the following locations:
Court Street Municipal parking lot.
Green Street between Waukegan Road and Pearl Street.
Main Street between Front Street and the railroad tracks.
Main Street Municipal parking lot.
Pearl Street between Green Street and the Pearl Street Bridge.
Riverside Drive between Miller Riverfront Park and Broad Street.
Riverside Drive Municipal parking lot.
Waukegan Road east between Green Street and the end of the property located at
1110 N. Green Street.
This section shall not supersede section
7-4-2, “Parking Limited During Snow Removal”, of this chapter when it is in
effect.
(Ord. 17-1157, 11-20-2017)
7-4-6: ANGLE PARKING ONLY:
Only angle parking shall be permitted in the following areas:
Broad Street                South side, between Court Street and Park Street
Center Street               East side, from Main Street to John Street
Court Street                East side, from Pearl Street to Broad Street
                            West side, mid-block between Pearl Street and Elm
Court Street                Street beginning approximately 225 feet south of
                            the back of the curbing on the south side of Court
                            Street and extending south a distance of 70 feet
Green Street                From Elm Street south to the northerly edge of the
                            Green Street Bridge over Boone Creek
                            North side between Center Street and Third Street;
                            and north beginning a point 33 feet east of the
John Street                 centerline of State Route 31 (Front Street) and
                            ending at a point 99 feet east of State Route 31
                            (Front Street) adjacent to 1002 Front Street
                            From the easterly edge of the Chicago &
Main Street                 Northwestern RR property to 150 feet east of Front
                            Street
Park Street                 West side, from Pearl Street to Broad Street
Pearl Street                Both sides, between Park Street and Riverside Drive
                            South side, from the back of the curbing on the
Pearl Street                east side of Green Street extended easterly 110
                            feet
Riverside Drive             Both sides from approximately 300 feet south of Elm
                            Street to 200 feet north of Pearl Street
Riverside Drive parking lot West side of the Riverside Drive parking lot
 
Every vehicle that is angle parked shall be so parked that the only manner of
exiting the vehicle from the parking stall into the adjoining traffic lane is
to back the vehicle out of said stall.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998; amd. Ord. 01-765)
7-4-7: PERMIT PARKING ONLY:
   A.   Residential Parking Permits: In order to accommodate residential living
within the McHenry Downtown Business District, the City will offer annual
Residential Parking Permits that may be utilized in specific locations within
municipal parking lots.
      1.   Requirements:
         a.   Must show proof of residency within the downtown business
district.
         b.   Fee: Residential Permit Parking: Residential Permit Parking
allows parking without four (4)-hour restrictions or overnight restrictions.
Proof of residency is required. Available permits are defined by location and
number in Section C. The annual fee for a residential parking permit is one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per permit annually, payable in advance. Permits
purchased after July 1 of any calendar year shall have a reduced fee of fifty
dollars ($50.00) and will not be prorated further. Annual permits will be made
available for purchase on December 1 of the preceding year and shall be
available on a first-come, first-served basis. No portion of this permit shall
be refundable under any circumstances. Purchasing a Residential Parking Permit
does not guarantee a parking spot at any given time.
   B.   Business Employee Parking Permits: In order to accommodate the downtown
business district workforce on Green Street, the City will offer annual
Business Employee Parking Permits for use in the designated area of the Green
Street Municipal Lot.
      1.   Requirements:
         a.   Must provide the name of the business within the downtown
district you are employed at.
         b.   Fee: Business Employee Permit Parking: Business Employee Permit
Parking allows parking without four (4)-hour restrictions but prohibits
overnight parking between two o’clock (2:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m.
These permit are defined by location and number in Section C. The annual fee
for a business employee parking permit is thirty dollars ($60.00) per permit
annually, payable in advance. Permits purchased after July 1 of any calendar
year shall have a reduced fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) and will not be
prorated further. Annual permits will be made available for purchase on
December 1 of the preceding year and shall be available on a first-come, first-
served basis. No portion of this permit shall be refundable under any
circumstances. Purchasing a Business Employee Parking Permit docs not guarantee
a parking spot at any given time.
   C.   Locations Specified:
 
Location:                    Number of Residential Restrictions:
                             Permits
                                                   All regular parking stalls.
                                                   These stalls shall not be
Riverside Drive Central                            posted or reserved solely
(Alleyway) Parking Lot       12                    for permit parking. All
                                                   other parking restrictions
                                                   will continue to be in
                                                   effect.
                                                   All regular parking stalls.
                                                   These stalls shall not be
                                                   posted or reserved solely
Court Street Lots - All Lots 15                    for permit parking. All
                                                   other parking restrictions
                                                   will continue to be in
                                                   effect.
                                                   All parking stalls located
                                                   within Green Street Lot.
                                                   These stalls shall not be
Green Street Lot             10                    posted or reserved solely
                                                   for permit parking. All
                                                   other parking restrictions
                                                   will continue to be in
                                                   effect.
                                                   All regular parking stalls.
                                                   These stalls shall not be
Main Street North & South                          posted or reserved solely
Lots                         13                    for permit parking. All
                                                   other parking restrictions
                                                   will continue to be in
                                                   effect.
 
 
           Number
Location:  of       Restrictions:
           Business
           Permits
Green               All parking stalls located within Green Street Lot. These stalls shall not be
Street Lot 10       posted or reserved solely for permit parking. No parking between two o’clock
                    (2:00) a.m. and six o’clock (6:00) a.m. daily with this permit.
Riverside
Drive               All regular parking stalls. These stalls shall not be posted or reserved solely
Central    12       for permit parking. No parking between two o'clock (2:00) a.m. and six o'clock
(Alleyway)          (6:00) a.m. daily with this permit.
Parking
Lot
Court               All regular parking stalls. These stalls shall not be posted or reserved solely
Street     10       for permit parking. No parking between two o'clock (2:00) a.m. and six o'clock
Lots                (6:00) a.m. daily with this permit.
 
   D.   Snowfall: In order to enable the City to snow plow the permit parking
spaces, the parking of motor vehicles thereon shall be prohibited from the time
that snowfall exceeds a depth of two inches (2") thereon until the parking
spaces have been snow plowed by the City.
(Ord. 13-1082; amd. Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998; Ord. 01-770; Ord. 04-845; Ord. 21-
36, 7-19-2021; Ord. 21-73, 12-20-2021; Ord. 23-63, 12-4-2023; Ord. 23-69, 12-
18-2023)
7-4-8: TRAILER PARKING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any boat trailer, whether attached
to a motor vehicle or not, on any part of Riverside Drive located south of Elm
Street.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-4-9: NO PARKING AT ANY TIME:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such vehicle
at any of the following locations at any time:
Boone Creek Circle             On south side of the street from 4007 Boone
                               Creek Circle to Leonard Avenue
Boone Creek Circle             On west side of the street from Olde Mill Lane
                               to 4007 Boone Creek Circle
Borden Street                  On the east side from Main Street to Elm Street
Cobblers Crossing              On west side and north side of the street
Commercial Avenue              From Highview Avenue east to Meadow Lane
Corporate Drive                Entire length of street along both sides
Cross Trail                    On the east side from Joyce Lane to Crystal
                               Trail
                               Along the west side of the street from Royal
Crystal Lake Road              Drive to the south boundary of McH West Campus
                               High School
Crystal Lake Road              On both sides of the street from Elm Street to
                               the northern line of Hanley Street
Dartmoor Drive                 On both sides of the street, from Curran Road to
                               6402 Dartmoor Drive
                               On the north side of the street between the
Dartmoor Drive                 following locations: 20 feet east and 60 feet
                               west of the crosswalk at Huntington Drive
                               On the north side of the street from the east
Dartmoor Drive                 side of Boone Creek Bridge extending west to its
                               intersection with Whitmore Trail
                               On the south side of the street between Augusta
Dartmoor Drive                 Drive extending west to its intersection with
                               Whitmore Trail
Dartmoor Drive                 On the south side of the street, from 6402
                               Dartmoor Drive to Farmstead Drive
Elm Street                     On the north side from its intersection with the
                               west bank of Boone Creek to Court Street
                               On the north side in a northeasterly direction
Elm Street                     from the centerline of Front Street for a
                               distance of 150 feet
Elm Street                     On the south side from Front Street to Court
                               Street
Evergreen Circle               On the east side of the street from 2228
                               Evergreen Circle to 2432 Evergreen Circle
Evergreen Circle               On the north side of the street from 2460
                               Evergreen Circle to 2518 Evergreen Circle
Evergreen Circle               On the south side of the street from 2730
                               Evergreen Circle to 2746 Evergreen Circle
                               On the west side of the street from 2200
Evergreen Circle               Evergreen Circle to 2224 Evergreen Circle; and
                               from 2546 Evergreen Circle to 2702 Evergreen
                               Circle
Farmstead Drive                On both sides of the street, from Longford Drive
                               to Draper Road
Farmstead Drive                On the west side of the street, from Waterford
                               Drive to Longford Drive
Freund Avenue                  Along the east side of the street from Elm
                               Street to a point 300 feet north of Elm Street
                               On both sides of the street from Route 120 (Elm
Front Royal Drive              Street) to fifty feet (50') north on the north
                               edge of Manchester Mall
Front Royal Drive              On the east side of the street from Manchester
                               Mall to Elm Street
                               Along the east side from the north driveway
Front Street                   thereon of the First National Bank of McHenry to
                               a point 80 feet north thereof
Front Street                   Along the east side of the street from Elm
                               Street to a point 300 feet north of Elm Street
Front Street                   On both sides of the street for a distance of 50
                               feet south from Main Street
Front Street and Prime Parkway For 400 feet on both sides of the intersection
Green Street                   Along both sides from Waukegan to Bull Valley
                               Road
Green Street                   Along the west side of the street between
                               Washington Street and Pearl Street
Green Street                   Along the west side of the street from Waukegan
                               Road to a point 300 feet north of Waukegan Road
                               On the east side of the street in front of the
                               Green Street entrance to 1110 N. Green Street
Green Street                   beginning approximately 130 feet north of the
                               north curb line extended for Waukegan Road and
                               ending 175 feet north thereof
                               On the west side of the street immediately north
                               of the southerly driveway entrance to 1111 N.
Green Street                   Green Street for a distance of 45 feet, except
                               that this 45 foot space shall be reserved
                               exclusively for parking Regional Transportation
                               Authority buses
Highview Avenue                Both sides of the street from Elm to Home
Industrial Drive               The entire length of the street along both sides
                               Along both sides from Green Street to the
                               entrance driveway for McHenry Country Club; on
John Street                    the north side from the westerly point of the
                               western most edge of the Green Street right-of-
                               way to a point 50 feet west
Kane Avenue                    Along the north side from Green Street to Center
                               Street
                               Both sides of the street from its intersection
Kane Avenue                    with Front Street to a point west, approximately
                               230 feet, at the eastern most edge of the
                               driveway located at 4008 Kane Avenue
Knox Drive                     On both sides of the street from Park Place to
                               Charles J. Miller Road
Kresswood Drive                Along the exterior curb
Lakewood Road                  At the southernmost portion in the turnaround
                               area
Lillian Street                 Entire length of the street along both sides
Longford Drive                 On the north side of the street, from Farmstead
                               Drive to 6434 Longford Drive
Main Street                    Along the south side from a point 250 feet east
                               of Front Street to Green Street
Meadow Lane                    Both sides from Elm Street to Shore Drive
Miller Parkway                 Entire length of street along both sides
Municipal Drive                Entire length along both sides
Oak Drive                      Between Route 120 and Prairie
Olde Mill Lane                 On east side of the street from Spring Creek
                               Circle to Leonard Avenue
Olde Mill Lane                 On south side of the street from Boone Creek
                               Circle to Spring Creek Lane
Olde Mill Lane                 On west side of the street from McCullom Lake
                               Road to Boone Creek Circle
Orleans Drive                  Between the railroad tracks and Oak Drive
Pearl Street                   Along the north side of the street between Park
                               Street and Green Street
                               Along the south side of the street between
Pearl Street                   Richmond Road and Court Street, except in the
                               spaces provided
                               Along both sides of the road for the entire
Petersen Park Road             length of the road, except in the spaces
                               provided
Prime Parkway                  Entire length of street along both sides
Ramble Road                    Both sides of the street from Elm to Home Avenue
Richmond Road                  On the east side of the road from Elm Street to
                               Pearl Street
Ridgeview Drive                Entire length of street along both sides
                               Along east side between the north City limits to
Riverside Drive                a point on the southernmost edge of the Weber
                               Park Lift Station driveway entrance
Riverside Drive                Along the east side from Elm Street to a point
                               100 feet north of Elm Street
                               On the north side of the street from a point 465
                               feet northwesterly of the intersection of
Royal Drive                    Oakwood Drive and Royal Drive, east to the
                               intersection of Royal Drive and Crystal Lake
                               Road
                               On the south side of the street from a point 604
                               feet northwesterly of the intersection of
Royal Drive                    Oakwood Drive and Royal Drive, east to the
                               intersection of Royal Drive and Crystal Lake
                               Road
Shamrock Lane                  The entire length along both sides
Spring Creek Lane              On east side of the street from 2100 Spring
                               Creek Lane to Olde Mill Lane
Spring Creek Lane              On north side of the street from Olde Mill Lane
                               to 2100 Spring Creek Lane
Sunset Drive                   On the east side from the creek bridge to the
                               corner of Willow Lane
Third Street                   On both sides from Waukegan Road to Elm Street
Waukegan Road                  Along south side from Green Street to Third
                               Street
Waukegan Road                  On north side from Green Street to Fourth Street
Waukegan Road                  On the north side of the road from a point 610
                               feet east of Green Street to the Fox River
Waukegan Road                  On the south side from Green Street to the Fox
                               River
Whitaker Trail                 On east side of the street
                               On the north and/or east side from the eastern
Wiltshire Drive                most point of 912 Wiltshire Drive east/south 879
                               feet to the eastern most intersection of
                               Wiltshire Drive and Oakwood Drive
                               On the south and/or west side from the eastern
Wiltshire Drive                most point of 913 Wiltshire Drive east/south 740
                               feet to the eastern most intersection of
                               Wiltshire Drive and Oakwood Drive
Winding Creek Drive            On both sides between Crystal Lake Road and
                               Driftwood Trail
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998; amd. Ord. 01-782; Ord. 02-789; Ord. 02-807; Ord. 02-
816; Ord. 03-820; Ord. 03-826; Ord. 04-844; Ord. 06-896; Ord. 08-956; Ord. 09-
990; Ord. 13-1071; Ord. 13-1072; Ord. 14-1098; Ord. 15-1116; Ord. 23-35, 6-19-
2023; Ord. 24-51, 12-2-2024; Ord. 25-29, 6-2-2029)
7-4-10: PARKING IN FRONT OF ANY MCHENRY UTILITY FACILITY PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle or any other vehicle
to park or block the driveway of any of the following locations at any time:
1016 Broadway, Sanitary Lift Station.
1105 Carrick Lane, Sanitary Lift Station.
501 Cartwright Trail, Sanitary Lift Station.
5400 Dartmoor Drive, Sanitary Lift Station.
6400 Dartmoor Drive, Sanitary Lift Station.
3621 Diamond Drive, Sanitary Lift Station.
1809 Donovan Street, Sanitary Lift Station.
1914 Doolin Lane, Sanitary Lift Station.
Between 5825 and 5827 Fieldstone Trail, Sanitary Lift Station.
3611 Freund Avenue, Sanitary Lift Station.
3800 Grove Avenue, Sanitary Lift Station.
1934 Hemlock Lane, Sanitary Lift Station.
222 S. McHenry Avenue, South Wastewater Treatment Plant.
3710 Millstream Drive, Sanitary Lift Station.
1115 River Road, Sanitary Lift Station.
1201 S. River Road, Sanitary Lift Station.
1401 N. Riverside Drive, Sanitary Lift Station.
701 S. Riverside Drive, Sanitary Lift Station.
2515 W. Route 120, Sanitary Lift Station.
3306 Waukegan Road, Central Wastewater Treatment Plant.
4506 Willow Lane, Sanitary Lift Station. (Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-4-11: NO PARKING SIX O’CLOCK A.M. TO SIX O’CLOCK P.M.:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such vehicle
between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) A.M. to six o’clock (6:00) P.M. in any
of the following locations:
 
Riverside Drive Adjacent to 1312 N. Riverside Drive
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-4-12: NO PARKING SEVEN O’CLOCK A.M. TO SEVEN O’CLOCK P.M. ON WEEKDAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any operator of a motor vehicle to park such vehicle
between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) P.M. on
weekdays in any of the following locations:
 
Oakwood Drive On both sides of the road between its intersection with Royal
              Drive and its western most intersection with Wiltshire Drive
 
(Ord. 02-794)
7-4-13: NO PARKING EIGHT O’CLOCK A.M. TO FOUR O’CLOCK P.M. ON SCHOOL DAYS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such vehicle
between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. to four o’clock (4:00) P.M. on
school days in any of the following locations:
 
Allen Avenue  Both sides of the road between Green Street and John Street
Fourth Street On both side of the street between Main Street and James Street
John Street   On the north side of the road between Green Street and Fourth
              Street
John Street   On the south side from Green Street west to Fourth Street
Kane Avenue   On the north side from Green Street to a point 320 feet west of
              its intersection with Green Street
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998; amd. Ord. 99-718; Ord. 99-740; Ord. 02-794; Ord. 05-
873; Ord. 07-944)
7-4-14: NO PARKING ON FRIDAYS BETWEEN FOUR O’CLOCK P.M. AND TWELVE O’CLOCK
MIDNIGHT:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such vehicle
between the hours of four o’clock (4:00) P.M. and twelve o’clock (12:00)
midnight on Fridays in any of the following locations:
 
Kane Avenue Along the north side from a point 320 feet west of Green Street to
            a point 230 feet east of Center Street
 
(Ord. 02-798)
7-4-15: NO PARKING OR STANDING BETWEEN EIGHT O’CLOCK A.M. TO FOUR O’CLOCK P.M.
ON SCHOOL DAYS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park or sit in a
vehicle standing between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. and four
o’clock (4:00) P.M. on school days at any of the following locations:
 
Driftwood Trail On the west side of the street between Winding Creek Drive and
                Glenbrook Trail
 
(Ord. 07-944)
7-4-16: NO PARKING SEVEN O’CLOCK A.M. TO NINE O’CLOCK A.M. ON SCHOOL DAYS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such vehicle
between the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. on
school days at the following locations:
 
Bromley Avenue   On both sides of the street from 4913 Bromley Avenue to
                 Kensington Drive
Kensington Drive On both sides of the street from Crystal Lake Road to Bromley
                 Avenue
Pyndale Drive    On both sides of the street from 4909 Pyndale Drive to
                 Kensington Drive
Stratford Court  On both sides of the street from the eastern intersection of
                 Stratford Court to Kensington Drive
 
(Ord. 17-1141)
7-4-17: NO PARKING TEN O’CLOCK P.M. TO FOUR O’CLOCK A.M.:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such vehicle
between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and four o’clock (4:00) A.M. in
any of the following locations:
 
Broad  On the south side, adjacent to Veteran’s Memorial Park, from Court Street to
Street Park Street
Court  On the east side, adjacent to Veteran’s Memorial Park, from Pearl Street to
Street Broad Street
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-4-18: PARKING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES:
   A.   Locations Specified: It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a
medically handicapped person, to park any motor vehicle in any of the following
locations, which shall be marked by the appropriate signs:
Althoff Park parking lot                Five (5) designated parking spaces
                                        The 3 northern most parking spaces on
Center Street                           the east side of Center Street
                                        adjoining the First United Methodist
                                        Church
Court Street                            The space on the west side of Court
                                        Street at 1309 Court Street
                                        The space on the east side of Court
Court Street                            Street, south of Elm Street at 3421 Elm
                                        Street
                                        The space on the east side of Court
Court Street                            Street, north of Elm Street at 3420 Elm
                                        Street
Court Street Municipal parking lot area Four (4) designated parking spaces
Creekside Park                          Two (2) designated parking spaces
East Park Beach parking lot             One (1) designated parking spot
Fort McHenry Park parking lot           Two (2) designated parking spaces
Fox Ridge Park parking lot              Five (5) designated parking spaces
Freund Park parking lot                 Two (2) designated parking spaces
Front Street                            The space on the west side of Front
                                        Street at 929 Front Street
                                        The space on the west side of Front
Front Street                            Street, south of Main Street at 3901
                                        Main Street
                                        1 parking space abutting on the north
                                        and 1 parking space abutting on the
Green Street                            south of the no parking zone on the
                                        east side in front of 1110 N. Green
                                        Street
Green Street                            The northern most parking space in
                                        front of 1111 N. Green Street
                                        The northern most parking space on the
Green Street                            east side of Green Street south of
                                        Pearl Street
                                        The parking space on the east side of
Green Street                            Green Street in front of 1204 N Green
                                        Street
                                        The parking space abutting the fire
Green Street                            hydrant no parking area in front of
                                        1228 N. Green Street
Green Street Municipal parking lot      Five (5) designated parking spaces
John Street                             The space south of John Street at 3813
                                        W John Street
                                        Five (5) parking spaces on the north
Kane Avenue                             side, 950 feet west of the Kane Avenue
                                        and Green Street intersections
                                        Two (2) parking spaces on the south
Kane Avenue                             side, west of the Kane Avenue and Green
                                        Street intersection
Knox Park east parking lot              Five (5) designated parking spaces
Knox Park west parking lot              Two (2) designated parking spaces
Lakeland Park parking lot               One (1) designated parking space
                                        The spot on the north side of Main
Main Street                             Street, west of Green Street, at 3604
                                        Main Street
Main Street                             The spot on the North side of Main
                                        Street, at 3932 Main Street
Main Street                             The parking space on the South Side of
                                        Main Street at 3941 W. Main Street
Main Street                             The 3rd parking space west of Front
                                        Street on the south side
Main Street north parking lot           One (1) parking space on the southwest
                                        corner of the lot
                                        First 5 parking spaces in the northwest
Metra commuter parking lot              corner adjacent to Main Street, west of
                                        railroad tracks
Miller Point Park parking area          Five (5) designated parking spaces
                                        The space on the east side of Park
Park Street                             Street, north of Pearl Street, at 3318
                                        Pearl Street
Park Street                             Two (2) parking spaces on the east side
                                        of Park Street at 1304 Park Street
Pearl Street                            The space on the north side of Pearl
                                        Street at 3318 Pearl Street
Pearl Street                            Two (2) spaces on the south side at
                                        3315 Pearl Street
                                        The space on the east of Riverside
Pearl Street                            Drive on the north side of Pearl Street
                                        at 1402 Riverside Drive
Pearl Street                            East of Riverside Drive on the south
                                        side at 1334 Riverside Drive
                                        Five (5) parking spaces in the parking
                                        lot near the large baseball diamond.
                                        Two (2) parking spaces in the parking
Petersen Park parking lots              lot near the small ball diamond. Three
                                        (3) parking spaces in the parking lot
                                        north of Oak Drive. Six (6) parking
                                        spaces located along the drive east of
                                        the beach.
Public Works Department parking lot     Three (3) designated parking spaces
Recreation Center parking lot on        Six (6) designated parking spaces
Municipal Drive
Riverside Drive                         The northern most parking space on the
                                        east side of the street south of Elm
Riverside Drive                         The northern most parking space on the
                                        west side south of Pearl Street
Riverside Drive                         The parking space in front of 1334 N.
                                        Riverside Drive
                                        The parking space on the east side in
Riverside Drive                         front of entrance to 1314 N. Riverside
                                        Drive
Riverside Drive parking lot             Two (2) designated parking spaces
Shamrock Farm Park parking lot          Five (5) designated parking spaces
Veterans Memorial Park parking areas    Four (4) designated parking spaces
West Park Beach parking lot             One (1) parking spot
 
   B.   Identification Card; Fee; Display:
      1.   Parking spaces set aside for medically handicapped persons may be
occupied by motor vehicles displaying a State of Illinois medically handicapped
registration plate, or an Illinois disabled person identification card issued
by the City or other municipality pursuant to the Illinois Identification Card
Act. Such identification card may be obtained from the City Clerk upon request
supported by written certification from a medical doctor addressed to the City
that the applicant for the card is a medically handicapped person. The fee
charged for the issuance of such identification card shall be as follows:
   TEMPORARY DISABILITY IDENTIFICATION CARD
 
First time issuance fee for a 90 day card   $5.00
Reissue or replacement fee of a 90 day card 2.00
 
      2.   The medically handicapped parking card shall be prominently
displayed by attaching it to the vehicle’s rearview mirror or placing it on the
dashboard or visor when no rearview mirror is available.
   C.   Applicability Of Other Parking Regulations: Vehicles bearing the
aforementioned medically handicapped parking cards or registration plates, when
parked in other areas of the City, are exempt from any ordinance imposing time
limitations on parking, but are subject to the provisions of all other Parking
Ordinances.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998; amd. Ord. 21-73, 12-20-2021)
7-4-19: TWO HOUR PARKING EIGHT O’CLOCK A.M. TO FOUR O’CLOCK P.M. ON SCHOOL
DAYS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such vehicle
for more than two (2) consecutive hours on school days between the hours of
eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. and four o’clock (4:00) P.M. in any of the following
locations:
              Along both sides from James Street to Main Street except for the
Center Street handicapped parking spaces set forth in subsection
              7-4-18A of this chapter
Fourth Street Along both sides from James Street to Main Street
James Street  Along both sides from Green Street to Center Street
Kane Avenue   Along the south side of the street from Green Street to Center
              Street
Main Street   Along the north side from Green Street to a point 265 feet east
              of Front Street
Third Street  Along both sides from James Street to Main Street
Third Street  Along the east side from Main Street to a point 135 feet north of
              Main Street
Third Street  Along the west side from Main Street to Waukegan Road
Waukegan Road Along the north side from Fourth Street to Third Street
Waukegan Road Along the north side from the intersection with Green Street east
              to a point 610 feet east of Green Street
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998; amd. Ord. 05-871; Ord. 17-1160, 12-18-2017)
7-4-20: FOUR HOUR PARKING SIX O’CLOCK A.M. TO SIX O’CLOCK P.M., EXCEPT
SATURDAY, SUNDAY AND HOLIDAYS:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such vehicle
for a period of time longer than four (4) consecutive hours from six o’clock
(6:00) A.M. to six o’clock (6:00) P.M., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays,
at any of the following locations:
 
Broad Street South side between Park Street and Court Street
Court Street East side between Broad Street and Pearl Street
Park Street  West side between Pearl Street and Broad Street
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-4-21: FOUR HOUR PARKING SIX O’CLOCK A.M. TO SIX O’CLOCK P.M.:
Provided that parking is allowed at said location and in compliance with the
City’s Parking Ordinances, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor
vehicle to legally park such vehicle for a period of time longer than four (4)
consecutive hours between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) A.M. and six o’clock
(6:00) P.M. at any of the following locations:
City leased parking lot located on Pearl Street, Parcel no. 09-26-408-034 (when
said lease is active).
City leased parking spaces at 1209 N. Green Street (when said lease is active).
See section
7-12-1 of this title, appendix A-1.
Court Street from Venice Avenue to Pearl Street.
Court Street Municipal parking lot. See section
7-12-3 of this title, appendix A-3.
Court Street Municipal parking lot #2. See section
7-12-3 of this title, appendix A-3.
Court Street Municipal parking lot #3. See section
7-12-3 of this title, appendix A-3.
Court Street west side from Pearl Street to Broad Street.
Elm Street from Front Street to the west bank of Boone Creek.
Elm Street from Riverside Drive to Court Street.
Front Street west side, north to the entrance of Walgreens and south to John
Street.
Green Street from Waukegan Road to Pearl Street.
Green Street Municipal parking lot. See section
7-12-1 of this title, appendix A-1.
Main Street from the Crystal Lake Road to one hundred fifty feet (150') east of
Front Street.
Main Street north Municipal parking lot.
Main Street south Municipal parking lot.
Park Street east side from Pearl Street to Broad Street.
Park Street from Venice Avenue to Pearl Street.
Pearl Street from the bridge to Richmond Road.
Riverside Drive from Venice Avenue to Broad Street.
Riverside Drive north Municipal parking lot. See section
7-12-6 of this title, appendix A-6.
Riverside Drive south Municipal parking lot. See section
7-12-6 of this title, appendix A-6.
Waukegan Road from a point on the north side thereof one hundred feet (100')
east of its intersection with Front Street, thence easterly to Third Street.
Waukegan Road on the south side thereof from a point one hundred seventy five
feet (175') east of its intersection with Front Street, thence easterly to
Third Street.
Exceptions: All handicapped spaces, fifteen (15) minute parking spaces and
permit parking are exempt from the four (4) hour parking restrictions, as
defined in section
7-4-7, subsection
7-4-18A, and sections
7-4-24 and
7-4-25 of this chapter.
(Ord. 17-1160, 12-18-2017)
7-4-22: LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle to permit the standing
or parking of a motor vehicle in the following designated loading zone areas,
unless such motor vehicle is a delivery vehicle which is servicing an adjoining
business:
The east side of Main Street in front of 3931 Main Street.
The east side of the Riverside Drive Municipal parking lot (section
7-12-6 of this title, appendix A-6) between Pearl Street and a point which is
fourteen feet (14') south of 1309 Riverside Drive (except the area located at
the rear of 1315 Riverside Drive).
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998; amd. Ord. 08-959)
7-4-23: SCHOOL BUS LOADING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such vehicle
between the hours of two o’clock (2:00) P.M. and three o’clock (3:00) P.M. on
school days at the following location:
 
            On the south side, beginning at a point approximately 496 feet east
Kane Avenue of the centerline of Center Street to a point 234 feet extended
            easterly from the point of beginning
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-4-24: [RESERVED]:
7-4-25: FIFTEEN MINUTE PARKING EIGHT O’CLOCK A.M. UNTIL SIX O’CLOCK P.M. ON
MONDAY THROUGH SATURDAY:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such vehicle
for longer than fifteen (15) consecutive minutes between the hours of eight
o’clock (8:00) A.M. and six o’clock (6:00) P.M. on Monday through Saturday at
the following locations:
   2 parking stalls at 1214 North Green Street.
   2 parking stalls at 1252 North Green Street.
   1 parking stall at 1305 North Court Street.
   1 parking stall at 3908 West Main Street.
   2 parking stalls at 3923 West Main Street.
   3 parking stalls at 1307 - 1309 North Riverside Drive.
   2 parking stalls at 1325 North Riverside Drive.
(Ord. 08-964; amd. Ord. 19-1188, 3-4-2019; Ord. 21-24, 5-17-2021; Ord. 21-27,
6-7-2021; Ord. 24-63, 12-16-2024)
7-4-26: FIFTEEN MINUTE PARKING SPACES ONLY:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to park such vehicle
for longer than fifteen (15) minutes at one time at the following locations:
3 parking stalls immediately south of the Boone Creek Bridge on Green Street on
the east side of the road.
(Ord. 10-1818)
7-4-27: MILLER RIVERFRONT PARK BOAT LAUNCH PARKING:
   A.   Daily, Season Pass Required: Any vehicle or trailer parked in Miller
Riverfront Park Boat Launch is required to display a valid daily pass receipt
clearly visible and placed on the front windshield in the lower right hand
corner of the driver’s position, or season pass sticker that is properly
displayed, clearly visible and affixed to the neck of the trailer.
   B.   No Parking Time Limit: No parking shall be permitted in the park
between eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. and six o’clock (6:00) A.M. daily.
(Ord. 18-1168, 4-16-2018)
7-4-28: DOWNTOWN BUSINESS DISTRICT PARKING LOTS:
To meet the needs of downtown businesses, municipal parking lots in the
Downtown Business District, only in locations specified, shall be limited to
patrons of the downtown businesses and not for general loitering. It shall be
considered loitering if a vehicle and its occupant(s) remain in the parking lot
for thirty (30) minutes without frequenting a local business or otherwise
utilizing public amenities. This shall apply in any of the following locations:
   Court Street Municipal parking lot(s).
   Green Street Municipal parking lot.
   Main Street Municipal parking lot(s).
   Riverside Drive Municipal parking lot(s).
(Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
CHAPTER 5: ONE-WAY STREETS
Section
7-5-1: One-Way Streets
7-5-1: ONE-WAY STREETS:
It is unlawful to operate any vehicle on any of the designated streets or
alleys in any direction other than that indicated in this section.
 
One-Way Street                                               Traffic Direction
Roadway adjoining 1237 N. Green Street on the north and 1225
N. Green Street on the south between Green Street and the    Westbound
Municipal parking lot
Traffic lane on Riverside Drive Municipal parking lot        Southbound
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
CHAPTER 6: TURNING RESTRICTIONS
Section
7-6-1: Right Turn Only Lanes
7-6-2: No Left Turns
7-6-1: RIGHT TURN ONLY LANES:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive such vehicle in
any designated “Right Turn Only” lane, except for making a right turn. The
following lanes are designated as “Right Turn Only” lanes:
Northbound curb lane on Green Street at Elm Street.
Southbound curb lane on Green Street at Elm Street.
Riverside Drive parking lot exit at Elm Street.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-6-2: NO LEFT TURNS:
   A.   Green Street Onto Elm Street: It shall be unlawful for the operator of
any vehicle (except those in a funeral procession) to make a left hand turn
from the northbound or southbound lanes of Green Street onto Elm Street during
the hours of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. until seven o’clock (7:00) P.M.
(Ord. 99-734; amd. Ord. 99-738)
   B.   John Street Onto Allen Avenue: It shall be unlawful for the operator of
any vehicle to make a left hand turn from John Street onto Allen Avenue during
the hours of two o’clock (2:00) P.M. until four o’clock (4:00) P.M. on school
days only.
(Ord. 01-783; amd. Ord. 05-876)
CHAPTER 7: STOPS, YIELD AND SIGNAGE
Section
7-7-1: Stop Streets Established
7-7-2: Yield Streets Established
7-7-3: Traffic Control Signals Authorized
7-7-4: Pedestrian Control Signals
7-7-5: No Right Turn On Red Light
7-7-6: No Right Turn On Red Light During School Days When Children Present
7-7-1: STOP STREETS ESTABLISHED:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle being operated on any of
the streets hereinafter listed in the column designated “Stop Street” to drive
such vehicle into the intersection with the street listed opposite it in the
column designated “Intersecting Street”, without first bringing such vehicle to
a full stop.
Stop Street Intersecting Street
Stop Street                               Intersecting Street
Abbey Drive (NB)                          Winding Creek Drive
Abbington Drive                           Dartmoor Drive
Abbington Drive                           Greenbrier Drive
Adams Drive (SB)                          Route 120
Albany Street (WB)                        Front Street
Albert Drive (WB)                         Whiting Drive
Allen Avenue                              Green Street
Allen Avenue                              John Street
Almond Lane (WB)                          Hazelwood Drive
Amherst Court (WB)                        Bennington Lane
Anne Street (EB/WB)                       Dale Avenue
Anne Street                               Front Street
Anne Street                               Green Street
April Avenue (EB)                         Whiteoak Drive
Arbor Drive (WB)                          Hemlock Drive
Arbor Drive (WB)                          Riverside Drive
Armstead Lane (NB)                        Cunat Drive
Ashland Drive                             Abbington Drive
Ashland Drive                             Cambridge Drive
Ashley Drive                              Chesterfield Drive
Ashley Drive                              Front Royal Drive
August Drive                              Greenbrier Drive
Augusta Drive                             Dartmoor Drive
Ayre Drive (NB)                           Wexford Drive
Bally (NB)                                Bull Valley
Baltimore Street (NB)                     Cunat Drive
Bank Drive (EB)                           Knox Drive
Bank Drive (WB)                           Route 31
Barkley Court (EB)                        Highbridge Trail
Barney Court (EB)                         Adams Drive
Barnwood Trail                            Courtland Trail
Bauer Road (SB)                           Bretons Drive
Beach Avenue (NB/SB)                      Bonner Drive
Beach Avenue (NB/SB)                      IL State Route 120
Beach Avenue                              Shore Drive
Beach Drive (EB/WB)                       Broadway
Beach Drive (EB/WB)                       Hilltop
Belden (SB)                               Albany
Bennington (SB)                           Martin Road
Betsy Lane (SB)                           Cunat Drive
Birch Lane (NB/SB)                        Chestnut Drive
Biscayne (EB/WB)                          Barreville
Biscayne (EB/WB)                          Bonita
Biscayne (EB)                             Broadway
Biscayne (EB/WB)                          Hilltop Boulevard
Bonita (NB/SB)                            Biscayne
Bonner Drive                              Beach Avenue
Bonner Drive (EB/WB)                      Meadow Lane
Bonnie Brae Drive (SB)                    Foxview Highland Drive
Bonnie Brae Drive (NB)                    Sunrise View
Boone Creek Circle (EB)                   Leonard Street
Boone Creek Circle (NB)                   Olde Mill Lane
Borden Street (NB/SB)                     IL State Route 120 (Elm Street)
Borden Street                             Main Street
Bradley Court (NB/SB)                     Orleans Street
Bretons Drive (WB)                        Green Street
Bretons Drive (EB)                        Ronda Road
Bretons Drive (EB/WB)                     Valley Road
Brighton Place (WB)                       Amberwood Place
Brittany Drive                            Ringwood Road
Brittany Drive                            Sherman Drive
Broad Street (EB/WB)                      Court Street
Broad Street (EB/WB)                      Green Street
Broad Street (EB/WB)                      Park Street
Broad Street                              Richmond Road
Broad Street                              Riverside Drive
Broadway (NB/SB)                          Biscayne Road
Broadway (NB)                             Bull Valley
Broadway (NB/SB)                          Stillhill
Broadway (NB/SB)                          Sunrise View
Bromley Court                             Dartmoor Drive
Bromley Court                             Kensington Drive
Brookwood Trail (NB)                      Abbey Drive
Brookwood Trail (SB)                      Bull Valley Road
Brookwood Trail (NB/SB)                   Windhaven Trail
Brown Street                              Orleans Street
Brown Street                              Prestwick Street
Bull Valley Road (EB/WB)                  Crystal Lake Road
Burning Tree Circle (WB)                  Eagle Point Drive
Burning Tree Drive (WB)                   Ridge Road
Bush Trail (EB)                           Reagan Boulevard
Callista Avenue                           Crestwood Street
Callista Avenue (EB/WB)                   Ponca Street
Callista Avenue                           Sioux Lane
Callista Avenue (EB/WB)                   South Street
Cambridge Drive                           Abbington Drive
Cambridge Drive                           Windridge Drive
Camden Street (NB)                        Cunat Drive
Camden Street (SB)                        Yorktown Street
Canterbury Drive                          Augusta Drive
Canterbury Drive                          Greenbrier Drive
Capital Drive (NB/WB)                     Ridgeview Drive
Carey Drive (NB)                          Biscayne Road
Carey Drive (SB)                          Forest Road
Carol (NB)                                Stillhill
Carriage Trail (NB/SB)                    Winding Creek Drive
Carrick Lane (EB)                         Draper Road
Carter Court (NB)                         Tyler Trail
Cartwright Trail (NB)                     Cobblestone Trail
Cartwright Trail (SB)                     Dartmoor Drive
Cashel Lane (EB)                          Doolin Avenue
Cashel Lane (SB)                          Murphy Drive
Castlewood Trail (SB)                     Cartwright Trail
Centegra Drive (WB)                       Ridgeview Drive
Center Street                             Grove Avenue
Center Street (NB/SB)                     John Street
Center Street (NB/SB)                     Kane Avenue
Center Street                             Main Street
Central Street                            Prairie Avenue
Central Street                            Shore Drive
Charles Street (SB)                       IL Route 120
Charlotte Avenue                          Country Club Drive
Charlotte Avenue                          John Street
Charmin Lane (EB)                         Murphy Drive
Charmin Lane (WB)                         Veterans Parkway
Chasefield Circle                         Creekside Trail
(south intersection WB)
Cherryhill Court (NB)                     Whiting Drive
Chesterfield Court                        Chesterfield Drive
Chesterfield Drive                        Oakwood Drive
Chesterfield Drive                        Royal Drive
Chestnut Drive (SB)                       McCullom Lake Road
Chestnut Lane (WB)                        Pine Drive
Chickaloon Drive                          Draper Road
Church Street                             Grand Avenue
Clearbrook Avenue                         Millstream Drive
Clearbrook Avenue                         North Drive
Clearview Avenue                          Eastern Avenue
Clearview Avenue                          Oak Drive
Clinton Court (NB)                        Tyler Trail
Clover Avenue                             Dale Avenue
Clover Avenue                             Green Street
Clover Avenue (EB/WB)                     Timothy Lane
Cobbler Crossing (SB)                     Remington Trail
Cobblestone Trail (EB/WB)                 Wedgewood Trail
Cobblestone Trail (EB)                    Whitmore Trail
Cobblestone Trail (WB)                    Winbleton Trail
Colony Trail (SB)                         Deerwood Trail
Colony Trail                              Glenbrook Trail
Colony Trail (NB)                         Timber Trail
Commercial Avenue                         Highview Avenue
Commercial Avenue                         Meadow Lane
Concord Drive (NB)                        Savoy Lane
Concord Drive (NB)                        Veterans Parkway
Conway Circle (WB - both)                 Doolin Avenue
Cork Lane (NB)                            Dartmoor Drive
Cork Lane (WB)                            Farmstead Drive
Court Street (WB)                         Pine Street
Cornell Court                             Orleans Street
Corporate Drive (SB)                      Prime Parkway
Court Street (NB/SB)                      Elm Street
Court Street (NB/SB)                      Pearl Street
Court Street                              Washington Street
Courtland Trail                           Cross Trail
Courtland Trail (WB)                      Driftwood Court
Courtland Trail                           Driftwood Trail
Creekside Lane (both intersections)       Scully Drive
Creekside Trail (NB/SB)                   Greenbrier Drive
Creekside Trail (EB)                      Huntington Drive
Creekside Trail (SB)                      Winding Creek Drive
Crescent Avenue (EB/WB and NB/SB)         John Street
Crestwood Street                          Lillian Street
Crestwood Street                          Mill Street
Crooked Tree Court (SB)                   Olde Mill Lane
Cross Trail (NB/SB)                       Dartmoor Drive
Cross Trail (NB/SB)                       Glenbrook Trail
Cross Trail (NB)                          Loyola Drive
Cross Trail (NB/SB)                       Oregon Trail
Crystal Lake Road (SB)                    Crystal Trail Cross Trail
Crystal Trail                             Glenbrook Trail
Cumberland Circle (SB/EB)                 Ashley Drive
Cunat Drive (NB)                          Bull Valley Road
Cunat Drive (WB)                          Crystal Lake Road
Curran Road                               Draper Road
Dale Avenue (NB)                          Anne Street
Dale Avenue (NB/SB)                       High Street
Dartmoor Drive (WB/EB)                    Cross Trail
Dartmoor Drive (EB/WB)                    Crystal Lake Road
Dartmoor Drive (EB/WB)                    Curran Road
Dartmoor Drive (WB)                       Farmstead Drive
Dartmoor Drive (EB/WB)                    Thornwood Drive
Dartmoor Drive (EB/WB)                    Waters Edge Drive
Dayton (WB)                               IL State Route 31
Deer Run Trail (SB)                       Deerwood Trail
Dear Run Trail (EB)                       Silver Glen Road
Deerwood Trail (WB)                       Ridge Road
Denali Trail                              Chickaloon Drive
DePaul Court (SB)                         Loyola Drive
Devonshire Court                          Waters Edge Drive
Doherty Lane (EB)                         Doolin Avenue
Doherty Lane (SB)                         Flynn Street
Donegal Court (SB)                        Donegal Lane
Donegal Lane (WB)                         Tralee Lane
Donnelly Place (NB/SB)                    Pebble Creek Drive
Donovan Court                             Orleans Street
Donovan Street                            Orleans Street
Doolin Avenue (NB)                        Veterans Parkway
Dot Street                                IL State Route 120
Drake Court                               Orleans Street
Draper Road (WB)                          Carrick Lane
Draper Road (WB)                          Curran Road
Driftwood (NB/SB)                         Glenbrook Trail
Driftwood (NB/SB)                         Winding Creek Drive
Driftwood Trail                           Barnwood Trail
Driveway exits from hospital parking lots Medical Center Drive
Dublin Court (WB)                         Draper Road (both intersections)
Dundalk Lane (EB)                         Doolin Avenue
Dundalk Lane (SB)                         Murphy Drive
Eagle Point (NB)                          Burning Tree Circle
Eaglewood Trail (EB)                      Highbridge Trail
Eaglewood Trail (EB)                      Newport Trail
Eastern Avenue                            Prairie Avenue
Eastern Avenue                            Shore Drive
Eisenhower Boulevard (WB/NB)              Tyler Trail
Enfield Drive (SB)                        Murphy Drive
Essex Court                               Chesterfield Drive
Fairfax Drive (SB)                        Abbey Drive
Fairfax Drive (NB)                        Winding Creek Drive
Fairway Drive                             Green Street
Fairway Drive (EB/WB)                     Valley Road
Farmstead Drive (WB)                      Draper Road
Farrington Drive                          Canterbury Drive
Farrington Drive                          Windridge Drive
Fieldstone Trail (WB)                     Newport Trail
Fieldstone Trail (WB)                     Whitmore Drive
Florence Boulevard (EB)                   Ringwood Road
Florence Boulevard (WB)                   Whiting Drive
Flower Street                             Home Avenue
Flower Street                             Prairie Avenue
Flower Street (NB/SB)                     Ramble Road
Flower Street                             Shore Drive
Flower Street                             Willow Lane
Forest (WB)                               Barreville
Fourth Street                             James Street
Fourth Street (NB/SB)                     John Street
Fourth Street                             Main Street
Foxview Highland Drive (WB)               Hilltop Boulevard
Freund Avenue (EB)                        Church Street
Freund Avenue                             IL State Route 120
Freund Avenue                             Maple Avenue
Front Royal Court                         Front Royal Drive
Front Royal Drive (SB)                    Chesterfield Drive
Front Royal Drive (EB/WB)                 Hanley Street
Front Royal Drive                         IL State Route 120
Front Street                              West Street
Garden Quarter Road                       Hanley Street
Geneva Place (WB)                         Amberwood Place
Geneva Place (EB)                         Donnelly Place
Gladstone Drive (NB)                      Centegra Drive
Gladstone Drive (SB)                      Shamrock Lane
Glen Drive                                Bonner Drive
Glenbrook Trail                           Cross Trail
Glenbrook Trail (WB)                      Crystal Lake Road
Glenbrook Trail (NB)                      Dartmoor Drive
Glenbrook Trail (EB/WB)                   Driftwood Trail
Golfview (both intersections)             John Street
Grand Avenue                              Freund Avenue
Grand Avenue                              Millstream Drive
Grand Avenue                              Richmond Road
Graue Mill Court (NB)                     Spring Creek Lane
Green Street (NB/SB)                      John Street
Green Street (NB/SB)                      Pearl Street
Green Street                              Washington Street
Green Street (NB/SB)                      Waukegan Road
Greenbrier Drive (EB/WB)                  Augusta Drive
Greenbrier Drive (NB)                     Creekside Drive
Greenbrier Drive                          Crystal Lake Road
Greendale Court (WB)                      Loyola Drive
Gregg (NB)                                Bull Valley Road
Grove Avenue (EB/WB)                      Center Street
Hampton Court                             Chesterfield Drive
Hampton Court                             Chesterfield Drive and Ashley Drive
Hanley Street                             Crystal Lake Road
Hanley Street                             Front Royal Drive
Hanson Avenue (NB)                        Cunat Drive
Hanson Avenue (SB)                        Madison Avenue/Monroe Avenue
Hartland Trail                            Glenbrook Trail
Hartland Trail                            Village Trail
Hayward Court (EB)                        Matanuska Trail
Hazelwood Drive (NB)                      Almond Lane
Hazelwood Lane (EB)                       Riverside Drive
Hemlock Drive (NB)                        Arbor Drive
Hemlock Drive (WB)                        Kennedy Drive
Heritage Drive (NB)                       Greenbrier Drive
Heritage Drive (SB)                       Winding Creek Drive
High Street                               Front Street
High Street                               Timothy Lane
Highbridge Trail (SB)                     Eaglewood Trail
Highbridge Trail (NB)                     Jordan Court
Highview Avenue (NB/SB)                   Home Avenue
Highview Avenue                           IL State Route 120 (Elm Street)
Highview Avenue                           Prairie Avenue
Highview Avenue                           Shore Drive
Highview Avenue                           Willow Lane
Hillside Lane (NB)                        Eisenhower Boulevard
Hillside Lane (SB)                        IL Route 120
Hillside Lane (SB)                        Lincoln Road
Hilltop (NB/SB)                           Biscayne
Hilltop (NB)                              Bull Valley Road
Hilltop (SB)                              Pleasant View
Hollywood Boulevard (NB/SB)               Biscayne
Hollywood Boulevard (SB)                  Forest Road
Holy Apostles Access Road (SB)            Cunat Drive
Home Avenue (EB/WB)                       Beach Avenue
Home Avenue                               Meadow Lane
Home Avenue (EB/WB)                       Parklane Avenue
Home Avenue (EB/WB)                       Ramble Road
Hoover Trail (NB/SB)                      Polk Trail
Hoover Trail (NB)                         Tyler Trail
Hunter Path (EB)                          Broadway
Hunter Path (WB)                          Hilltop
Huntington Drive (NB)                     Dartmoor Drive
Huntington Drive (SB)                     Greenbrier Drive
Huntington Drive (NB/SB)                  Sarasota Drive
Illiamna Trail                            Denali Trail
Independence Court (EB)                   Highbridge Trail
Industrial Drive (EB/WB)                  Oak Drive
Inverness Trail (NB)                      Dartmoor Drive
Inverness Trail (SB)                      Eaglewood Trail
James Street                              Center Street
James Street                              Green Street
Jefferson Avenue (NB)                     Cunat Drive
Jefferson Avenue (SB)                     Monroe Avenue
Jennifer Lane (SB/NB)                     Orleans Street
Jennifer Lane                             Prestwick Street
John Street (EB/WB)                       Center Street
John Street (NB/SB)                       Crescent Avenue
John Street                               Front Street
John Street (EB/WB)                       Green Street
Jordan Court (EB)                         Highbridge Trail
Joyce Court (EB)                          Oakton Street/Joyce Lane
Joyce Lane (EB/WB)                        Cross Trail
Joyce Lane (NB/SB)                        Dartmoor Drive
Joyce Lane (NB)                           Loyola Drive
Judy Lane                                 John Street
Kane Avenue (EB/WB)                       Center Street
Kane Avenue                               Front Street
Kane Avenue                               Green Street
Katie Lane (EB)                           Ronda Road
Katie Lane (NB)                           Turnberry Drive
Katmai Trail                              Chickaloon Drive
Kenmare Lane (EB)                         Doolin Avenue
Kenmare Lane (SB)                         Murphy Drive
Kennedy Drive (EB)                        Hemlock Drive
Kennedy Drive (NB)                        McCullom Lake Road
Kennedy Drive (SB)                        McCullom Lake Road
Kensington Drive                          Crystal Lake Road
Kensington Drive (WB)                     Kensington Drive
Kensington Drive                          Oakwood Drive
Kensington Drive (SB)                     Stratford Court
Kensington Drive (WB)                     Stratford Court (west intersection)
Kensington Drive                          Waters Edge Drive
Key Lane (EB/WB)                          Cunat Drive
Kinley (EB/WB)                            Broadway
Kinley (WB)                               Hilltop
Kinley (EB)                               Riverside Drive
Kinsale Lane (EB)                         Carrick Lane
Knoll Avenue                              Home Avenue
Knoll Avenue                              Prairie Avenue
Knoll Avenue                              Shore Drive
Knoll Avenue                              Willow Lane
Knox Drive (NB)                           Park Place
Knox Drive (SB)                           Municipal Drive
Knox Drive (NB)                           Municipal Drive
Lakeland Avenue                           Home Avenue
Lakeland Avenue                           Ramble Road
Lakewood Avenue                           Home Avenue
Lakewood Avenue                           Shore Drive
Lakewood Avenue (NB/SB)                   Willow Lane
Lakewood Road (NB)                        McCullom Lake Road
Lakewood Road                             Petersen Park Road
Landcaster Circle (EB both)               Whitmore Trail
Landings Court (WB)                       Olde Mill Lane
Larkin Lane (WB)                          Green Street
Lauren Court                              Orleans Street
Lawn Court                                Bonner Drive
Lawrence Parkway                          Bull Valley Road
Lawrence Parkway                          Medical Center Drive
Lee Street                                Dale Avenue
Lee Street (EB)                           Timothy Street
Legend Lane (SB)                          Dartmoor Drive
Leonard Street (NB)                       Olde Mill Lane
Leonard Street (NB/SB)                    Orleans Street
Leonard Street (SB)                       Prestwick Street
Lexington Street (WB)                     Baltimore Street
Lexington Street (NB)                     Cunat Drive
Lillian Street                            Crystal Lake Road
Lillian Street (EB/WB)                    Sioux Lane
Limerick Lane (SB)                        Shannon Drive
Linda Road                                Fairway Drive
Linda Road (SB)                           Skyway Drive
Loch Glen Lane (NB)                       Turnberry Drive
Logan Avenue                              Crestwood Street
London Trail (NB)                         Cobblestone Trail
Longford Drive (WB)                       Farmstead Drive
Lorient Drive (WB)                        Bauer Road
Lorient Drive (EB)                        Ronda Road
Lorient Drive (EB/WB)                     Valley Road
Loyola Drive (NB/SB)                      Dartmoor Drive
Loyola Drive (SB)                         Joyce Lane
Madison Avenue (NB)                       Cunat Drive
Main Street (WB)                          Crystal Lake Road
Main Street (EB/WB)                       Front Street
Main Street                               Green Street
Malibu Court (EB)                         Crystal Lake Road
Malibu Court (WB)                         Heritage Drive
Maple Avenue                              Richmond Road
Manchester Mall                           Front Royal Drive
Martin Road                               IL State Route 120
Martin Road                               Ringwood Road
Matanuska Trail                           Chickaloon Drive
McCullom Lake Road (EB)                   Riverside Drive
McCullom Lake Road (WB)                   Riverside Drive
McHenry (NB)                              Bull Valley Road
McHenry (NB/SB)                           Miller Drive
McHenry (SB)                              Stillhill Drive
McHenry Country Club exit                 John Street
Meadow Lane (NB)                          Bull Valley Road
Meadow Lane (SB)                          Miller Drive
Meadow Lane (WB)                          Oakwood Drive
Meadow Lane (NB/SB)                       Prairie Street
Medical Center Drive (WB)                 Centegra Drive
Medical Center Drive                      IL State Route 31 (Front Street)
Medical Center Drive (EB/WB)              Lawrence Parkway
Medical Center Drive (WB/EB)              Ring Road
Melrose Court                             Wiltshire Drive
Middleton Lane (EB/SB)                    Longford Drive
Mill Street                               Crystal Lake Road
Miller Drive (EB/WB)                      Broadway
Miller Drive (WB)                         Hilltop
Miller Parkway (NB/SB)                    Prime Parkway
Millstream Drive                          Elm Street
Millstream Drive (SB)                     Front Street
Millstream Drive                          Maple Avenue
Monroe Avenue (NB)                        Cunat Drive
Municipal Drive (EB)                      Green Street
Municipal Drive (WB)                      Knox Drive
Municipal parking lot (SB)                Municipal Drive
Murphy Drive (EB)                         Doolin Avenue
Murphy Drive (SB)                         Flynn Street
Newport Trail (NB)                        Dartmoor Drive
Norman Drive (NB)                         Dartmoor Drive
Norman Drive (WB)                         Joyce Lane
North Avenue                              Home Avenue
North Avenue                              Prairie Avenue
North Avenue                              Shore Drive
North Avenue                              Willow Lane
North Drive (NB/SB)                       Grand Avenue
North Drive                               Maple Avenue
North Drive                               West Street
Northfox Lane                             Royal Drive
Northside Avenue (NB)                     IL Route 120
Oak Avenue (EB/WB)                        Center Street
Oak Avenue (EB/WB)                        Front Street
Oak Drive (NB/SB)                         Orleans Street
Oak Drive (NB/SB)                         Prairie Avenue
Oakton Court (SB)                         Dartmoor Drive
Oakton Street (NB)                        Dartmoor Drive
Oakwood Drive                             Bonner Drive
Oakwood Drive (NB/SB)                     Chesterfield Drive
Oakwood Drive (NB/SB)                     Meadow Lane
Oakwood Drive                             Royal Drive
Ojibwa Lane                               Draper Road
Ojibwa Lane                               Matanuska Trail
Olde Mill Lane (SB)                       Leonard Street
Olde Mill Lane (NB)                       McCullom Lake Road
Orchid Patch (NB)                         Bull Valley Road
Orchid Path (SB)                          Miller Drive
Oregon Trail                              Cross Trail
Oregon Trail                              Glenbrook Trail
Orleans Street (EB)                       Donovan Court
Orleans Street (WB)                       Donovan Street
Orleans Street                            Industrial Drive
Orleans Street (EB/WB)                    Leonard Avenue
Orleans Street                            McCullom Lake Road
Orleans Street (EB/WB)                    Oak Drive
Orleans Street (NB/SB)                    Prestwick Street
Overland Trail                            Cross Trail
Overland Trail                            Glenbrook Trail
Park Place (WB)                           Route 31
Park Street (NB/SB)                       Elm Street
Park Street (NB/SB)                       Pearl Street
Park Street (NB/SB)                       Washington Street
Parklane Avenue                           IL State Route 120 (Elm Street)
Parklane Avenue                           Shore Drive
Parkway Avenue                            Eastern Avenue
Parkway Avenue                            Oak Drive
Pearl Avenue (NB)                         Stillhill Drive
Pearl Street (EB/WB)                      Green Street
Pearl Street                              Riverside Drive
Pebble Creek Drive (WB)                   Amberwood Place
Pebble Creek Drive (EB)                   Green Street
Perry Lane (NB)                           Cunat Drive
Petersen Park Road (west intersection)    Lakewood Road
Petersen Park Road                        McCullom Lake Road
Pin Oak Drive                             Ojibwa Lane
Pine Drive (SB)                           McCullom Lake Road
Pine Drive (NB - both intersections)      McCullom Lake Road
Pleasant Avenue                           Home Avenue
Pleasant Avenue                           Willow Lane
Plumrose Lane (NB)                        Arbor Drive
Plumrose Lane (WB)                        Hemlock Drive
Polk Trail (EB)                           Hillside Lane
Polk Trail (WB)                           Reagan Boulevard
Ponca Street                              Lillian Street
Ponca Street                              Logan Street
Prairie Avenue (EB/WB)                    Meadow Lane
Prairie Avenue                            Oak Drive
Prairie Street (EB)                       Bally Road
Prairie Street                            Beach Avenue
Prestwick Street                          Donovan
Prestwick Street                          Orleans Street
Prime Parkway (EB)                        IL Route 31
Pyndale Drive                             Bromley Court
Pyndale Drive                             Kensington Drive
Radcliff Court (WB)                       Bennington Lane
Ramble Road                               Elm Street
Ramble Road                               Flower Street
Ramble Road (WB)                          North Avenue
Reagan Boulevard (SB)                     Lincoln Road
Reagan Boulevard (NB)                     Tyler Trail
Redwood Lane (EB/WB/NB)                   Chestnut Drive
Redwood Lane (NB)                         Hazelwood Drive
Ridgeview Drive (NB/SB)                   Bull Valley Road
Ridgeview Drive (SB)                      Prime Parkway
Ridgeway Trail (SB)                       Deerwood Trail
Ring Road (NB)                            Medical Center Drive
River Road (NB)                           Lincoln Road
Riverside Drive (NB/SB)                   Broad Street
Riverside Drive (NB/SB)                   McCullom Lake Road
Riverside Drive (NB/SB)                   Pearl Street
Riverside Drive (NB/SB)                   Washington Street
Riverside Drive parking lot               Elm Street
Riverstream Drive                         John Street
Rogers Avenue                             Home Avenue
Rogers Avenue                             Prairie Avenue
Rogers Avenue                             Shore Drive
Rogers Avenue                             Willow Lane
Ronda Road (NB/SB)                        Turnberry Drive
Rose Avenue (SB)                          Tomlinson Drive
Rose Avenue (NB)                          Whiting Drive
Ross Lane (SB)                            Cunat Drive
Royal Drive (NB)                          Chesterfield Drive
Royal Drive                               Crystal Lake Road
Ryan Street                               Orleans Street
Ryan Street                               Prestwick Street
St. Paul Street (EB)                      Green Street
Sandburg Drive                            Abbington Drive
Sandburg Drive                            Windridge Drive
Sarasota Drive (EB)                       Augusta Drive
Sarasota Drive (WB)                       Creekside Trail
Sarasota Drive (WB)                       Huntington Drive
Savoy Lane (EB)                           Concord Drive
Savoy Lane (NB)                           Veterans Parkway
Scully Drive                              Elm Street (Route 120)
Settlers Court (NB)                       Olde Mill Lane
Shannon Drive (WB)                        Draper Road
Shepherd Hill Drive                       Green Street
Sherman Drive                             Ringwood Drive
Sherman Drive                             Shore Drive
Shore Drive (EB/WB)                       Beach Road
Shore Drive (EB/WB)                       Meadow Lane
Shore Drive                               Oak Drive
Shore Drive (EB/WB)                       Parklane Avenue
Shore Drive                               Ringwood Road
Shore Drive (EB/WB)                       Sherman
Shorehill Drive                           Beach Avenue
Shorehill Drive (EB/WB)                   Parklane Avenue
Shorehill Drive                           Sunset Avenue
Silbury Court (both intersections)        Kensington Drive
Silver Glen Road (NB)                     Burning Tree Drive
Silver Glen Road (SB)                     Deerwood Trail
Sioux Lane                                Lillian Street
Skyway Drive (EB/WB)                      Linda Road
Skyway Drive (EB)                         Ronda Road
Skyway Drive (EB/WB)                      Valley Drive
Somerset Mall                             Front Royal Drive
South Sarasota Drive (EB)                 Huntington Drive
South Street                              Lillian Street
South Street                              Logan Street
Spring Creek Lane (WB/SB)                 Olde Mill Lane
Springbrook Court (NB/SB)                 Winding Creek Drive
Springdale Lane                           Scully Drive
Steeplechase Court (SB)                   Castlewood Trail
Stillhill Drive (WB)                      Hilltop
Stillhill Drive (EB)                      Riverside Drive
Stonebridge Trail (EB)                    Whitmore Trail
Stratford Court (east intersection)       Kensington Drive
Stratford Court (west end)                Kensington Drive
Sumner Lane (WB)                          Cunat Drive
Sunrise View (WB)                         Bonita Lane
Sunrise View (EB/WB)                      Hilltop
Sunset Avenue                             Home Avenue
Sunset Avenue                             Shore Drive
Sunset Avenue (both intersections)        Willow Lane
Sussex Drive                              Ashley Drive
Sussex Drive (EB)                         Front Royal Drive
Sycamore Court                            Matanuska Trail
Tamarack Court                            Ojibwa Lane
Tanglewood Trail (NB)                     Cobblestone Trail
Tanglewood Trail (EB)                     Whitmore Trail
Terrace (EB)                              Broadway
Terrace (WB)                              Hilltop
Third Street                              Elm Street
Third Street                              James Street
Third Street (NB/SB)                      John Street
Third Street (NB/SB)                      Main Street
Third Street (NB/SB)                      Waukegan Road
Thornwood Drive                           Dartmoor Drive
Thornwood Drive                           Waters Edge Drive
Timber Trail (EB)                         Ridgeway Trail
Timber Trail (WB)                         Silver Glen Road
Timber Trail Court (EB)                   Silver Glen Road
Timothy Lane                              Dale Avenue
Timothy Lane                              Young Street
Tomlinson Drive (EB/WB)                   Bennington Lane
Tomlinson Drive (NB)                      Whiting Drive
Tralee Lane (EB/SB)                       Cork Lane
Trappers Court (SB)                       Boone Creek Circle
Truman Trail (NB)                         Tyler Trail
Turnberry Drive (WB)                      Green Street
Turnberry Drive (EB)                      Ronda Road
Turnberry Drive (EB/WB)                   Valley Road
Tustamena Trail                           Chickaloon Drive
Tustamena Trail                           Matanuska Trail
Tyler Trail (SB)                          Truman Trail
Valley Drive (NB/SB)                      Skyway Drive
Veterans Parkway (EB)                     Barreville Road
Veterans Parkway (WB)                     Route 31
Village Trail                             Overland Trail
Vine (WB)                                 Barreville Road
Vine (EB)                                 Hollywood Boulevard
Virginia Avenue                           Country Club Drive
Vista Terrace (EB)                        Broadway
Vista Terrace (WB)                        Hilltop
Wall Street (EB)                          Hillside Lane (north intersection)
Wall Street (EB)                          Hillside Lane (south intersection)
Walnut Lane (WB)                          Pine Drive
Washington Street (EB/WB)                 Green Street
Washington Street                         Richmond Road
Washington Street                         Riverside Drive
Waterford Court (NB)                      Waterford Drive
Waterford Drive (EB/SB)                   Farmstead Drive
Waters Edge Drive                         Dartmoor Drive
Waters Edge Drive                         Kensington Drive
Waukegan Road                             Front Street
Waukegan Road                             Green Street
Waukegan Road (EB/WB)                     Third Street
Wedgewood Trail (NB)                      Bluegrass Trail
Wedgewood Trail (SB)                      Dartmoor Drive
Wellington Drive                          Augusta Drive
Wellington Drive                          Canterbury Drive
West Street                               Front Street
Westminster Place (WB)                    Amberwood Place
Westminster Place (EB)                    Donnelly Place
Wexford Court (NB)                        Wexford Drive
Wexford Drive (NB)                        Ayre Drive
Wexford Drive (EB/SB)                     Farmstead Drive
Whitaker Trail (SB)                       Remington Trail
Whiteoak Court (WB)                       Whiteoak Drive
Whiteoak Drive (NB)                       Tomlinson Drive
Whiting Court (NB)                        Whiting Drive
Whiting Drive (SB)                        Tomlinson Drive
Whitmore Trail (NB/SB)                    Dartmoor Drive
Whitmore Trail (WB)                       Newport Trail
Willow Lane (EB/WB)                       Meadow Lane
Wiltshire Drive (both intersections)      Oakwood Drive
Windhaven Trail (WB)                      Brookwood Trail
Winding Creek Drive (EB/WB)               Crystal Lake Road
Winding Creek Drive                       Driftwood Drive
Winding Creek Drive (EB/WB)               Heritage Drive
Windridge Drive                           Dartmoor Drive
Windridge Drive                           Greenbrier Drive
Windsor Lane (WB)                         Cunat Drive
Winslow Circle                            Waters Edge Drive
Wood Street                               Crestwood Street
Wood Street                               Crystal Lake Road
Woodmar Circle                            Waters Edge Drive
Woodridge Trail (SB)                      Deerwood Trail
Woodridge Trail (EB)                      Ridgeway Trail
Woodridge Trail (EB)                      Timber Trail
Yorktown Street (EB)                      Baltimore Street
Yorktown Street (SB)                      Cunat Drive
Young Street                              Green Street
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998; amd. Ord. 99-743; Ord. 00-752; Ord. 00-755; Ord. 00-
762; Ord. 01-773; Ord. 01-774; Ord. 01-787; Ord. 02-795; Ord. 02-801; Ord. 02-
805; Ord. 02-808; Ord. 02-810; Ord. 02-813; Ord. 02-815; Ord. 04-839; Ord. 06-
881; Ord. 06-897; Ord. 06-898; Ord. 08-956; Ord. 08-963; Ord. 09-991; Ord. 13-
1073)
7-7-2: YIELD STREETS ESTABLISHED:
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle being operated on any of
the streets hereinafter listed in the column designated “Yield Streets” to
drive such vehicle into the intersection with the street listed opposite to it
in the column designated “Intersecting Streets”, without first giving
preferential right-of- way to traffic on said “Intersecting Street”, and, if
necessary, bring such vehicle to a full stop.
Yield Street Intersecting Street
Yield Street                                     Intersecting Street
Bonnie Brae (SB)                                 Pleasant View
Broadway (SB)                                    Pleasant View
Carol Street (SB)                                Beach
Clearview Avenue                                 Central Street
Crescent Avenue                                  Golfview Avenue
First Avenue (WB)                                Washington Street
Green Street (SB traffic making right hand turn) Waukegan Road
Hunter Drive                                     Park Lane
Hunter Drive                                     Sunset Avenue
Kinley Road (EB/WB)                              McHenry
Lakewood Avenue                                  Shorehill Drive
Lincoln Avenue                                   Church Street
Lincoln Avenue                                   Freund Avenue
Parkway Avenue                                   Central Street
Pearl Avenue (SB)                                Beach Drive
Spruce Lane                                      Flower Street
Victor Drive                                     Park Lane
Victor Drive                                     Sunset Avenue
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-7-3: TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS AUTHORIZED:
The traffic control signals erected at the following locations are hereby
authorized and deemed to be official:
Bull Valley Road at IL State Route 31 (Front Street).
Chapel Hill Road at IL Route 120.
Front Street at Elm Street.
Green Street at Elm Street.
Industrial Drive at Waukegan Road.
Lillian/Grove at IL State Route 31 (Front Street).
Meadow Lane at IL State Route 120 (Elm Street).
Richmond Road at Elm Street.
Richmond Road at McCullom Lake Road.
Ringwood Road/Draper Road at IL State Route 120 (Elm Street).
River Road at IL Route 120.
Riverside Drive at Elm Street. (Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-7-4: PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS:
The pedestrian control signals erected at the following locations are hereby
authorized and deemed to be official:
Front Street at Elm Street.
Green Street at Elm Street.
Lillian/Grove at IL State Route 31 (Front Street).
Richmond Road at Elm Street.
Riverside Drive at Elm Street.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-7-5: NO RIGHT TURN ON RED LIGHT:
The driver of any vehicle facing a circular red traffic control signal is
prohibited from making a right turn at the following intersections during the
time such signal is exhibited:
Southbound traffic on Riverside Drive at Elm Street.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-7-6: NO RIGHT TURN ON RED LIGHT DURING SCHOOL DAYS WHEN CHILDREN PRESENT:
The driver of any vehicle facing a circular red traffic control signal is
prohibited from making a right turn at the following intersections during the
time such signal is exhibited during school days when children are present:
Westbound traffic on Pearl Street at Richmond Road (Route 31 North).
(Ord. 05-875)
CHAPTER 8: RESTRICTED ROAD TRAFFIC
Section
7-8-1: Vehicle Traffic Restricted
7-8-2: Class 2 Truck Routes; Exceptions
7-8-3: Penalty
7-8-1: VEHICLE TRAFFIC RESTRICTED:
   A.   Except as provided otherwise herein, the following roadways are hereby
restricted to vehicle traffic with a single or combination registered weight of
twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds or more:
   Dartmoor Drive from Crystal Lake Road to Curran Road.
   Lillian Street from Front Street to Crystal Lake Road.
   Maple Avenue from Richmond Road to Millstream Drive.
   Martin Road from Illinois Route 120 to Ringwood Road.
   Orleans Street from McCullom Lake Road to Oak Drive.
   Riverside Drive from McCullom Lake Road to Washington Street.
   Veterans Parkway from Illinois Route 31 to Green Street.
   Biscayne Avenue from Green Street to Hilltop Boulevard.
   Hilltop Boulevard from Biscayne Avenue to Bull Valley Road.
   Bull Valley Road from Hilltop Boulevard to McHenry Avenue.
   B.   Exceptions: The following below exceptions are permitted on the above
restricted roads in reference to vehicles with a combined registered weight of
twenty-six thousand (26,000) pounds or more.
      1.   Vehicles of legal size and weight making deliveries on the
restricted route.
      2.   Emergency vehicles.
      3.   Government owned vehicles.
      4.   Utility companies while conducting maintenance or repairs on or
adjacent to the restricted roadway.
      5.   School buses.
      6.   City permitted garbage trucks.
      7.   Personal vehicles when the resident of a restricted road, or
connecting road is going to or from their residence.
      8.   (Martin Road Only) restricted implements of husbandry shall be
exempt as well as farm vehicles in the course of farming land that adjoins
Martin Road.
(Ord. 15-1110; amd. Ord. 23-42, 8-21-2023)
7-8-2: CLASS 2 TRUCK ROUTES; EXCEPTIONS:
   Specified: The following roads are classified as Class 2 truck routes
pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-107:
   Adams Drive
   Albany Street
   Barney Court
   Belden Street
   Blake Boulevard
   Bolger Court
   Borden Street
   Bull Valley Road from Curran Road to Crystal Lake Road
   Century Court
   Commercial Drive
   Corporate Parkway
   Curran Road from Illinois Route 120 to Bull Valley Road
   Dayton Street
   Dot Street
   Hi Point Road
   Hill Street
   Industrial Drive
   Medical Center Drive
   Metalmaster Way
   Miller Parkway
   Oak Drive from Elm Street to Orleans Street
   Prime Parkway
   Ridgeview Drive
   Ringwood Road, which is under City jurisdiction from Illinois Route 120 to
the northern most City limits
(Ord. 15-1110; amd. Ord. 23-42, 8-21-2023)
7-8-3: PENALTY:
   Any person, corporation, or other legal entity found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be subject to injunctive relief requested by
the City and fined according to the Fines and Penalties found in
Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible to reimburse the
City for all costs of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees.
(Ord. 15-1110; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022; Ord. 23-42, 8-21-2023)
CHAPTER 9: PERMITS
Section
7-9-1: Permit Requirements
7-9-2: Application For Permit
7-9-3: Fee Schedules
7-9-4: Police Escorts
7-9-5: Bonds, Indemnification And Insurance
7-9-6: Suspension And Reinstatement
7-9-1: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: A permit shall be required for the movement of any
vehicle or combinations of vehicles, that is nondivisible or is carrying a load
that is nondivisible, while operating on roadways and bridges within the
jurisdiction of the City which exceeds the following limits:
      1.   Maximum gross weight of more than eighty thousand (80,000) pounds;
      2.   Maximum single axle weight of more than twenty thousand (20,000)
pounds;
      3.   Maximum tandem axle weight of more than thirty four thousand
(34,000) pounds;
      4.   Axle weights or series of axle weights that exceed the maximum
limits set forth in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/15-111(f);
      5.   Maximum gross length of forty two feet (42') for single vehicles;
      6.   Maximum gross length of more than fifty five feet (55') for tractor-
semitrailer combinations;
      7.   Maximum gross length of more than sixty feet (60') for all other
combinations;
      8.   Maximum gross width of more than eight feet, six inches (8'6");
      9.   Maximum gross height of more than thirteen feet, six inches (13'6").
   B.   Exemptions: Exempt from permits are the following:
      1.   Fire Department vehicles;
      2.   Those vehicles operating under an emergency declaration;
      3.   City owned vehicles engaged in emergency utility repair;
      4.   Equipment used for snow and ice removal, owned or operated by any
governmental body.
   C.   Issue In Name Of Owner, Operator: Permits shall be issued only in the
name of a person, firm, business or corporation that owns and operates the
transporting vehicle or that operates the vehicle under a bona fide lease
agreement.
   D.   Time Of Day: Permits for vehicles that are both overweight and/or
oversize are valid only a half hour before sunrise until a half hour after
sunset, on any day which a permit issued by the Illinois Department of
Transportation is valid.
   E.   Nontransferable: Permits are nontransferable and apply only to the
permittee.
   F.   Revisions: The City may issue revisions to permits:
      1.   To correct an error attributed to the City;
      2.   To correct an error attributed to the applicant, discovered before
the move;
      3.   To adjust weights, dimension or routes as issued on the permit,
before the move is made.
   G.   Agreement: The permit, when issued, constitutes an agreement between
the permittee and the City that the move described in the application will take
place only as described. The permittee has the responsibility to report to the
Police Department any inaccuracies or errors on the part of either the City or
the permittee before starting any move. Undertaking the move is prima facie
evidence of acceptance of the permit as issued and its terms.
   H.   Route: The routing prescribed in the permit constitutes the sole extent
of the authority granted by the permit for the use of roads within the
jurisdiction of the City, and any vehicle and/or load found to be off route
will be considered off route and without a permit. Permits shall be in the
driver’s possession at all times unless otherwise directed by the Police
Department and presented upon demand to any and all police officers for the
purpose of inspection. Both electronic and paper copies of the permit are
acceptable.
   I.   Divisible Vehicles: Any vehicle(s) and/or load found to be divisible
will render the permit null and void. The entire gross weight and axles weights
of the vehicle(s) with the load are subject to legal weights. It is the duty of
the applicant to verify the nondivisibility of the vehicle(s) before making
application for the permit. The permit application itself is prima facie
evidence that the applicant confirmed the vehicle(s) and/or load was
nondivisible.
   J.   Notification: If required, arrangement shall be made by the permittee
to have the proper utilities notified, property moved, bridge or highway
analysis performed and completed in advance of any permit movement.
   K.   Other Applicable Laws: All movements under the permit shall be made in
accordance with all applicable Federal, State and local laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations.
   L.   Deception: Permits are null and void if altered for the purpose of
deception. The permits issued under this section constitute the grant of a
privilege by the City and may be denied or suspended for such reasons as the
City may deem rationally related to its governmental interests including, but
not limited to:
      1.   A permittee knowingly providing incorrect information in an
application for a permit;
      2.   A permittee, its agents or employees operating on a permit which has
been altered for purposes of deception;
      3.   Noncompliance by permittee, its agents or employees with Federal,
State or local ordinances pertaining to the transport of goods or operation of
a vehicle engaged in the transport of goods;
      4.   Moving on City streets without a valid permit as required under this
section.
   M.   Assigned Routes: All single trip or round trip permits are limited to
movements on assigned routes only.
   N.   Maximum Limitation, Routing: All quarterly or annual overweight permits
are restricted to the following maximum limitations and routing:
      1.   Twelve feet (12') in width.
      2.   Thirteen feet, six inches (13'6") in height.
      3.   One hundred fifteen feet (115') in length.
      4.   May not move across bridges or structures that are posted or listed
as such on the City truck route map.
      5.   May not move on a “no truck” route that is posted or listed as such
on the City truck route map, without written permission from a member of the
Police Department.
      6.   May not use any City street as a cut through to avoid using a State,
County or Township highway.
   O.   Standards Of Application: These permits are subject to all standards of
application set forth in this title, except that the load may be interchanged
provided none of the above listed maximum weight and size dimensions are
exceeded. Quarterly and annual permits shall list the registration number and
state for the power unit, and vehicle identification number (VIN). The serial
number of the power unit and/or owner applied number shall also be listed, if
applicable.
   P.   Violation: Any violation of these terms will render the permit null and
void, and subject the driver, firm, business or corporation that owns the
vehicle to legal weight and dimension laws. The arresting police officer will
immediately confiscate the permit. (Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-9-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Considerations: All applications for permits shall be given full
consideration. Permits for proposed moves may be issued:
      1.   When the City roadways and bridges will not be unduly damaged; and
      2.   When the safety of the traveling public will be adequately
protected.
   B.   Information Required: Applications for a permit to move an oversized
and/or overweight vehicle, and/or load, must be made to the Police Department.
The following information shall be included on the permit application:
      1.   Company name.
      2.   Company address.
      3.   Company fax and telephone numbers.
      4.   Description of hauling vehicle or power unit.
      5.   Description of load to be moved and if the load is carrying an
attachment.
      6.   Maximum dimensions, gross weight and axle weights of vehicle,
including load.
      7.   Roads under the jurisdiction of the City to be traveled.
      8.   Any special conditions.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-9-3: FEE SCHEDULES:
   A.   Scope: The City, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, shall
collect a fee as shown herein from applicants for the issuance of a permit to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicle(s), and/or loads, which fit
the categories shown. Any axle or gross weight greater than the maximum weights
set forth in this chapter is subject to special assessment and investigation to
determine appropriate fees.
   B.   Billing, Collection: The Finance Department is responsible for the
billing, invoicing and collection of permit fees. The Finance Department, in
their discretion, may make rules and regulations as to acceptable methods of
payment and due dates. Any unpaid permit fees will be turned over to a
collection agency under contract of the City.
   C.    Fee Schedule:
      1. The fee schedule for single vehicles shall be as follows:
Category Axles Maximum Weights Axles Single Trip Round Trip Quarterly Annual
Category Axles Maximum Axles         Single Trip Round Trip Quarterly Annual
               Weights
               48,000  Gross
1A       2     25,000  Any single    $15.00      $25.00     $85.00    $ 340.00
                       axle
               54,000  Gross
2A       2     28,000  Any single    20.00       35.00      100.00    400.00
                       axle
               60,000  Gross
3A       3+    21,000  Any single    25.00       45.00      115.00    460.00
                       axle
               40,000  2 axle tandem
               68,000  Gross
4A       3+    25,000  Any single    30.00       55.00      130.00    520.00
                       axle
               48,000  2 axle tandem
               72,000  Gross
5A       3+    25,000  Any single    60.00       115.00     270.00    1,080.00
                       axle
               48,000  2 axle tandem
               80,000  Gross
6A       3+    27,000  Any single    70.00       135.00     285.00    1,140.00
                       axle
               54,000  2 axle tandem
               72,000  Gross
7A       4+    21,000  Any single    35.00       65.00      145.00    580.00
                       axle
               40,000  2 axle tandem
               76,000  Gross
8A       4+    23,000  Any single    40.00       75.00      160.00    640.00
                       axle
               44,000  2 axle tandem
               80,000  Gross
               27,000  Any single
9A       4+            axle          60.00       100.00     225.00    900.00
               54,000  2 axle tandem
               60,000  3 or 4 axle
                       group
 
      2. The fee schedule for combination vehicles shall be as follows:
Category Axles Maximum Weights Axles Single Trip Round Trip Quarterly Annual
Category Axles Maximum Axles          Single Trip Round Trip Quarterly Annual
               Weights
               88,000  Gross
               23,000  Any single
1B       5+            axle           $30.00      $55.00     $190.00   $ 760.00
                       2 axle tandem
               44,000  or 3 or 4 axle
                       group
               100,000 Gross
               25,000  Any single
2B       5+            axle           40.00       75.00      220.00    880.00
                       2 axle tandem   
               48,000  or 3 or 4 axle
                       group
               110,000 Gross
               23,000  Any single
3B       6+            axle           45.00       85.00      235.00    940.00
               44,000  2 axle tandem
               54,000  3 or 4 axle
                       group
               120,000 Gross
               25,000  Any single
4B       6+            axle           50.00       95.00      250.00    1,000.00
               48,000  2 axle tandem
               60,000  3 or 4 axle
                       group
               143,000 Gross
               27,000  Any single
5B       6+            axle           60.00       115.00     325.00    1,300.00
               54,000  2 axle tandem
               78,000  3 or 4 axle
                       group
               162,000 Gross
               25,000  Any single
6B       7+            axle           70.00       135.00     400.00    1,600.00
               50,000  2 axle tandem
               75,000  3 axle group
               100,000 4 axle group
7B       8+    187,000 Gross1         80.00       155.00     500.00    2,000.00
 
Note:
      1.    Same axle weights as 6B.
      3.   The fee schedule for over dimension (oversized vehicles) shall be as
follows:
Category Maximum Size Escort Single Trip Round Trip Quarterly Annual
Category Maximum Size  Escort Single Trip Round Trip Quarterly Annual
         Width: 10'
1C       Height: 13'6" No     $ 15.00     $ 25.00    $ 75.00   $300.00
         Length: 115'
         Width: 12'
2C       Height: 13'6" No     20.00       40.00      120.00    480.00
         Length: 115'
         Width: 14'
3C       Height: 13'6" No     30.00       55.00      165.00    660.00
         Length: 115'
         Width: 18'           50.00
4C       Height: 16'   Yes               95.00      X         X
         Length: 135'          

         Width: >18'
5C       Height: >16'  Yes    100.00      195.00     X         X
         Length: >135'
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-9-4: POLICE ESCORTS:
Police escorts are required for certain vehicles and loads as indicated in
subsection
7-9-3C of this chapter. The total number of officers necessary to provide for a
safe move shall be determined by the Police Department, based upon the size and
weight of the permit move. Fees for escorts shall be in addition to the permit
fees set forth herein. Escort fees shall provide for a minimum of two (2) hours
of service calculated by the most current overtime rate established by the
Police Department.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-9-5: BONDS, INDEMNIFICATION AND INSURANCE:
   A.   Assumption Of Liability: The permittee shall assume total liability for
any and all damages to streets, bridges, City owned appurtenances and private
or public property while engaged in a permit move. The measure of liability is
the cost for all repairs or replacement of property damaged by the permittee.
   B.   Indemnification: The permittee shall indemnify and hold harmless the
City or members of the Police Department from any costs, judgments or
settlements, including attorney fees, arising from physical injuries, including
loss of life, or damage to or loss of property related to acts or omissions by
permittee, its officers, agents or employees pursuant to the permit.
   C.   Liability Insurance: Upon application for a permit each applicant shall
provide evidence of a valid comprehensive general liability insurance policy,
with an insurance company approved by the City, for protection against personal
injury or property damage in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
per occurrence. The City and the Police Department shall be listed as a
certificate holder on the policy.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-9-6: SUSPENSION AND REINSTATEMENT:
   A.   Time Determined: Suspension of a current permit shall be for the time
determined appropriate by the Police Department; however, reinstatement may be
made upon conditions determined by the City and payment of all outstanding
settlements or judgments.
   B.   Enforcement; Hearing: The Chief of Police or their designee shall
administer and enforce this section and shall have the authority to grant,
deny, suspend or reinstate permits. Any applicant or permittee denied a permit
or who has had a permit suspended, upon request, shall be given a hearing
before the Chief of Police first, then the City Manager if the permittee is
still unsatisfied.
   C.   Outstanding Fees, Payments: No permits shall be issued an applicant or
company who has outstanding fees or payments due to the City.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
CHAPTER 10: VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT
Section
7-10-1: General Regulations
7-10-2: Definitions
7-10-3:    Violations
7-10-4:    Notice
7-10-5:    Preliminary Hearing
7-10-6:    Administrative Adjudication Hearing
7-10-7:    Posting Of Cash Bond
7-10-8:    Pending Forfeiture Proceedings
7-10-9:    Administrative Penalty
7-10-10: Vehicle Possession
7-10-1: GENERAL REGULATIONS:
   A.   Applicability: This chapter shall not replace or otherwise abrogate any
existing State or Federal laws or City ordinances pertaining to vehicle seizure
and impoundment. These penalties shall be in addition to any penalties that may
be assessed by a court for any criminal charges.
   B.   Stolen Vehicles: This chapter shall not apply if the vehicle used in
the violation was stolen at that time and the theft was reported to the
appropriate police authorities within twenty-four (24) hours after the theft
was discovered.
   C.   Towing, Storage Fees: Fees for towing and storage of a vehicle pursuant
to this chapter shall be those approved by the Chief of Police for all towing
agents authorized to tow for the McHenry Police Department.
(1987 Code § 13-17; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
7-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
   ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY:  
   1.   The owner of a vehicle eligible for impoundment under this section,
because it was used in connection with a drag racing, drifting, street
sideshow, reckless driving, fleeing and eluding, and/or any other violation
that resulted in injury or death to any person, shall be subject to an
administrative penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00);
   2.   The owner of a vehicle eligible for impoundment under this section,
other than those in subsection (1), shall be subject to an administrative
penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00).
   CASH BOND:  
   1.   The amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), payable to the City in
a form acceptable to the City, which is posted with the Police Department to
permit the Police Department to release a vehicle pending disposition at a
hearing on a drag racing, drifting, street sideshow, reckless driving, fleeing
and eluding, and/or any other violation that resulted in injury or death to any
person;
   2.   The amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), payable to the City in a
form acceptable to the City, which is posted with the Police Department to
permit the Police Department to release a vehicle pending disposition at a
hearing on a violation, other than those in subsection (1).
(Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
7-10-3: VIOLATIONS:
A motor vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner
of record, that is used in connection with the following violations shall be
subject to seizure and impoundment by the City, and the owner of record shall
be liable to the City for an administrative penalty, in addition to any towing
and storage fees as hereinafter provided, unless expressly permitted by this
chapter.
   A.   Driving under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs (625 ILCS 5/11-501
(a) or a similar local ordinance).
   B.   Driving while license is suspended or revoked (625 ILCS 5/6-303 or
similar local ordinance).
   C.   No valid driver’s license (unlicensed) excluding expired driver’s
license of less than one year (625 ILCS 5/6-303 or similar local ordinance).
   D.   Fleeing or attempting to elude a peace officer, including aggravated
fleeing (625 ILCS 5/11-204, et seq., or a similar local ordinance).
   E.   Street racing, aggravated street racing, or street sideshow (625 ILCS
5/11-506 or a similar local ordinance).
   F.   Reckless driving (625 ILCS 5/11-503 or a similar local ordinance).
   G.   Leaving the scene of an accident involving death or personal injury
(625 ILCS 5/11-401).
   H.   Any violation of law which makes the vehicle subject to seizure under
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/505, et seq. (Illinois Controlled Substances
Act).
   I.   Any violation of law which makes the vehicle subject to seizure under
720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1, et seq. (Cannabis Control Act).
   J.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
24-1 (unlawful use of weapons), 5/24-1.5 (reckless discharge of a firearm) or
5/24-3.1 (unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition).
   K.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant
has been issued by a Circuit Clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges
that the driver violated 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-101 (drivers must
have licenses or permits), 5/6-303 (driving while driver’s license, permit or
privilege to operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked) or 5/11-501
(driving while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs,
intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof).
   L.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
16 (theft and related offenses) or 5/16A (retail theft).
   M.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor or felony offense in violation of the
Criminal Code of 1961 (720 ILCS 5/1-1, et seq.).
   N.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance as defined
by the Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/100, et seq.).
   O.   Any violation of the law which makes the vehicle subject to seizure
under 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 (Seizure and Forfeiture of Vessels,
Vehicles, and Aircraft).
(1987 Code § 13-16; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
7-10-4: NOTICE:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police officer
shall provide for the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the
City. The police officer shall notify any person identifying themselves as the
owner of the vehicle or any person who is found to be in control of the vehicle
at the time of the alleged violation, of the fact of the seizure of the
vehicle, and of the owner’s right to request an administrative adjudication
hearing to be conducted in accordance with this Code and this chapter. Said
vehicle shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearing provided for
in this chapter, unless the vehicle owner posts a cash bond with the City and
pays the towing and storage charges.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
7-10-5: PRELIMINARY HEARING:
   A.   Appeal: If the owner of record of a vehicle seized pursuant to this
chapter desires to appeal the seizure, the owner must make a request for a
preliminary hearing within twenty-four (24) hours of the seizure. The request
shall be in writing and filed with the Chief of Police or his designee, who
shall conduct such preliminary hearing within twenty-four (24) hours after
receipt of the request, excluding Saturdays, Sundays or City holidays.
   B.   Hearing: All interested persons shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to be heard at the preliminary vehicle impoundment hearing. The formal rules of
evidence shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible only if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent
persons in the conduct of their affairs.
   C.   Probable Cause; Continued Impoundment: If, after the hearing, the Chief
of Police or the Chief’s designee determines there is probable cause to believe
that the vehicle is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this
chapter, the continued impoundment of the vehicle shall be ordered as provided
herein unless the vehicle owner posts a cash bond to the City and pays the
towing agent any applicable towing and storage fees.
   D.   Return Of Vehicle: If the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee
determines there is not such probable cause, the vehicle shall be returned
without penalty or other fees.
(1987 Code § 13-19; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
7-10-6: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION HEARING:
   A.   Appointment Of Law Judge: The City shall appoint an individual, not
employed by the Police Department, to serve as an Administrative Law Judge for
purposes of this chapter. (See title 1, chapter 4, article B, “Administrative
Adjudication”, of this Code.)
   B.   Notification; Hearing; Plea: Within ten (10) days after a vehicle is
seized and impounded pursuant to this chapter, the City shall notify, by
certified mail, return receipt requested, the owner of record of the date, time
and location of a plea hearing that will be conducted in accordance with title
1, chapter 4, article B, “Administrative Adjudication”, of this Code. The owner
will appear at a hearing and enter a plea of guilty or not guilty. If a plea of
guilty is entered, the case will be disposed of at that time. If the owner
pleads not guilty, a final hearing shall be conducted on that date unless
continued by order of the Administrative Law Judge. An owner of record can
request the scheduled plea hearing date be continued, as long as the request
for continuance is made no later than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the
hearing. In the event that the City is seeking to forfeit the vehicle pursuant
to applicable law, these impoundment proceedings shall be stayed pending the
final disposition of the forfeiture proceedings. If the vehicle is forfeited,
the impoundment proceeding pursuant to this chapter shall be dismissed by the
City. If the vehicle is not forfeited, the City shall schedule a plea hearing
within ten (10) days of receipt of the final order in the forfeiture proceeding
and shall notify the owner of said plea hearing as provided herein.
   C.   Hearing; Rules Of Evidence: All interested persons shall be given a
reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence
shall not apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. In a
hearing on the propriety of impoundment of a vehicle, any sworn or affirmed
report, citation or ticket that: 1) is prepared in the performance of a law
enforcement officer’s duties; and 2) sufficiently describes the circumstances
leading to the impoundment, shall be admissible evidence of the vehicle owner’s
liability, unless rebutted by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
   D.   Finding Owner Liable: If, after the hearing, the Administrative Law
Judge determines by a preponderance of evidence that the vehicle was used in
violation of this chapter, the Administrative Law Judge shall then enter an
order finding the owner of record of the vehicle liable to the City for the
administrative penalty.
   E.   Return Of Vehicle: If, after the hearing, the Administrative Law Judge
does not determine by a preponderance of evidence that the vehicle was used in
such a violation, the Administrative Law Judge shall enter an order finding for
the owner and for the return of the vehicle.
   F.   Failure To Appear: If the owner of record requests a hearing but fails
to appear at the hearing or fails to request a hearing in a timely manner, the
owner of record shall be deemed to have waived their right to a hearing and the
Administrative Law Judge shall enter a default order in favor of the City in
the amount of the administrative penalty. Once the order has been entered, the
City shall make a reasonable effort to notify any lienholder of the default
order entered against the owner of record.
   G.   Default Order: If a default order is entered against the owner of
record for failing to request or appear at a hearing, the owner of record may
make a request to vacate the default judgment. The motion shall be made in
writing and sent by certified mail to the Administrative Law Judge within
thirty (30) days of the default order being entered. Once such a request is
made, the default order will be vacated and the administrative adjudication
hearing will be set within ten (10) days of the request.
   H.   Default Orders: If the owner of record pays such an administrative
penalty and the vehicle is returned to the owner, no default order need be
entered if the owner is informed of their right to a hearing and signs a
waiver, in which case an order of liability shall be deemed to have been made
when the City receives the written waiver.
(1987 Code § 13-20; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
7-10-7: POSTING OF CASH BOND:
   A.   Vehicle Release: If a cash bond is posted with the Police Department,
the impounded vehicle shall be released to the owner of record. However, the
vehicle owner shall remain liable to the towing agent for any applicable towing
or storage fees.
   B.   Forfeit: If an administrative penalty is imposed by the Administrative
Law Judge for a violation of this chapter, the cash bond shall be forfeited to
the City. However, if a violation of this chapter is not proven by a
preponderance of the evidence, the cash bond shall be returned to the person
posting the cash bond.
   C.   Held Until Decision Issued: All cash bonds posted pursuant to this
chapter shall be held by the City until the Administrative Law Judge has issued
a decision.
   D.   Form Of Bond: The cash bond posted shall be in the form of cash, money
order, certified check, E-check or any authorized credit or debit cards.
(1987 Code § 13-21; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
7-10-8: PENDING FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS:
When a vehicle is the subject to forfeiture proceedings by the City, the owner
shall not be permitted to post the cash bond and pay the towing and storage
charges for release of the vehicle until the forfeiture proceedings have
concluded. In the event forfeiture of the vehicle is granted by the court,
these impoundment proceedings shall be dismissed.
(1987 Code § 13-22; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
7-10-9: ADMINISTRATIVE PENALTY:
   A.   Debt Due: If an administrative penalty is imposed pursuant to this
chapter, such administrative penalty shall constitute a debt due and owing to
the City. If a vehicle has been impounded when such an administrative penalty
is imposed, the City may seek to obtain a judgment on the debt and enforce such
judgment against the vehicle as provided by law. Except as provided otherwise
in this chapter, a vehicle shall continue to be impounded until the
administrative penalty is paid to the City and any applicable towing and
storage fees are paid to the towing agent, in which case possession of the
vehicle shall be given to the person who is legally entitled to possess the
vehicle, or the vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a judgment
to enforce a lien as provided by law.
   B.   Failure To Pay: If the administrative penalty and applicable fees are
not paid within thirty (30) days after an administrative penalty is imposed
against an owner of record who defaults by failing to appear at the hearing,
the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and shall be disposed of in the manner
provided by law for the disposition of unclaimed vehicles. In all other cases,
if the administrative penalty and applicable fees are not paid within thirty
(30) days after the expiration of time at which administrative review of the
Administrative Law Judge’s determination may be sought, or within thirty (30)
days after an action seeking administrative review has been resolved in favor
of the City, whichever is applicable, the vehicle shall be deemed unclaimed and
shall be disposed of in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
unclaimed vehicles under the Illinois Vehicle Code. However, where proceedings
have been instituted under State or Federal Drug Asset Forfeiture Laws,
disposal of the subject vehicle shall be consistent with those proceedings.
(1987 Code § 13-23; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
7-10-10: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
   A.   Policy: Except as otherwise provided by law, no owner, lienholder or
other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a vehicle
impounded under this chapter until the administrative penalty and fees
applicable under this chapter have been paid. However, whenever a person with a
lien of record against an impounded vehicle has commenced foreclosure
proceedings, possession of the vehicle shall be given to that person if he
agrees in writing to refund the City the amount of the net proceeds of any
foreclosure sale, less any amounts required to pay all lienholders of record,
not to exceed the administrative penalty, plus the applicable fees.
   B.   Owner Of Record: For purposes of this chapter, the “owner of record” of
a vehicle is the record title holder as registered with the Illinois Secretary
of State.
(1987 Code § 13-24; amd. Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
CHAPTER 11: PENALTIES
Section
7-11-1: Penalty Applicability
7-11-2: Driving While License, Permit Or Privilege To Operate Motor Vehicle
Suspended Or Revoked
7-11-3: Driving While Under The Influence Of Alcohol, Other Drugs Or
Combination Of Both
7-11-4: Parking Penalty
7-11-5: Unauthorized Use Of Parking Places Reserved For Persons With
Disabilities
7-11-6: General Penalty
7-11-7: Cost Of Prosecution
7-11-8: Voluntary Settlements Regarding Certain Violations
7-11-1: PENALTY APPLICABILITY:
All penalty provisions contained or referred to or incorporated in section
7-1-1 of this title are also adopted and incorporated, including, but not
limited to, those contained in the Unified Code of Corrections (730 ILCS 5/1-1-
1 et seq.), as section
7-1-1 of this title, City of McHenry, Illinois, with the exception of the fine
penalties listed for persons found guilty of violating section
7-1-1 of this title, sections 5/6-303, 5/11-501(a)(1), 5/11-501(a)(2), 5/11-501
(a)(3) and 5/11-501(a)(4).
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-11-2: DRIVING WHILE LICENSE, PERMIT OR PRIVILEGE TO OPERATE MOTOR VEHICLE
SUSPENDED OR REVOKED:
Any person found guilty of violating section
7-1-1 of this title, section 5/6-303 shall be fined not less than two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-11-3: DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL, OTHER DRUGS OR
COMBINATION OF BOTH:
Any person found guilty of violating section
7-1-1 of this title, sections 5/11-501(a)(1), 5/11-501(a)(2), 5/11-501(a)(3)
and 5/11-501(a)(4) shall be fined not less than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) nor more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-11-4: PARKING PENALTY:
Parking penalties shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties found in
Title 15, Chapter 1, Fines and Penalties.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998; amd. Ord. 23-24, 5-1-2023)
7-11-5: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING PLACES RESERVED FOR PERSONS WITH
DISABILITIES:
The penalty for the unauthorized use of parking places reserved for persons
with disabilities shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), in addition to
any costs or charges connected with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle
authorized under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/11-1301.3.
(Ord. 07-935)
7-11-6: GENERAL PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, any person, firm or corporation violating any
section of this title shall be fined not less than seventy five dollars
($75.00), nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed to be a
separate offense.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-11-7: COST OF PROSECUTION:
All fines shall include the City’s cost of prosecution, including, but not
limited to, filing fees, witness fees and attorney fees.
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-11-8: VOLUNTARY SETTLEMENTS REGARDING CERTAIN VIOLATIONS:
Certain offenses may be settled and compromised by payment to the City
according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 2: Parking
Fines.
(Ord. 18-1177, 8-6-2018; amd. 2019 Code; Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 12: APPENDICES
Section
7-12-1: Appendix A-1 Green Street Municipal Parking Lot
7-12-2: Appendix A-2 Main Street North And South Municipal Parking Lot
7-12-3: Appendix A-3 Court Street Municipal Parking Lot
7-12-4: Appendix A-4 Knox Park East Parking Lot (Swimming Pool)
7-12-5: Appendix A-5 Petersen Park Parking Lots
7-12-6: Appendix A-6 Riverside Drive Municipal Parking Lot
7-12-1: APPENDIX A-1 GREEN STREET MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2021.png]
 
(Ord. 17-1160, 12-18-2017)
7-12-2: APPENDIX A-2 MAIN STREET NORTH AND SOUTH MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2023.png]
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-12-3: APPENDIX A-3 COURT STREET MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2025.png]
 
(Ord. 17-1160, 12-18-2017)
7-12-4: APPENDIX A-4 KNOX PARK EAST PARKING LOT (SWIMMING POOL):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2027.png]
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-12-5: APPENDIX A-5 PETERSEN PARK PARKING LOTS:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2029.png]
 
(Ord. 98-714, 10-7-1998)
7-12-6: APPENDIX A-6 RIVERSIDE DRIVE MUNICIPAL PARKING LOT:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2031.png]
 
(Ord. 17-1160, 12-18-2017)
TITLE 8: PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
Section
8-1-1: Supervision And Control
8-1-2: Construction Permits
8-1-3: Conformity With Specifications; Acceptance By City
8-1-4: Injury To New Pavement
8-1-5: Repairs
8-1-6: Report Of Defects
8-1-7: Obstructions Prohibited
8-1-8: Barricades; Lighting
8-1-9: Use For Display Of Goods, Defacing
8-1-10: Obstructing Drains And Filling And Obstructing Open Ditches
8-1-11: Gasoline Pumps Prohibited
8-1-12: Playing Games
8-1-13: Permit For Openings; Protection
8-1-14: Deposits On Streets And Sidewalks
8-1-15: Burning Prohibited
8-1-16: Curb Ramps For Handicapped
8-1-17: Unlawful Curb Cuts
8-1-18: Snow And Ice
8-1-1: SUPERVISION AND CONTROL:
All maintenance and repair of public streets, alleys, sidewalks and other
public ways shall be under the supervision and the direct control of the
Director of Public Works. The Director shall be charged with the enforcement of
all ordinances pertaining to such public ways (except Traffic Ordinances) and
is hereby authorized to enforce such ordinances.
(1987 Code § 21-1)
8-1-2: CONSTRUCTION PERMITS:
It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement on any public street,
sidewalk, alley or other public way, or to repair the same, without first
having secured a permit therefor subject to the following:
   A.   Applications: Applications for such permits shall be made to the
Director of Public Works;
   B.   Information Required: Application shall state the location of the
intended pavement or repair, the extent thereof, and the person or firm who is
to do the actual construction work;
   C.   Performance Bond: Application submittal shall be accompanied by an
approved performance bond in an amount acceptable to the Director of Public
Works. Said bond shall be kept on file in the Office of the City Clerk;
   D.   Certificate Of Insurance: Application submittal shall be accompanied
with a Certificate of Insurance naming the City as additionally insured;
   E.   Order For Issuance: No such permit shall be issued except on order of
the Director of Public Works.
(1987 Code § 21-2)
8-1-3: CONFORMITY WITH SPECIFICATIONS; ACCEPTANCE BY CITY:
All street, sidewalk and alley pavements shall be in conformity with uniform
specifications which shall be laid down or approved from time to time by the
Council, and all completed work shall be accepted by the City only upon
approval by the City Engineer or Director of Public Works.
(1987 Code § 21-3)
8-1-4: INJURY TO NEW PAVEMENT:
It shall be unlawful to walk upon or drive any vehicle or animal upon, or
injure any newly laid street, sidewalk or alley pavement while the same is
guarded by a barricade, or to knowingly injure any soft or newly laid pavement.
(1987 Code § 21-4)
8-1-5: REPAIRS:
All public street, alley and sidewalk pavement shall be kept in good repair.
Such repair work, whether done by the City or by the abutting owner, shall be
under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
(1987 Code § 21-5)
8-1-6: REPORT OF DEFECTS:
It shall be the duty of every City officer or employee becoming cognizant of
any defect in any street, alley or sidewalk, or any obstruction thereof, to
report the same to the Director of Public Works as soon as possible.
(1987 Code § 21-6)
8-1-7: OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, create or maintain any
obstruction of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way, except as may
be specifically authorized by ordinance or by the Director of Public Works.
(1987 Code § 21-7)
8-1-8: BARRICADES; LIGHTING:
   A.   Required: Any person laying or repairing any pavement on a street,
sidewalk or public place, or making an excavation in any such place, shall
maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to any person or vehicle by
reason of the work. Such barricades shall be protected by a light at nighttime.
   B.   Defects In Pavement: Any defects in any such pavement shall be
barricaded to prevent any such injury; and any person properly maintaining any
opening or excavation in any such place shall guard such opening or excavation
while the same remains open by proper barricades and lights.
(1987 Code § 21-8)
   C.   Disturbing Barricades: It shall be unlawful to disturb or interfere
with any barricade or lights lawfully placed to protect or mark any new
pavement or excavation or opening in any public street, alley or sidewalk.
(1987 Code § 21-9)
8-1-9: USE FOR DISPLAY OF GOODS, DEFACING:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without permission of the Council, to use
any street, sidewalk or other public place as space for the display or sale of
goods or merchandise; or to write or mark any signs or advertisements on any
such pavements.
(1987 Code § 21-10)
8-1-10: OBSTRUCTING DRAINS AND FILLING AND OBSTRUCTING OPEN DITCHES:
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or cause to be obstructed any open ditch or
drain in any street right-of- way, alley or public property, or to fill in any
such open ditch.
(1987 Code § 21-11)
8-1-11: GASOLINE PUMPS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain any gasoline pump on any public
street or sidewalk in the City.
(1987 Code § 21-13)
8-1-12: PLAYING GAMES:
It shall be unlawful to play any games upon any street, alley or sidewalk or
other public place, where such games cause unnecessary noise or interfere with
traffic or pedestrians.
(1987 Code § 21-14)
8-1-13: PERMIT FOR OPENINGS; PROTECTION:
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any opening or stairway in any
public street, alley or sidewalk without a permit from the City. All lawfully
maintained openings shall be guarded by a suitable cover or railing which meets
with the approval of the City Engineer and Director of Public Works.
(1987 Code § 21-15)
8-1-14: DEPOSITS ON STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
   A.   Streets:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any street any material which may
be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any glass, or
other articles which may do injury to any person, animal or property.
      2.   Materials may be deposited in streets preparatory to delivery or
use, provided such deposit does not reduce the usable width of the roadway at
the point to less than eighteen feet (18'); provided, that such material, other
than the material to be used in actual building construction, shall not be
permitted to remain on such street for more than three (3) hours.
      3.   Any such material shall be guarded by lights if it remains upon any
street after sunset.
(1987 Code § 21-16)
   B.   Sidewalks:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to deposit on any public sidewalk any material
which may be harmful to the pavement thereof, or any waste material, or any
glass or other articles which might cause injury to persons, animals or
property.
      2.   Merchandise or other articles may be deposited on sidewalks
preparatory to delivery; provided, that the usable width of the walk is not
thereby reduced to less than four feet (4'); and provided, that no such article
shall remain on such sidewalk for more than one-half (1/2) hour.
(1987 Code § 21-17)
      3.   The owners or occupants of all property facing on or abutting
sidewalks shall keep the said abutting or adjacent sidewalks clean and free
from debris and litter at all times.
(1987 Code § 21-18)
8-1-15: BURNING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to burn any materials, rubbish or any
substance upon any public street, sidewalk or alley in the City.
(1987 Code § 21-19)
8-1-16: CURB RAMPS FOR HANDICAPPED:
All new curbs and all existing curbs which are part of any reconstruction which
is contiguous to any highway shall comply with this section. In order to enable
persons using wheelchairs to travel freely and without assistance, at each
crosswalk, a ramp with nonslip surface shall be built into the curb so that the
sidewalk and street blend to a common level. Such ramp shall not have a slope
greater than one inch (1") rise per twelve inch (12") length. Where, because of
surrounding buildings or other restrictions, it is impossible to conform the
slope to this requirement, the ramp shall contain a slope with as shallow a
rise as possible under the circumstances. In all ramps, there shall be a
gradual rounding at the bottom of the slope.
(1987 Code § 21-22)
8-1-17: UNLAWFUL CURB CUTS:
It shall be unlawful to cut any concrete curb and gutter in any street in the
City for use in connection with the discharge of sump pump water into the
street, or for any other purpose; provided, however, that curb cuts may be
permitted in conjunction with a driveway permit issued pursuant to the
ordinances of the City.
(1987 Code § 21-23)
8-1-18: SNOW AND ICE:
   A.   Definitions:
   ROADWAY: That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or
ordinarily used for public vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
   SIDEWALK: That portion of a street between the curb line, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STREET OR HIGHWAY: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
(1987 Code § 21-112)
   B.   Deposits Restricted: It is unlawful for any person to deposit or cause
to be deposited any snow and/or ice from private property on or against a fire
hydrant, or on any public sidewalk, public roadway, or loading and unloading
areas of a public transportation system, including the windrowing of snow and
ice upon the curbs of public streets, roadways and highways. Provided snow and
ice may be windrowed on curbs incident to the cleaning of public roadways.
(1987 Code § 21-113)
   C.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(1987 Code § 21-114) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 2: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
8-2-1: Definitions
8-2-2: Duty To Enforce
8-2-3: Ejection Of Violators
8-2-4: Seizure Of Property
8-2-5: Damaging Property
8-2-6: Maintenance, Use Of Restrooms, Washrooms
8-2-7: Removal Of Natural Resources
8-2-8: Permit Required For Structures, Utilities
8-2-9: Damaging Plants
8-2-10: Climbing, Sitting On Trees, Fixtures
8-2-11: Molesting Animals, Birds
8-2-12: Feeding Noxious Substances To Animals, Birds
8-2-13: Pollution Of Waters
8-2-14: Refuse And Trash Disposal
8-2-15: Swimming
8-2-16: Structures On Beaches
8-2-17: Place For Dressing, Undressing
8-2-18: Boating And Docking
8-2-19: Firearms And Weapons
8-2-20: Picnicking
8-2-21: Camping
8-2-22: Games, Recreational Activities Limited
8-2-23: Horseback Riding
8-2-24: Intoxicating Beverages
8-2-25: Fireworks And Explosives
8-2-26: Pets And Domestic Animals
8-2-27: No Smoking In Any Enclosed Park Facility Building
8-2-28: Soliciting Alms, Contributions
8-2-29: Fires
8-2-30: Closed Areas
8-2-31: Going Onto Ice
8-2-32: Loitering And Boisterousness
8-2-33: Duty To Exhibit Permits
8-2-34: Interference With Permittees
8-2-35: Vending And Peddling
8-2-36: Advertising And Signs
8-2-37: Park Closing Hours
8-2-38: Lost And Found Articles
8-2-39: Permits For Group Activities
8-2-40: Airplanes Prohibited
8-2-41: Vehicles And Certain Watercraft And Motors Prohibited On McCullom Lake
8-2-42: Skateboards
8-2-43: Charges For Park And Recreation Facilities
8-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
DIRECTOR: The Director of Parks and Recreation or the Director’s designee, the
Parks and Recreation Department staff, or a person immediately in charge of any
park area and its activities, and to whom all park attendants of such area are
responsible.
PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center, McCullom Lake,
or any other area in the City, owned or used by the City, and devoted to active
or passive recreation.
VEHICLE: Any wheeled conveyance, whether motor powered, animal drawn, or self-
propelled. The term shall include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or
description. Exception is made for baby carriages and vehicles in the service
of the City parks.
(1987 Code § 16-1; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
8-2-2: DUTY TO ENFORCE:
The Director and park attendants shall, in connection with their duties imposed
by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 16-2)
8-2-3: EJECTION OF VIOLATORS:
The Director and any park attendant shall have the authority to eject from the
park any person acting in violation of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 16-3)
8-2-4: SEIZURE OF PROPERTY:
The Director and any park attendant shall have the authority to seize and
confiscate any property, thing or device in the park, or used in violation of
this chapter.
(1987 Code § 16-4)
8-2-5: DAMAGING PROPERTY:
No person in a park shall wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper
with, or displace or remove, any buildings, bridges, tables, benches,
fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines or other public
utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards,
whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other boundary
markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or
appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
(1987 Code § 16-5)
8-2-6: MAINTENANCE, USE OF RESTROOMS, WASHROOMS:
No person in a park shall fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and
washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of four (4)
years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
(1987 Code § 16-6)
8-2-7: REMOVAL OF NATURAL RESOURCES:
No person in a park shall dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or
not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, downed timber or other
wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting, or
other means or agency.
(1987 Code § 16-7)
8-2-8: PERMIT REQUIRED FOR STRUCTURES, UTILITIES:
No person in a park shall construct or erect any building or structure of
whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string
any public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special
written permit issued hereunder.
(1987 Code § 16-8)
8-2-9: DAMAGING PLANTS:
No person in a park shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or
plant or injure the bark, or pick the flowers or seeds, of any tree or plant.
Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or
plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any
other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(1987 Code § 16-9)
8-2-10: CLIMBING, SITTING ON TREES, FIXTURES:
No person in a park shall climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments,
vases, fountains, railing, fences or upon any other property not designated or
customarily used for such purposes.
(1987 Code § 16-10)
8-2-11: MOLESTING ANIMALS, BIRDS:
No person in a park shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase,
tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall the
person remove or have in their possession the young of any wild animal, or the
eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird; nor shall they collect, remove,
have in their possession, give away, sell or offer to sell, or buy or offer to
buy, or accept as a gift, any specimen, alive or dead, of any of the group of
tree snails. Exception to the foregoing is made in that snakes known to be
deadly poisonous, such as rattlesnakes, moccasins, coral snakes, or other
deadly reptiles, may be killed on sight. This section is not intended to
prohibit the taking of fish by legal means.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
8-2-12: FEEDING NOXIOUS SUBSTANCES TO ANIMALS, BIRDS:
No person in a park shall give or offer, or attempt to give, to any animal or
bird any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substances.
(1987 Code § 16-12)
8-2-13: POLLUTION OF WATERS:
No person in a park shall throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of
water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain
flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
(1987 Code § 16-13)
8-2-14: REFUSE AND TRASH DISPOSAL:
No person in a park shall have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any
bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage
or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof,
but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; where
receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried
away from the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly
disposed of elsewhere.
(1987 Code § 16-14)
8-2-15: SWIMMING:
   A.   Areas For Swimming: No person in a park shall swim, bathe or wade in
any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and
at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such
regulations as are herein set forth or may be hereafter adopted. Nor shall any
person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of
swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat when such activity is prohibited by
the Health Department upon a finding that such use of the water would be
dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
(1987 Code § 16-15)
   B.   Swimming Hours: No person in a park shall frequent any waters or places
designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat,
except between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the Director or
the City Council for such purposes for each individual area.
(1987 Code § 16-16)
8-2-16: STRUCTURES ON BEACHES:
No person in a park shall erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or
bathing area any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be
an unobstructed view into said tent, shelter or structure from at least two (2)
sides; nor shall any guy wire, rope or extension or exterior brace or support
be connected or fastened from any such structure to any other structure, stake,
rock or other object outside thereof.
(1987 Code § 16-17)
8-2-17: PLACE FOR DRESSING, UNDRESSING:
No person in a park shall dress or undress on any beach, or in any vehicle,
toilet or other place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be
provided for that purpose.
(1987 Code § 16-18)
8-2-18: BOATING AND DOCKING:
   A.   Areas For Boating: No person in a park shall bring into or operate any
boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor powered or not, upon any waters,
except at places designated for boating by the Director. Such activity shall be
in accordance with applicable regulations as are now or may hereafter be
adopted.
(1987 Code § 16-19)
   B.   Use Of Public Docks: No person in a park shall use the public docks for
dockage or other purpose without first making arrangements for such
accommodation with the Director, or the City Council, who shall assign space
and collect reasonable rental charges in conformity with established
regulations and rates.
(1987 Code § 16-20)
   C.   Unlawful Boat Docking:
      1.   Unlawful Locations: It shall be unlawful for any person to dock any
boat between sunset and sunrise at any of the following locations:
         a.   Walsh Park frontage on Boone Creek;
         b.   Weber Park frontage on the Fox River;
         c.   City beach properties fronting on McCullom Lake;
         d.   Miller’s Riverfront Park frontage on the Fox River.
(1987 Code § 16-20.1)
      2.   Riverfront Park Boat Launch:
         a.   Motorboats: Six o’clock (6:00) A.M. to eleven o’clock (11:00)
P.M.;
         b.   Personal watercraft: Nine o’clock (9:00) A.M. to dusk.
(Ord. 18-1169, 4-16-2018)
   D.   Reckless Operation Of Boats: No person shall operate any boat on any
body of water within the City limits with a wilful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property, nor in such a manner as to annoy, frighten or
endanger any other person who may then be on or in any such body of water.
(1987 Code § 16-21)
   E.   Boating Hours: No person in a park shall launch, dock or operate any
boat of any kind on any waters between the closing hour of the park at night
and opening hour the following morning, nor shall any person be on, or remain
on or in, any boat during the said closed hours of the park.
(1987 Code § 16-22)
   F.   Swimming Prohibited At Miller Riverfront Boat Launch: Miller Riverfront
Park and Boat Launch is an unsupervised facility for the exclusive use of
individuals participating in boating and sailing activities. Swimming is
prohibited.
(Ord. 18-1169, 4-16-2018)
8-2-19: FIREARMS AND WEAPONS:
No person in a park shall use, carry or possess firearms of any descriptions,
or air rifles, paintball guns, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings or any
other forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human
safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or
any kind of trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond park
boundaries is prohibited.
(1987 Code § 16-23)
8-2-20: PICNICKING:
   A.   Designated Areas: No person in a park shall picnic or lunch in a place
other than those designated for that purpose. Park attendants shall have the
authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent
congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of
all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end.
   B.   First Come, First Served: No person in a park shall violate the
regulation that use of the individual cooking grills, together with tables and
benches, follows generally the rule of “first come, first served”.
   C.   Exclusive Use Prohibited: No person in a park shall use any portion of
the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the
purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any
person use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities
are crowded.
   D.   Extinguishing Fires; Trash: No person in a park shall leave a picnic
area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the
nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in
the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are
available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by
the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
   E.   Permit For Group Activities: Where a permit for group activities has
been issued pursuant to section
8-2-39 of this chapter, subsections B and C of this section shall not apply to
individual members of the group for which the permit was issued.
(1987 Code § 16-24)
8-2-21: CAMPING:
No person shall set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the
purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after
closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used for such
purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon, or the like.
Exception to this section shall be granted only by permission of the City
Council or Director for specific events.
(1987 Code § 16-25)
8-2-22: GAMES, RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES LIMITED:
   A.   General Provisions: No person in a park shall take part in or abet the
playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects, such as
stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes, except in areas set apart for such
forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games is
prohibited, except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor.
Rollerskating, skateboarding and cycling shall be confined to those areas
specifically designated for such recreational activities.
(1987 Code § 16-26)
   B.   Gambling; Games Of Chance: No person in a park shall gamble, or
participate in or abet any game of chance.
(1987 Code § 16-35)
8-2-23: HORSEBACK RIDING:
No person in a park shall ride a horse except on designated bridle trails.
Where permitted, horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, and
ridden with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, nor
shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
(1987 Code § 16-27)
8-2-24: INTOXICATING BEVERAGES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall possess or drink any alcoholic
beverages at any time in any City park, except beer and/or wine which may be
consumed pursuant to a City park beer/wine permit issued by the Mayor. No such
permit, however, may be issued unless an application for such permit has been
filed and the City Council has authorized its issuance. Such permit shall be
valid only for the period issued and shall be subject to inspection by any City
official, police officer or park personnel upon request.
   B.   Drunkenness: No person in a park shall have entered or be under the
influence of intoxicating liquor.
   C.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(1987 Code § 16-28) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
8-2-25: FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES:
No person in a park shall bring in, have in their possession, set off or
otherwise cause to explode or discharge or burn, any firecracker, torpedo,
rocket, or other fireworks or explosives of inflammable material, or discharge
them or throw them into any such area from land or highway adjacent thereto.
This prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture or article that in
conjunction with any other substance or compound would be dangerous from any of
the foregoing standpoints. Professional fireworks displays are allowed only by
City Council permit as provided in section
6-6-3 of this Code.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
8-2-26: PETS AND DOMESTIC ANIMALS:
No person in a park shall be responsible for the entry of a dog or other
domestic animal into park areas, with the exception of dogs in a designated dog
park.
(1987 Code § 16-30; amd. 2019 Code)
8-2-27: NO SMOKING IN ANY ENCLOSED PARK FACILITY BUILDING:
Smoking in any and all enclosed buildings located in a park facility is hereby
prohibited in order to be in compliance with the Smoke Free Illinois Act.
(1987 Code § 16-31)
8-2-28: SOLICITING ALMS, CONTRIBUTIONS:
No person in a park shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose,
whether public or private, without City Council approval.
(1987 Code § 16-32)
8-2-29: FIRES:
No person in a park shall build or attempt to build a fire, except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the Director. No
person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material, within any
park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
(1987 Code § 16-33)
8-2-30: CLOSED AREAS:
   A.   Authorized:
      1.   Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public
by the Director at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or
at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either entirely or
merely to certain uses, as the Director shall find reasonably necessary.
(1987 Code § 16-43)
      2.   Any police officer of the City may order the closing of any
Municipal park, or any part thereof, for any interval of time, where, in the
judgment of such police officer, the public safety or the maintenance of law
and order requires such closing. Such closing order shall thereupon remain in
full force and effect until it is rescinded by the Chief of Police or by any
other command officer of the Police Department.
(1987 Code § 16-43.1)
   B.   Use Of Closed Areas:
      1.   No person in a park shall enter an area posted as “Closed to the
Public”, nor shall any person use, or abet the use of any area in violation of
posted notices.
(1987 Code § 16-34)
      2.   No person shall enter, or remain in, any closed part of any
Municipal park during the time that such park or part thereof has been closed
by action of the Director, or by any police officer, under the authority of
this chapter.
(1987 Code § 16-43.2)
8-2-31: GOING ONTO ICE:
No person in a park shall go onto the ice on any of the waters, except such
areas as are designated as skating rinks and are used for ice fishing when ice
is at a minimum of four inches (4") thick.
(1987 Code § 16-36)
8-2-32: LOITERING AND BOISTEROUSNESS:
No person in a park shall sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats, benches or
other areas, or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to a
breach of the public peace.
(1987 Code § 16-37)
8-2-33: DUTY TO EXHIBIT PERMITS:
No person in a park shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the
Director he claims to have upon request of any authorized person who shall
desire to inspect the same for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any
ordinance or rule.
(1987 Code § 16-38)
8-2-34: INTERFERENCE WITH PERMITTEES:
No person in a park shall disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or
party occupying any area, or participating in any activity, under the authority
of a written permit issued by the City.
(1987 Code § 16-39)
8-2-35: VENDING AND PEDDLING:
No person in a park shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor
shall he station or place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation,
sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is hereby made as to
any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and
regulation of the Director and/or City Council in accordance with title 4,
chapter 13 of this Code.
(1987 Code § 16-40)
8-2-36: ADVERTISING AND SIGNS:
   A.   Advertising: No person in a park shall announce, advertise or call the
public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire.
   B.   Signs: No person in a park shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post
any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person
erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways
or roads adjacent to a park.
(1987 Code § 16-41)
8-2-37: PARK CLOSING HOURS:
   A.   Specified: The closing hours for each individual park shall be as
follows:
Name Of Park Closing Hours
Name Of Park                   Closing Hours
Althoff Park                   Dusk
Boulder Creek                  Dusk
Brookside Trail                Dusk
Center Street Park             Dusk
Cold Springs Park              Dusk
Creekside Park                 Dusk
East Beach Park                Dusk
Fox Ridge Park                 10:00 P.M.
Freund Park                    10:00 P.M.
Green Street Park              Dusk
Jaycees Park                   Dusk
Kiwanis Tot Lot                Dusk
Knox Park                      10:00 P.M.
Lakeland Park                  Dusk
Lakeland Park Boat Launch      Dusk
Liberty Trails Park            Dusk
Malibu Playground              Dusk
McHenry Shores Beach           Dusk
Miller’s Riverfront Park     11:00 P.M.
Millstream Subdivision Beaches Dusk
Neumann Park                   10:00 P.M.
North Oak Park                 Dusk
Overton Park                   Dusk
Pebble Creek Park              Dusk
Petersen Park                  10:00 P.M.
Pheasant Valley Park           Dusk
Riverside Hollow Park          Dusk
Rotary Park                    10:00 P.M.
Shamrock Farm Park             Dusk
Veteran’s Memorial Park      10:00 P.M.
Walsh Park                     10:00 P.M.
Weber’s Park                 Dusk
West Beach Park                Dusk
Wheeler Park                   Dusk
Whispering Oaks Park           Dusk
 
(1987 Code § 16-42; amd. Ord. 18-1169, 4-16-2018)
   B.   Sports Facilities; Scheduled Recreation: Parks with sports facilities
and other scheduled recreation and special event activities shall be open until
ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. when lights are turned on. Special event activities
may extend beyond the ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. closing as approved by the City
Council.
(1987 Code § 16-42)
8-2-38: LOST AND FOUND ARTICLES:
The finding of lost articles by park attendants shall be reported to the
Director, who shall make every reasonable effort to locate the owners. The
Director shall make every reasonable effort to find articles reported as lost.
Found articles will be kept at the Park Department offices for thirty (30)
days, after which they will be discarded.
(1987 Code § 16-44)
8-2-39: PERMITS FOR GROUP ACTIVITIES:
A permit shall be obtained from the Director before participating in any group
park activity.
   A.   Application: A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file
an application with the Director. The application shall state:
      1.   The name and address of the applicant;
      2.   The name and address of the person, persons, corporation or
association sponsoring the activity, if any;
      3.   The day and hours for which the permit is desired;
      4.   The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired;
      5.   An estimate of the anticipated attendance;
      6.   Any other information which the Director shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue hereunder
and recommend same to City Council for action.
   B.   Standards For Issuance: The Director shall issue a permit hereunder
when the City Council finds:
      1.   The proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the park;
      2.   The proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation;
      3.   The proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite
violence, crime or disorderly conduct;
      4.   The proposed activity will not entail unusual, extraordinary or
burdensome expense or police operation by the City;
      5.   The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the
day and hour required in the application.
   C.   Appeal: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of an application, the
Director shall apprise an applicant in writing of the reasons for refusing a
permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal in writing
prior to the next regular meeting of the City Council, and the City Council
shall act upon the appeal at its next such regular meeting. The decision of the
City Council shall be final.
   D.   Effect Of Permit: A permittee shall be bound by park rules and
regulations and all applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were
inserted in said permits.
   E.   Liability Of Permittee: The person or persons to whom a permit is
issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person
whatever by reason of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such
permit shall have been issued. At the request of the Director, the permittee
shall secure insurance to save the City harmless from any claim or claims for
damages which may arise from the use of the public premises by permittee. The
City shall be named as an additional insured on such policy or policies, and
permittee must produce proof of coverage and payment of premium thereof prior
to the use of the premises concerned.
(1987 Code § 16-45)
8-2-40: AIRPLANES PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate any airplane on any portion of McCullom Lake, which is
located within the City limits, nor upon any other body of water which is
located within the City limits.
(1987 Code § 16-46)
8-2-41: VEHICLES AND CERTAIN WATERCRAFT AND MOTORS PROHIBITED ON MCCULLOM LAKE:
Except as provided herein, no person shall operate any boat with a motor in
excess of ten (10) horsepower or a pontoon watercraft with a motor in excess of
twenty five (25) horsepower on any portion of McCullom Lake located within the
City limits.
(1987 Code § 16-47)
8-2-42: SKATEBOARDS:
No person shall ride or operate a skateboard within any City park, except at
such places as may be designated by the Director and then only in accordance
with the rules, regulations and restrictions promulgated and posted.
(1987 Code § 16-49)
8-2-43: CHARGES FOR PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES:
No person shall use any park or recreation facility for which a fee, charge
and/or deposit is specified in this section without first paying said fee or
charge and/or deposit:
   A.   Picnic Reservations: The rental fee and deposit for group picnic
reservations will be as follows:
  Rental Fee Deposit Total
                                                  Rental Fee Deposit Total
Family/wedding/nonprofit organizations - City                       
resident:
 25 - 50 people                                  $ 55.00    $ 25.00 $ 80.00
 51 - 150 people                                 85.00      50.00   135.00
 151 and over                                    115.00     75.00   190.00
Family/wedding/nonprofit organizations - non-City                   
resident:
 25 - 50 people                                  110.00     25.00   135.00
 51 - 150 people                                 170.00     50.00   220.00
 151 - and over                                  230.00     75.00   305.00
Companies and corporations:                                         
 Located in City                                 220.00     150.00  370.00
 Located outside of City                         440.00     150.00  590.00
Alcohol (beer/wine only) allowed with an additional $25.00 permit fee.
 
(amd. Ord. 22-73, 12-5-2022)
   B.   Special Event Park Rentals: The daily rental for the use of parks for
special events will be as follows:
 
Special Events For Profit      Resident Nonresident
Less than 500 people           $300.00  $ 500.00
500 - 1,000 people             400.00   750.00
Between 1,001 and 3,000 people 500.00   1,000.00
Greater than 3,000 people      Fees and City services to be negotiated
 
   C.   Field Rentals: The daily rental fee and deposit for the use of a
baseball, softball and soccer field by any team shall be as follows:
      1.   The following organizations shall be exempt from field use fees:
         a.   McHenry Baseball Association;
         b.   McHenry Pigtail League;
         c.   McHenry Area Soccer Federation;
         d.   McHenry Jr. Warriors Football;
         e.   McHenry High School District 156.
      2.   The following rental fees shall be established:
 
Field                  Fee                    Deposit Total
Petersen Park field 2  $50.00/game            $50.00  $100.00
All other ball fields  $25.00/game            25.00   50.00
Soccer/lacrosse fields $50.00/game            50.00   100.00
                       $25.00/2 hours                 25.00
Field lighting         $15.00/each additional         $15.00/each additional
                       hour                           hour
 
   D.   Peter J. Merkel Aquatic Center Pool Rentals: Daily and season passes
for the Peter J. Merkel Aquatic Center are available for purchase at the Parks
and Recreation Department Office. The rental fee for exclusive use of Knox Park
Swimming Pool will be as follows:
 
                                                             Rental Fee Total
Rental of entire pool:                                                  
 Saturdays and Sundays from 7:15 P.M. to 9:15 P.M. includes $175.00    $175.00
  2 lifeguards
 
(1987 Code § 16-48)
   E.   Miller Riverfront Park Boat Launch:
      1.   Eligible Residents; Fees: All residents of the City, Village of
Lakemoor and Village of Johnsburg are eligible for resident fees (reference
Intergovernmental Agreement dated 6-20-2016).
 
Season Pass Or Daily Fee Required For All Vessels
Valid May 1 Through April 30 - Fees Not Prorated
Launch fees for residents (all watercraft):
 Daily       $ 25.00
 Season pass 150.00
Nonresident launch fees (all watercraft):
 Daily       35.00
 Season pass 180.00
 
(Ord. 18-1169, 4-16-2018)
      2.   Placement Of Passes, Stickers; Transferability: Daily pass receipts
shall be placed on the front windshield in the lower right hand corner of the
driver’s position. Season pass stickers shall be affixed to the neck of the
trailer and clearly visible when parked. Season passes are nontransferable and
nonrefundable.
(Ord. 18-1169, 4-16-2018; amd. 2019 Code)
      3.   Penalties: Any vehicle or trailer parked in Miller Riverfront Park
Boat Launch without a valid daily pass receipt that is clearly visible and
placed on the front windshield in the lower right hand corner of the driver’s
position, or season pass sticker properly displayed and clearly visible that is
affixed to the neck of the trailer, shall receive a citation as regulated by
title 7, “Motor Vehicles And Traffic”, of this Code.
(Ord. 18-1169, 4-16-2018)
CHAPTER 3: TREES, SHRUBS AND NOXIOUS GROWTH
ARTICLE A: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
8-3A-1: Street Tree, Parkway Tree Defined
8-3A-2: Application For Permits
8-3A-3: Permitted Street Tree Species
8-3A-4: Improvements Prohibited In Public Rights-Of-Way
8-3A-5: Street Tree Spacing
8-3A-6: Planting Distance From Curb And Sidewalk
8-3A-7: Distance From Street Corners And Fire Hydrants
8-3A-8: Distance From Utilities
8-3A-9: Removal Of Public Trees, Shrubs
8-3A-10: Injuring Unlawful
8-3A-11: Attaching Advertisements, Notices
8-3A-12: Removal Of Vegetation Likely To Fall On Public Ways
8-3A-13: Wires, Rope And Poles
8-3A-14: Gas Leaks Causing Injury
8-3A-15: Precautions During Excavations
8-3A-16: Care Of Street Trees And Other Trees
8-3A-17: Tree Topping
8-3A-18: Pruning And Corner Clearance On Private Property
8-3A-19: Private Property Tree Care And Removal
8-3A-20: Stump Removal
8-3A-21: Penalty
8-3A-1: STREET TREE, PARKWAY TREE DEFINED:
A STREET TREE/PARKWAY TREE is defined herein so as to include trees growing or
to be planted between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues,
boulevards, alleys or other public ways within the City.
(1987 Code § 24-1)
8-3A-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
Applications for permits for tree removals and plantings shall be made to the
City Clerk and referred to the Director of Public Works for approval before
issuance.
(1987 Code § 24-2; amd. 2019 Code)
8-3A-3: PERMITTED STREET TREE SPECIES:
No tree species other than the small tree, medium tree and large tree species
listed in the Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance Technical
Specifications Manual and Standard Details T1 Street and Right-of-Way
Improvements Section I Parkway Trees, which is on file in the City office, may
be planted as street trees/parkway trees, unless permission to do so has been
previously given by the City.
(1987 Code § 24-3)
8-3A-4: IMPROVEMENTS PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY:
No rock gardens, boulders, benches or fences shall be built or maintained in
any public right-of-way.
(1987 Code § 24-4)
8-3A-5: STREET TREE SPACING:
Spacing of street trees shall be determined by the Subdivision Control and
Development Ordinance Technical Specifications Manual and Standard Details T1-
I Street and Right-of-Way Improvements Parkway Trees, which is on file in the
City office.
(1987 Code § 24-5)
8-3A-6: PLANTING DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK:
Planting distance of street trees from curb to sidewalk shall be as required by
the Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance Technical Specifications
Manual and Standard Details T1-I Street and Right- of-Way Improvements Parkway
Trees, which is on file in the City office.
(1987 Code § 24-6)
8-3A-7: DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS:
The distance of street trees from street corners and fire hydrants shall be as
required by the Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance Technical
Specifications Manual and Standard Details T1-I Street and Right-of-Way
Improvements Parkway Trees, which is on file in the City office.
(1987 Code § 24-7)
8-3A-8: DISTANCE FROM UTILITIES:
The distance of street trees from utilities shall be as required by the
Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance Technical Specifications Manual
and Standard Details T1-I Street and Right- of-Way Improvements Parkway Trees,
which is on file in the City office.
(1987 Code § 24-8)
8-3A-9: REMOVAL OF PUBLIC TREES, SHRUBS:
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to remove or cut down any tree or
shrub in any public place or right-of-way without first having secured a permit
therefor from the City.
(1987 Code § 24-9)
8-3A-10: INJURING UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to injure any tree or shrub planted
or growing in a public right-of-way or public place.
(1987 Code § 24-10)
8-3A-11: ATTACHING ADVERTISEMENTS, NOTICES:
It shall be unlawful to attach any sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or
shrub in any public right-of- way or place.
(1987 Code § 24-11)
8-3A-12: REMOVAL OF VEGETATION LIKELY TO FALL ON PUBLIC WAYS:
Any tree or limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on or across any
public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which such
tree is growing or stands.
(1987 Code § 24-12)
8-3A-13: WIRES, ROPE AND POLES:
   A.   Attaching Unlawful: It shall be unlawful to attach any wire or rope to
any tree or shrub in any public street, right-of-way or other public place
without the permission of the Director of Public Works.
   B.   Maintenance Of Utility Wires, Poles: Any person or firm which maintains
poles and wires in streets, alleys or other public places shall, in the absence
of provision in the franchise concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles
free from and away from any trees and shrubs in such places as far as may be
possible, and keep all such trees and shrubs near such wires and poles properly
trimmed, subject to the supervision of the Director of Public Works so that no
injury shall be done either to the poles or wires or to the shrubs and trees by
their contact.
(1987 Code § 24-13)
8-3A-14: GAS LEAKS CAUSING INJURY:
Any person maintaining any gas pipe in the City shall keep such pipe free from
leaks so that no injury shall be done thereby to any trees or shrubs.
(1987 Code § 24-14)
8-3A-15: PRECAUTIONS DURING EXCAVATIONS:
In making excavations in streets, public rights-of-way or other public places,
proper care shall be taken to avoid injury to the roots of any tree or shrub
wherever possible.
(1987 Code § 24-15)
8-3A-16: CARE OF STREET TREES AND OTHER TREES:
   A.   Plant, Maintain Authority: The City shall have the right to plant,
prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the right-of-way
lines of all streets, alleys, avenues and lanes and within all public grounds.
   B.   Removal Authority: The City may remove, or cause or order to be
removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by
reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines,
water lines or other public improvements, or is infected with any injurious
fungus, insect or other pests.
(1987 Code § 24-16)
8-3A-17: TREE TOPPING:
All tree trimming shall comply with the International Society of Arboriculture
or USDA Forest Service tree pruning standards and be in safety compliance with
the associated ANSI standards. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of
limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree’s
crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the
tree.
(Ord. 18-1163, 2-19-2018)
8-3A-18: PRUNING AND CORNER CLEARANCE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Every owner of any tree located on private property which overhangs any street
or right-of-way within the City shall prune the branches thereof so that such
branches shall not obstruct the light from any streetlamp or obstruct the view
of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of at least
eight feet (8') above the surface level of the street pavement and sidewalk.
The owner of such tree shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees or
broken or decayed limbs which overhand any street right-of-way or other public
property. When the owner fails to do so, the City shall have the right to prune
any trees or shrubs on private property when such tree or shrub interferes with
the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes
with visibility of any traffic control device or sign, and the owner shall
immediately reimburse the City for the expense of such work.
(1987 Code § 24-18)
8-3A-19: PRIVATE PROPERTY TREE CARE AND REMOVAL:
The City shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased tree
on private property within the City when such trees constitute a hazard to life
or property, or harbor insects or disease which constitutes a potential threat
to other trees or plants within the City. Removal shall be done by said owners
at their own expense. In the event of the failure of the owners to comply with
such provisions, the City shall have the authority to remove such trees and the
owner shall immediately reimburse the City for the expense of such removal.
(1987 Code § 24-19)
8-3A-20: STUMP REMOVAL:
All stumps of street trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so
that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
(1987 Code § 24-20)
8-3A-21: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 24-22) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
ARTICLE B: WEEDS AND NOXIOUS GROWTH
Section
8-3B-1: Weeds And Noxious Growth
8-3B-2: Violations
8-3B-1: WEEDS AND NOXIOUS GROWTH:
All premises and exterior property, including the parkway area located between
such premises and the adjoining road pavement or surface shall be maintained
free from weeds and plant growth in excess of eight inches (8"). All noxious
weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants
and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall
not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
(1987 Code § 24-26)
8-3B-2: VIOLATIONS:
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property (“owner”) to cut
and destroy weeds after being given notice of the violation by first class mail
addressed to the last known address of the owner, the owner shall be subject to
prosecution in accordance with section 106.3 of the International Property
Maintenance Code and applicable provisions of this Code. Upon failure to comply
with the notice of violation within four (4) days, any duly authorized employee
of the City or contractor hired by the City shall be authorized to enter upon
the property to cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon and the costs of such
removal, plus an administrative fee of fifteen percent (15%) of the total cost
of such removal, shall be paid by the owner.
(1987 Code § 24-27; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE C: TREE PRESERVATION
Section
8-3C-1: Purpose
8-3C-2: General Scope And Applicability
8-3C-3: Tree Removal Permit Required
8-3C-4: Fee For Permit
8-3C-5: Consideration Of Application
8-3C-6: Submittal Requirements For Permit
8-3C-7: Tree Removal Conditions
8-3C-8: Tree Preservation Plan Criteria
8-3C-9: Tree Protection Rights
8-3C-10: Replacement Schedule
8-3C-11: Penalty
8-3C-1: PURPOSE:
The tree preservation requirements specified herein are intended to foster
aesthetically pleasing development that will protect and preserve the
appearance, character, general health, safety and welfare of the community and
enhance property values. Specifically, these regulations are intended to
increase the compatibility of adjacent uses by preserving natural areas that
become buffers between uses and in doing so, minimize the harmful impact of
noise, dust and other debris; motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial
light intrusions, and other objectionable activities or impacts conducted or
created by adjoining or nearby uses; reduce topsoil erosion and stormwater
runoff; reduce energy consumption through windbreak and shade; and preserve
nesting for birds and wildlife.
(1987 Code § 24-40)
8-3C-2: GENERAL SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Specified: The provisions of this article shall apply to the following
private parcels of land:
      1.   Any subdivision of land in any zoning district resulting in the
creation of three (3) or more lots;
      2.   All Single-Family Residentially zoned lots larger than two (2)
acres;
      3.   All property zoned other than Single-Family Residential, larger than
one acre;
      4.   All areas seeking annexation to the City.
   B.   Exceptions: Exceptions include nurseries or orchards.
(1987 Code § 24-41)
8-3C-3: TREE REMOVAL PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Permit Required: No live tree measuring six inches (6") in diameter at
breast height (dbh) or greater, shall be removed from properties outlined in
section 8-3C-2 of this article without first obtaining a tree removal permit
from the Parks and Recreation Department. For purposes of this article, dbh
shall be considered to represent height of fifty four inches (54") above the
base of the tree.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   Emergency: A tree removal permit is not required when removal is
necessary due to an emergency situation posing an immediate threat to a person,
property or the community, and where such an emergency renders compliance with
the permit process unreasonable. The individual who removes the tree shall
first attempt to call the Parks and Recreation Department to obtain field
permission to remove the tree. If permission cannot be obtained due to
unavailability of the Parks and Recreation staff, the tree may be removed,
provided the person removing the tree notifies the Parks and Recreation
Department within forty eight (48) hours of the removal of the tree and the
reason for its removal.
      2.   Measurement: Where no tree on the parcel of land measures six inches
(6") dbh as verified by City staff.
      3.   Prior Plan: Properties for which a specific landscaping or tree
preservation plan has been approved prior to the effective date of this article
pursuant to the terms of an annexation agreement or other specific agreement or
ordinance applicable to such property.
(1987 Code § 24-42)
8-3C-4: FEE FOR PERMIT:
The fee for a tree removal permit shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00),
payable upon the submittal of a tree removal permit application.
(1987 Code § 24-49)
8-3C-5: CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION:
In connection with a site development permit, the Director of Community
Development and the City Arborist shall review the tree survey and tree
preservation plan and either approve or deny the application.
   A.   Connected With Subdivision: In connection with a subdivision, the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Arborist shall review the tree
survey and preservation plan and make a recommendation to the City Council for
approval or denial.
   B.   No Subdivision: Where no subdivision of land or site development permit
is required, the City Arborist shall review the tree survey and preservation
plan and make a recommendation to the City Council through the Director of
Parks and Recreation for approval or denial.
(1987 Code § 24-43; amd. 2019 Code)
8-3C-6: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Private Structures, Property: Any person requiring a tree removal
permit due to development, redevelopment, subdivision, new construction,
expansion, structural alteration or other improvement to private structures or
property shall submit the following information to the City Arborist.
(1987 Code § 24-44; amd. 2019 Code)
      1.   A tree survey which shall consist of a plat of survey indicating the
location, size and botanical and common name of all trees located on the parcel
with a six inch (6") dbh or greater. The tree survey shall also include all
proposed structures and impervious areas and identify those trees for removal.
      2.   A written statement indicating the reasons for removal of tree(s).
      3.   A tree preservation plan which is the tree survey, including a
designation in plan form of the trees that are to be preserved and protected.
The plan should include methods and procedures to be used for tree protection.
   B.   No Site Development Parcel: Any person requiring a tree removal permit
on a parcel not undergoing site development, subdivision, or any work involving
a building permit, the following information must be provided:
      1.   A plat of survey of the parcel. The location, size and species of
tree(s) to be removed shall be noted on the survey as accurately as possible.
      2.   A written statement indicating the reasons for removal of the tree
(s).
      3.   Reasons for tree removal related to disease or good forestry
practices may require justification in writing by a certified arborist.
(1987 Code § 24-44)
8-3C-7: TREE REMOVAL CONDITIONS:
When a person desires to remove a tree on a parcel of land covered under
section 8-3C-2, “General Scope And Applicability”, of this article, whether it
is part of a site development or not, such removal shall be deemed justified
where one or more of the following conditions are clearly demonstrated by the
person seeking a tree removal or site development permit:
   A.   Safety Hazard: A tree creates a safety hazard to pedestrians, vehicle
traffic, structures or utilities, or a threat to public safety.
   B.   Diseased, Weak: The tree is incurably diseased or has been severely
weakened by age, storm, fire or other natural disaster.
   C.   Good Forestry Practice: Good forestry practice requires removal. Said
forestry practice includes such considerations as to the number of healthy
trees a given parcel of land will support.
   D.   Replacement Schedule: These trees are subject to the following tree
replace schedule: five percent (5%) of the total diameter at breast height
(dbh) will be required as compensation for removal (e.g., the total dbh of the
trees listed below is 2,400 inches x 0.05 (5 percent) = 120 inches of
replaceable diameter. 120 inches of diameter divided by the diameter of the
replacement trees = the number of trees).
Common Name Botanical Name
Common Name     Botanical Name
Black locust    Robinia psuedo-acacia
Box elder       Acer negundo
Catalpa         Caltalpa speciosa
Chinese elm     Ulmus parvifolia
Choke cherry    Prunus virginiana
Cottonwood      Populus deltoides
Lombardy poplar Populus nigra
Mulberry        Morus rubra
Poplar          Populus (species)
Siberian elm    Ulmus pumila
Silver maple    Acer saccharinum
Tree-of-heaven  Ailanthus altissima
Willow          Salix (species)
 
(1987 Code § 24-45)
8-3C-8: TREE PRESERVATION PLAN CRITERIA:
Following is the criteria for approving a tree preservation plan:
   A.   General design.
   B.   Planting specifications.
   C.   Extent of existing tree coverage and consideration that reasonable
efforts are being taken to retain existing trees.
   D.   Techniques for the preservation and protection of existing trees during
construction.
   E.   Ratio of nondeciduous to deciduous trees.
   F.   Provisions for replacing destroyed or damaged trees and the planting of
additional trees where desirable.
   G.   General environmental considerations.
(1987 Code § 24-46)
8-3C-9: TREE PROTECTION RIGHTS:
The following tree protection techniques shall be employed during any work
conducted on the site. The tree preservation plan shall specify the following:
   A.   Encroaching Within Drip Line: All grading and construction equipment
shall not encroach within the drip line of a tree.
   B.   Harmful Materials: Crushed limestone, hydrocarbons and other materials
detrimental to trees shall not be placed within the drip line of any tree being
preserved, nor at any higher location where drainage toward the tree could
affect the health of the tree.
   C.   Fencing: Appropriate protective fencing shall be temporarily installed
at the periphery of the tree’s drip line throughout the duration of site
development and construction activities.
   D.   Construction Debris: The area within the drip line of the trees shall
remain free of building materials, dirt, fill and construction debris.
   E.   Methods Specified; Other Considerations: Methods used to preserve trees
shall be clearly specified. Methods other than outlined in this section may be
considered if demonstrated to be in keeping with good forestry practice and
maintaining the highest viability.
   F.   Notification To City: The owner/developer must notify the Community
Development Department forty eight (48) hours prior to work being performed
within areas under protection as indicated on the approved Tree Preservation
Plan.
(1987 Code § 24-47)
8-3C-10: REPLACEMENT SCHEDULE:
   A.   Specified: Trees removed, whether or not due to construction, site
development or subdivision of land, shall be replaced according to the
following schedule:
   TREE(S) REMOVED
 
Caliper (In Inches dbh) Number Of Replacement Trees
   30" or greater    3
   18" - 29"         2
   6" - 17"          1
 
   B.   Minimum Caliper: All replacement trees shall have a minimum caliper of
two inches (2") measured at six inches (6") above the base of the tree.
   C.   Species: Replacement trees shall be limited to the following species or
as determined by the approving authority:
All trees listed as permitted street trees
All trees listed as permitted street trees
American hornbeam       Carpus coroliniana
American larch          Larix laricina
Amur maple              Acer ginnala
Bald cypress            Taxodium distichum
Basswood                Tilia Americana
Bitternut hickory       Carya cordiformis
Black Hills spruce      Piceu glance densata
Black oak               Quercus Velutina
Black tupelo            Nyssa sylvatica
Black walnut            Juglaus nigra
Burr oak                Quercus macrocarpa
Catalpa                 Catalpa speciosa
Chesnut oak             Quercus prinus
Chinkapin oak           Quercus muehlengergii
Common horsechestnut    Aesculus Hippocastenum
Dawn redwood            Metasequoia glyptostroboides
Douglas fir             Pseudosuga menziesii
Eastern red cedar       Juniperus virginiana
Eastern white pine      Pinus strobus
English oak             Quercus robur
European black alder    Alnus glutinosa
European larch          Larix decidua
Flowering crabs         Malus supp.
London planetree        Platanus cerifolia
Magnolia, cucumber tree Magnolia acuminate
Magnolia, saucer        Magnolia x soulangiana
Magnolia, star          Magnolia stellata
Norway maple            Acer platanoides
Norway spruce           Picea abies
Ohio buckeye            Aesculus glabra
Pagoda dogwood          Cornus alternifolia
Paperbank maple         Acer griseum
Pear, callery           Pyrus calleryana
Red mulberry            Morus rubra
Red oak                 Quercus rubra
Riverbirch              Betula nigra
Sawtooth oak            Quercus acutissima
Scarlet oak             Quercus coccinea
Shagbark hickory        Carya ovata
Shingle oak             Quercus imbricaria
Swamp white oak         Quercus bicolor
Sweetgum                Liquidambar styraciflua
Swiss stone pine        Pinus cembra
Tulip tree              Liriodendron tulipifera
White cedar             Thuja occidentalis
White oak               Quercus alba
White spruce            Picea glanca
Whitespire birch        Betula platyphylla ‘whitespire’
Zeklova, Japanese       Zelkova serrata
 
   D.   Insufficient Space: In keeping with good forestry practice, if
sufficient space is not available to plant replacement trees, the owner/
developer shall pay the City the current replacement cost using the regional
cost per square inch of trunk area (cross section) to determine actual tree
value. This information is found in the International Society of
Arboriculture’s Guide for Plant Appraisal Ninth Edition (or most recent
edition) and by using the Illinois Arborist Associations Guide for Species
Ratings and Appraisal Factors for Illinois-Region A for each tree not planted
in compliance with the replacement schedule. Said amount is to be utilized for
tree planting or tree preservation programs operated by the City.
(1987 Code § 24-48)
8-3C-11: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation that violates any provision of this article
shall be subject to a fine according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title
15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, plus the City's cost of prosecution,
including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a violation exists and a tree
removal permit is not obtained shall constitute a separate offense. Further, a
separate offense shall be deemed committed for each tree injured, removed,
destroyed or for any undertaking of any procedure, the result of which is to
cause the death or substantial destruction of any tree within the City, having
a dbh of six inches (6") or greater.
(1987 Code § 24-50) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 4: MCHENRY RIVERWALK
Section
8-4-1: McHenry Riverwalk Defined
8-4-2: Skateboard, Roller Blades, In-Line Skates, Bicycles Prohibited;
Exemptions
8-4-3: Transient Merchant Licenses
8-4-4: Fishing
8-4-1: MCHENRY RIVERWALK DEFINED:
The McHenry Riverwalk is defined as the improved area designated along and
adjacent to the Boone Creek from the Elm Street Route 120 Bridge east to the
Fox River; thence curving north along the west side of the Fox River, up to and
including Weber Park. The McHenry Riverwalk is improved with sidewalk,
boardwalk, concrete and/or paver brick walking paths and includes a pedestrian
bridge crossing Boone Creek at Riverside Drive.
(1987 Code § 21-51)
8-4-2: SKATEBOARD, ROLLER BLADES, IN-LINE SKATES, BICYCLES PROHIBITED;
EXEMPTIONS:
The use of skateboards, roller blades, in-line skates, scooters, pedacycles
(motorized or nonmotorized) and bicycles is prohibited on the McHenry
Riverwalk. However, motorized or nonmotorized scooters, pedacycles, ambulatory
chairs or power chairs, utilized by the infirm, elderly or disabled, requiring
them for ambulation, are hereby exempt from this section.
(1987 Code § 21-52)
8-4-3: TRANSIENT MERCHANT LICENSES:
A total of ten (10) transient merchant licenses are permitted on the McHenry
Riverwalk annually. Each transient merchant shall be granted a license to
peddle their wares at one specific location on the Riverwalk. See also title 4,
chapter 13, “Solicitors, Peddlers And Transient Merchants”, of this Code.
(1987 Code § 21-54)
8-4-4: FISHING:
It shall be unlawful to fish on the McHenry Riverwalk, except at specifically
designated locations.
(1987 Code § 21-55)
CHAPTER 5: EXCAVATIONS AND TUNNELING
Section
8-5-1: Permit Required
8-5-2: Application For Permit
8-5-3: Permit Fee
8-5-4: Insurance Required
8-5-5: Deposit Required
8-5-6: Supervision
8-5-7: Manner Regulated
8-5-8: Restoring Surface
8-5-9: Temporary Sidewalks Required
8-5-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to tunnel under or to make any excavation
in any street, alley or other public place in the City without having obtained
a permit as is herein required, or without complying with the provisions of
this chapter, or in violation of or variance from the terms of any such permit.
(1987 Code § 21-32)
8-5-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made to the Director
of Public Works and shall include the following:
   A.   Description of the location of the intended excavation or tunnel;
   B.   The size of the project;
   C.   The purpose of the project;
   D.   The person doing the actual excavating work;
   E.   The name of the person for whom the work is being done;
   F.   An agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and
laws relating to the work to be done.
(1987 Code § 21-33)
8-5-3: PERMIT FEE:
Before any excavation is started, the contractor or owner shall pay to the
Director of Public Works a fifteen dollar ($15.00) permit fee.
(1987 Code § 21-34)
8-5-4: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No excavating permit shall be issued to the applicant until such applicant has
filed with the City Clerk a certificate of public liability insurance coverage,
in the sum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), to indemnify the City for
any claim, loss, liability or damage that may result or accrue from or be
caused by the making, existence or manner of guarding or constructing any such
tunnel or excavation.
(1987 Code § 21-35)
8-5-5: DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
In addition to the public liability insurance coverage required by section
8-5-4 of this chapter, the applicant shall deposit with the City Clerk cash in
an amount equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the cost of the project, or an
amount to be determined by the Director of Public Works, whichever is greater,
for which the permit is being sought, if the pavement is to be broken. The
minimum deposit shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). The purpose of this
deposit is to insure the proper restoration of the pavement. From this deposit
shall be deducted the cost and expense to the City of restoring the pavement,
and the balance thereof shall be returned to the applicant without interest
after the tunnel or excavation is completely refilled and the pavement is
restored.
(1987 Code § 21-36)
8-5-6: SUPERVISION:
The Director of Public Works shall from time to time inspect, or cause to be
inspected, all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public
street, alley or other public place in the City to see to the enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter. Notice shall be given to the Director of Public
Works at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the start of any work in or
under any public street, alley or other public place in the City.
(1987 Code § 21-37)
8-5-7: MANNER REGULATED:
   A.   Compliance Required: It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation
or tunnel in any way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit
therefor.
   B.   Bracing: Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent collapse of
adjoining ground; and, in excavations, the excavation shall not have anywhere
below the surface any portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface.
   C.   Injury: No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the
making of such excavations or tunnels; and notice shall be given to the persons
maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the City department or
officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or
affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes,
cables or conduits shall be disturbed.
   D.   Damage To Trees, Shrubs: No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done
to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof.
(1987 Code § 21-38)
8-5-8: RESTORING SURFACE:
   A.   Required: Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any
public street, alley or other public place in the City shall restore the
surface to its original condition. Refills shall be properly tamped down, and
any bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be left in the ground.
   B.   Openings: Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall
be repaired and the surface re-laid by the applicant, in compliance with the
ordinances of the City and under the supervision of the Director of Public
Works.
(1987 Code § 21-39)
8-5-9: TEMPORARY SIDEWALKS REQUIRED:
If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be
constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for
users.
(1987 Code § 21-40)
CHAPTER 6: ENCROACHMENTS
Section
8-6-1: Definitions
8-6-2: Encroachment Prohibited
8-6-3: Project Right-Of-Way Lines Established
8-6-4: Permissible Encroachments
8-6-5: Provisions Declared Additional
8-6-6: Penalty
8-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
Definitions as used in this chapter:
CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA: That area lying between the project right-of-way
limits and the platted street limits within which the City, by concurrence in
the establishment of the project right-of- way lines, will permit the State to
enter to perform all necessary construction operations.
ENCROACHMENT: Any building, fence, sign, or any other structure or object of
any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is
placed, located or maintained in, on, under or over any portion of the project
right-of-way or the roadway right-of-way where no project right-of-way line has
been established.
PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT: As any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign or
similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to
the limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the
building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of traffic on
the highway; the permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to be
construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed
outside the project right-of-way line and not confined by adjacent buildings.
PROJECT RIGHT-OF-WAY: As those areas within the project right-of-way lines
established jointly by the City and State, which will be free of encroachments,
except as hereinafter defined.
ROADWAY RIGHT-OF-WAY: As those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by
fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement
during the time the easement is in effect.
(1987 Code § 21-71)
8-6-2: ENCROACHMENT PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected, to retain
or cause to be retained, any encroachment, except as provided in section
8-6-4 of this chapter, within the limits of the project right- of-way or
roadway right-of-way where no project right-of-way lines have been established.
(1987 Code § 21-72)
8-6-3: PROJECT RIGHT-OF-WAY LINES ESTABLISHED:
Project right-of-way lines have been established at the following locations:
Along the north and south sides of Waukegan Street at the right-of-way line.
(1987 Code § 21-73)
8-6-4: PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENTS:
Revocable permits have been issued by the City for the temporary retention of
the following permissible encroachments: None.
(1987 Code § 21-74)
8-6-5: PROVISIONS DECLARED ADDITIONAL:
This chapter is intended to and shall be in addition to all other ordinances,
rules and regulations concerning encroachments and shall not be construed as
repealing or rescinding any other ordinance or part of any ordinance unless in
direct conflict therewith.
(1987 Code § 21-75)
8-6-6: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 21-76) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 7: CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Section
8-7-1: Purpose And Scope
8-7-2: Definitions
8-7-3: Annual Registration Required
8-7-4: Permit Required; Application And Fees
8-7-5: Action On Permit Applications
8-7-6: Effect Of Permit
8-7-7: Revised Permit Drawings
8-7-8: Insurance
8-7-9: Indemnification
8-7-10: Security
8-7-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
8-7-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner’s Identity Or Legal Status
8-7-13: General Construction Standards
8-7-14: Traffic Control
8-7-15: Location Of Facilities
8-7-16: Construction Methods And Materials
8-7-17: Vegetation Control
8-7-18: Removal, Relocation Or Modification Of Utility Facilities
8-7-19: Small Cells
8-7-20: Clean Up And Restoration
8-7-21: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
8-7-22: Variances
8-7-23: Penalties
8-7-24: Further Enforcement Remedies
8-7-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights-of-way within the City’s
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage and visual qualities of the City
rights-of-way and the City as a whole.
   B.   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the City intends to continue to
exercise its authority over the rights- of-way in the City and, in particular,
the use of the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform
standards to address issues presented by utility facilities, including without
limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
City’s utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
wetlands and other sensitive areas from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the historical and aesthetic character of the neighborhoods
in which facilities are installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize the City’s residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights-of-way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use, maintenance of property values and
enjoyment of private properties adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   C.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter:
      1.   This chapter applies to all facilities on, over, above, along, upon,
under, across or within the rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the City
or City property, including, but not limited to, cabinets, ancillary sheds and
utility poles. A facility lawfully established prior to the effective date of
this chapter may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by the
utility as presently constructed and located, and so long as the existing
footprint and height is not expanded, except as may be otherwise provided in
any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
      2.   No “facility”, as defined in section
8-7-2 of this chapter, shall hereafter be located, erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, or structurally altered unless
the required permits have been submitted to the City and approved by the City.
   D.   Franchises, Licenses Or Similar Agreements: The City, in its discretion
and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a franchise, license
or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their facilities on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across or within the City rights-of-way. Utilities
that are not required by law to enter into such an agreement may request that
the City enter into such an agreement. In such an agreement, the City may
provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with this chapter.
   E.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the City, such franchise, license or similar agreement
shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any lawful
renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the City and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   F.   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   G.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations.
   H.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The City shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards, conditions
and requirements expressed in this chapter when the City so determines. Nothing
herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the City to regulate its
rights-of-way for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
(1987 Code § 21-89)
8-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section.
Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed to it in
92 Illinois Administrative Code section 530.30, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: As defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: As defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: As defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as
carrier pipes, electrical conductors and fiber optic devices.
CITY INITIATED IMPROVEMENTS OR CITY OPERATIONS: Shall include, but not be
limited to, anything required by the City in annexation, final plat
requirements or other agreements with third parties, including those intended
to benefit other property within the City, City road construction, expansion or
relocation projects, public works projects, or other City operations,
maintenance and planning projects.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, recoverable slope, nonrecoverable slope and a clear run-out area. The
desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO Roadside Design Guide.
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right-of-way lines of a
right-of-way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any work that obstructs the right-of-way or causes a
material adverse effect on the use of the right-of-way for its intended use.
Such work may include, without limitation, the following: excavating or other
cutting; placement (whether temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment,
devices or structures; damage to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the
soil, and shall not include the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner
that does not materially obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right-of-way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, poles, monopoles and materials
(including, but not limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic
cable, antennas, vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals,
poles, conduits, grates, covers, pipes, cables and appurtenances thereto)
located on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within rights-of-way
under this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term FACILITY shall not
include any facility owned or operated by the City.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
GOVERNMENT ENTITY: Any local, County, State or Federal unit of government,
including, such as, by way of example, townships, counties, park districts and
school districts.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location or other characteristics, is determined by the
Public Works Director to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life,
health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of the
environment, including, but not limited to explosives, radioactive materials,
petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology (biological)
agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be hazardous or
toxic under any Federal or State law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right-of-way used for vehicular traffic, including
rural or urban roads or streets. Highway includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois Highway Code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois Cable and Video
Competition Law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois Commerce Commission.
IDOT: Illinois Department of Transportation.
JULIE: The Joint Utility Locating Information for Excavators Utility
Notification Program, operated pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 50/
1 et seq.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under the right-of-way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right- of-way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right-of-way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for
the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
8-7-4 and 8-7-5 of this chapter.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES ANTENNAE: A structure, antenna, equipment, accessory
equipment and related improvements used, or designed to be used, to provide
wireless transmission of voice, data, images or other information, including,
but not limited to, cellular phone service, personal communication service and
paging service.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products, including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane or coal-slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the City. If no
time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, State or Federal level.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY: Shall include, but not be limited to, any street, alley,
parkway, other land or waterway, dedicated or commonly used for utility or
cable purposes, including utility or cable easements.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right-of-way, highway, roadway or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT-OF-WAY OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the City has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the City. Right-of-way or rights-of-way shall not include any
real or personal City property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include City buildings, fixtures and
other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated in
the right-of-way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing
of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection therewith for a
consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross charge made
by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the
gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for
sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section
8-7-10 of this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS:
   A.   Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted
through use of local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services,
telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange service, private
line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile telecommunications
services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any other form of mobile
or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any other transmission of
messages or information by electronic or similar means, between or among points
by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite or similar
facilities. Private line means a dedicated nontraffic sensitive service for a
single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive or priority use of a
communications channel, or a group of such channels, from one or more specified
locations to one or more other specified locations.
   B.   Telecommunications shall not include:
      1.   Value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission.
      2.   Purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications service
provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such provider
to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end-to-end
communications.
      3.   The provision of cable services through a cable system as defined in
the Cable Communications Act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now
or hereafter amended, or cable or other programming services subject to an open
video system fee payable to the City through an open video system as defined in
the Rules of the Federal Communications Commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and
following), as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person who installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right-of-way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Every person engaged in making sales of
telecommunications at retail, as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: Shall include, in addition to all other commonly and legally accepted
definitions of the term, cable providers and facilities, and video service
providers.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any facility, as defined
in this section.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: As defined in the Illinois Cable and Video Competition Law of
2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-201(v).
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: An unstaffed facility for the transmission
and/or reception of radio frequency (RF), microwave or other signals for
commercial communications purposes, typically consisting of an equipment
enclosure, an antenna support structure or an alternative antenna support
structure, and one or more antennas.
(1987 Code § 21-90)
8-7-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right-of-way within the City, exclusive of those
utilities which have entered into a franchise agreement with the City, shall
register by January 1 of each year with the Public Works Director, providing
the utility’s name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy
numbers, the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the
utility in connection with emergencies involving the utility’s facilities in
the right-of-way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such
person, and evidence of insurance as required in section
8-7-8 of this chapter, in the form of a certificate of insurance.
(1987 Code § 21-91)
8-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no
person, unit of government or utility shall construct any facility on, over,
above, along, upon, under, across or within any City right-of- way, public
utility easement, utility easement or drainage easement which: 1) changes the
location of the facility; 2) adds a new facility; 3) disrupts the right-of-way
(or City easement); or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space
occupied by the facility on, over, above, along, under, across or within the
right-of-way (or City easement), without first filing an application with the
Public Works Director and obtaining a permit from the City. No permit shall be
required for installation and maintenance of service connections to customers’
premises where there will be no disruption of the right-of-way or City
easement.
(amd. Ord. 23-5, 2-6-2023)
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the City and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the City may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as “proprietary” or
“confidential” by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility’s corporate name and address, telephone and telecopy
numbers and an e-mail address contact, as well as a local contact.
      2.   The applicant’s name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address and its interest in the work.
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application.
      4.   A detailed description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed.
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the City:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the Illinois Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the City and shall promote
protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with ICC
regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with this
section unless the City finds that additional information or assurances are
needed.
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules and regulations. Such
applicant shall also provide to the City written evidence of insurance with
professional liability insurance of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
Drawings shall include a location map, dimensions of the right-of-way line and
a legend of all symbols and an RF study demonstrating proof of need, and
maximum permissible radio exposure levels.
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section
8-7-8 of this chapter.
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section
8-7-10 of this chapter.
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section
8-7-22 of this chapter).
      10.   All licenses issued by any agency authorizing the provision of the
services to be provided.
      11.   A detailed site plan showing the location of the proposed
facilities including the existing structure and all adjacent improvements.
      12.   All engineering plans depicting in detail the proposed facilities.
      13.   Written analysis of the projected diameter of service coverage.
      14.   A landscape plan.
      15.   A lighting plan.
      16.   Engineering plans.
      17.   Projected diameter of coverage.
      18.   Map of all existing towers, public facilities and buildings within
a six (6) mile radius of the proposed site.
      19.   Written proof describing why the facility cannot be located on any
of the identified existing towers, public facilities or buildings.
      20.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
City.
Each identified site must be addressed through separate application.
Once a completed application is received, the City shall review the provided
materials and return comments back to the applicant. The applicant shall
address all of staff’s comments and make a complete resubmittal.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any “Certificate of Public
Convenience and Necessity” or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority.
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class and operating pressures.
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Public Water Supplies,
have been satisfied.
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Water Pollution Control, and City have been satisfied.
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure and the design
standard to be followed.
      6.   Any other Federal or State agency approvals, if applicable.
(1987 Code § 21-92)
   E.   Small Cell Antennas Or Towers: With regard to installation of small
cell antennas or towers to be attached to new or existing utility poles or
structures, the provisions of section
8-7-19 of this chapter shall also apply and, in the event of any conflict with
the provisions of this section and section
8-7-19 of this chapter, the provisions of section
8-7-19 of this chapter shall control.
(Ord. 18-1176, 7-10-2018)
   F.   Applicant’s Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the City within thirty (30) days after
the change necessitating the amendment.
   G.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus
reimbursement for all technical consultant, attorney and other retained
personnel costs incurred by the City in reviewing said application. To that
end, the applicant shall deposit seven thousand five hundred dollars
($7,500.00) with the City at the time of the application from which the City
shall reimburse itself for such cost. The applicant shall restore the balance
of the fund to seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) after the City
reimburses itself. After the decision on the proposed facility and all invoices
have been paid, the remainder of the balance shall be returned to the
applicant.
(1987 Code § 21-92)
8-7-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   City Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the Public Works
Director within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does not
conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and
regulations, the Public Works Director shall reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons. If the Public Works Director is satisfied that
the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable
ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, the Public Works Director shall
issue a permit as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty
of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Public Works
Director, that the construction proposed under the application shall be in full
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to the Telephone Company Act, 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the City that it
intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the
provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the City not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement of
work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The Public Works Director shall
specify the portion of the right-of-way upon which the facility may be placed,
used and constructed.
      2.   In the event the Public Works Director fails to provide such
specification of location to the telecommunications retailer within either: a)
ten (10) days after service of notice to the City by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for new construction; or
b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the telecommunications
retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new construction, the
telecommunications retailer may commence work without obtaining a permit under
this chapter, although in all other appropriate respects, the
telecommunications retailer shall be bound by the provisions of this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the City, where a permit
is required for work pursuant to section
8-7-4 of this chapter, the telecommunications retailer shall submit to the City
an application for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and
documentation available regarding the facility to be constructed. Such
application shall be subject to the requirements of subsection A of this
section.
   C.   Additional City Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a State issued authorization under the Cable
and Video Competition Law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the City, unless otherwise acted upon by the City, provided
the holder has complied with applicable City codes, ordinances and regulations.
(1987 Code § 21-93)
8-7-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the City authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on City rights-of-way, and does not
create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon the
rights of others who may have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   B.   Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   C.   Preconstruction Meeting Required: At the election of the City, no
construction shall begin pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter prior
to attendance by the permittee and all major contractors and subcontractors who
will perform any work under the permit at a preconstruction meeting. The
preconstruction meeting shall be held at a date, time and place designated by
the City with such City representatives in attendance as the City deems
necessary. The meeting shall be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the
permit, and reviewing special considerations necessary in the areas where work
will occur, including, without limitation, presence or absence of other utility
facilities in the area and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of
other utilities, use of rights-of-way by the public during construction, and
access and egress by adjacent property owners.
   D.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a City permit does
not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of the City and
applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.
(1987 Code § 21-94)
8-7-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any material
respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and specifications
submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall submit a revised set
of drawings or plans to the City within ninety (90) days after the completion
of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans shall specifically
identify where the locations of the actual facilities deviate from the
locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the permit also
deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated as a
request for a variance in accordance with section
8-7-22 of this chapter. If the City denies the request, then the permittee
shall either remove the facility from the right-of-way or modify the facility
so it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor.
(1987 Code § 21-95)
8-7-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license or similar agreement, each utility occupying right-of-way or
constructing any facility in the right-of-way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the City, and its elected and appointed officers, officials, agents
and employees as additional insureds on the policies listed below:
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse and underground hazard (commonly referred to as
X, C and U coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with limits
not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers’ compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer’s liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors and
subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and subcontractors
shall comply with this section.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
required policies to the City on an annual basis and/or within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request from the City.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages:
      1.   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until 30 days after receipt by the City, by
registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a written
notice addressed to the City Manager of such intent to cancel or not to renew.
      2.   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the City of said notice, and
in no event later than ten (10) days prior to cancellation, the utility shall
obtain and furnish to the City evidence of replacement insurance policies
meeting the requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A1a of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections
B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-
insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection
A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a “private self-
insurer” under the Workers’ Compensation Act.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility’s Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the City and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self- insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   G.   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the State of Illinois.
(All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated A- or better
and of a Class size X or higher by A.M. Best Company.)
(1987 Code § 21-96)
8-7-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right-of-way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the City and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights-of-way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility’s indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the City, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives.
(1987 Code § 21-97)
8-7-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a Security Fund in a form and in
an amount set forth in this section. The Security Fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee’s sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
Security Fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage or loss incurred by the City occasioned by
the permittee’s failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations, orders,
permits and other directives of the City issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims, costs
or expenses that the City may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter, including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the City must perform itself or have
completed as a consequence solely of the permittee’s failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the City from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the Security Fund to the City in the
form of an unconditional letter of credit in a form acceptable to the City.
Such letter of credit provided pursuant to this section shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without thirty (30) days’ prior
written notice by certified mail to the City and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the City of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the City and within the State
at which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the Security Fund shall be sufficient to
provide for one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the reasonably estimated
cost to restore the right-of-way to at least as good a condition as that
existing prior to the construction under the permit, as determined by the
Public Works Director, and may also include reasonable, directly related costs
that the City estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to
perform such restoration. Where the construction of facilities proposed under
the permit will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the City, with
each phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a
related group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be
undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase
or phases, the Public Works Director may, in the exercise of sound discretion,
allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be
applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of
the Security Fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount
that would have been required under the provisions of this section for any
single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals: The City, upon fourteen (14) days’ advance written notice
clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal rights
under this section, may withdraw an amount from the Security Fund; provided,
that the permittee has not reimbursed the City for such amount within the
fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the City for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the City has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the City
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the Security Fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the City that any amount has been withdrawn from the Security Fund,
the permittee shall restore the Security Fund to the amount specified in this
section.
   F.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the Security Fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the City for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the Security Fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the City to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the City as a result of said revocation; provided,
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   G.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the City with respect to the
Security Fund are in addition to all other rights of the City, whether reserved
by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or
exercise of right with respect to said Security Fund shall affect any other
right the City may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City shall not be
entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any of its rights which
may be infringed or otherwise violated.
   H.   Security For Removal Of Facility: In addition, as a condition precedent
to the commencement of work in the City right-of-way, the applicant shall
deposit with the City an unconditional letter of credit in the amount of one
hundred fifty percent (150%) of the City’s engineer estimated amount to remove
the facility from the City’s right-of-way in the event that the facility is not
used to provide service for ninety (90) days in which case it will be deemed
abandoned and may be removed by the City.
(1987 Code § 21-98)
8-7-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   City Right To Revoke Permit: The City may revoke or suspend a permit
issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter or the permit as issued;
      3.   Permittee’s physical presence or presence of permittee’s facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee’s failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The City shall send written notice
of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this chapter
stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the City, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the City with evidence that no cause exists for
the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the City, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the City within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across or within the rights-of-way and restore the rights-of-way
to the satisfaction of the City providing written proof of such removal to the
City within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice of revocation.
The City may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time periods
provided in this section.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the City may issue a stop work order immediately upon discovery
of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within this section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of this section, the City or its designee may, at
the option of the City: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2) upon not less than
twenty (20) calendar days’ notice to the permittee, remove the subject
facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) calendar days’
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the City. The permittee shall be liable in all events
to the City for all costs of removal.
(1987 Code § 21-99)
8-7-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER’S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the City no less than
thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right-of-way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right-of-way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the City’s right-of-
way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer.
(1987 Code § 21-100)
8-7-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right-of-way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
      1.   Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction;
      2.   Supplemental Specifications and Recurring Special Provisions;
      3.   Highway Design Manual;
      4.   Highway Standards Manual;
      5.   Standard Specifications for Traffic Control Items;
      6.   Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (92 Illinois
Administrative Code section 545);
      7.   Flagger’s Handbook;
      8.   Work Site Protection Manual for Daylight Maintenance Operations; and
      9.   State of Illinois Plumbing Code, to the extent applicable.
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the Public Works Director shall determine, in the exercise of sound
engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be final.
If requested, the Public Works Director shall state which standard or principle
will apply to the construction, maintenance or operation of a facility in the
future.
(1987 Code § 21-101)
8-7-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The City’s minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT’s Illinois Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices and this Code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable Federal, State and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility’s workers when
performing any work on the rights-of-way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so there is minimum
interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Any lane closures and
detours must be outlined and inserted into the permit drawing and approved
during the permitting phase of the project.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least seventy two (72) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section
8-7-21 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is practicable
under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility’s attention by the City.
(1987 Code § 21-102)
8-7-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this section.
      1.   No Interference With City Facilities: No utility facilities shall be
placed in any location if the Public Works Director determines that the
proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
City’s utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the City’s utility facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right-of-way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right-of-
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right-of-way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right-of-way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
      6.   Exclusive Conduit: No permittee shall insert any wire, cable,
conduit or pipe through an existing conduit that traverses under the roadway or
right-of-way, such as a storm sewer. All utilities’ facilities must be in its
own exclusive conduit unless prior permission of the other utility or the
Public Works Director is obtained.
   B.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right-of- way of a highway only if:
         a.   Line Location: Lines are located as near as practicable to the
right-of-way line and as nearly parallel to the right-of-way line as reasonable
pole alignment will permit;
         b.   Curbed Pavement: Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as
practicable from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m)
behind the face of the curb, where available;
         c.   Uncurbed Pavement: Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as
remote from pavement edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet
(4') (1.2 m) outside the outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within
the clear zone;
         d.   Ditch Line, Drainageway Prohibited: No pole is located in the
ditch line of a highway or other drainageway; and
         e.   Ground Mounted Appurtenance: Any ground mounted appurtenance is
located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as
possible to the right-of-way line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right-of-way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Location: The facility is located as near the right-of-way line
as practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to
the right-of-way line;
         b.   Other Locations Impracticable: A new facility may be located
under the paved portion of a highway only if other locations are impracticable
or inconsistent with sound engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be
installed in existing conduit without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   Powers, Communications Line: In the case of an underground power
or communications line, the facility shall be located as near the right-of-way
line as practicable and not more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right-of-
way line and any above grounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot
(1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line or as near as practicable.
   C.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of City highways may
require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement or
additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   Minimum Vertical Line Clearance: It has a minimum vertical line
clearance as required by ICC’s rules entitled, “Construction of Electric Power
and Communication Lines” (83 Illinois Administrative Code 305);
         b.   Pole Location: Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of
the right-of-way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Major Intersections Avoided: Overhead crossings at major
intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   Maintenance Free: The design materials and construction methods
will provide maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Future Expansion: Capacity for the utility’s foreseeable future
expansion needs is provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Carrier, Casting Pipe: Any installation of a pipe, wire or other
facility that is three inches (3") in diameter shall be constructed in either a
carrier pipe or encased in concrete. The carrier/casting pipe shall be
constructed of a rigid material that is at least two inches (2") larger in
diameter from the utility installed within.
      7.   Markers: The City may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right-of-way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current Federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   D.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights-Of-Way: The City may
require that facilities be located within particular rights-of-way that are not
highways, rather than within particular highways.
   E.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   Location May Be Restricted: The City may restrict the location and
size of any freestanding facility located within a right-of-way subject to
applicable law.
      2.   Screening: The City may require any freestanding facility approved
located within a right-of- way to be screened from view in a manner appropriate
for the surrounding environment, and the City may require the facility’s owner
to maintain such screening.
   F.   Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   Other Owned Facilities: Other aboveground facilities owned by a
utility or utilities are located within one hundred (100) yards of the proposed
site for the facility;
      2.   New Installation Not Feasible: New underground installation is not
technically feasible; and
      3.   Suitable Design And Materials: The proposed installation will be
made at a location, and will employ suitable design and materials, to provide
the greatest protection of aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed
without adversely affecting safety. Suitable designs include, but are not
limited to, self-supporting armless, single pole construction with vertical
configuration of conductors and cable. Existing utility poles and light
standards shall be used wherever practicable; the installation of additional
utility poles is strongly discouraged.
   G.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Conditions For Permitting: Facilities may be installed as
attachments to bridges or roadway structures only where the utility has
demonstrated that all other means of accommodating the facility are not
practicable. No attachment shall be in excess of twelve feet (12') in height
from the underlying structure. Other means shall include, but are not limited
to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports and tower
supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or roadway
structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile, flammable,
corrosive or energized, especially those under significant pressure or
potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   Supporting Data; Considerations: A utility shall include in its
request to accommodate a facility installation on a bridge or roadway structure
supporting data demonstrating the impracticability of alternate routing.
Approval or disapproval of an application for facility attachment to a bridge
or roadway structure will be based upon the following considerations:
         a.   Risk Evaluation: The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the
commodity to be transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons
and property in the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   Importance: The type, length, value and relative importance of
the highway structure in the transportation system;
         c.   Alternate Routings: The alternative routings available to the
utility and their comparative practicability;
         d.   Method Of Attachment: The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   Increased Load Ability: The ability of the structure to bear the
increased load of the proposed facility;
         f.   Degree Of Interference: The degree of interference with bridge
maintenance and painting;
         g.   Visual Quality: The effect on the visual quality of the
structure; and
         h.   Public Benefit: The public benefit expected from the utility
service as compared to the risk involved.
   H.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   Prohibition: The City may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   Removal Or Alteration Of Visible Features: A facility may be
constructed only if its construction does not require extensive removal or
alteration of trees or terrain features visible to the right-of-way user or to
adjacent residents and property owners, and if it does not impair the aesthetic
quality of the lands being traversed.
      3.   Installation May Be Required: The City may require the installation
of landscape screening of facilities which shall be determined during the
permit review process.
      4.   Design: WCFs shall be designed to blend in with their surroundings.
This may mean that the facility be designed as a flag pole, tree or other
similar structure. It can also mean that the WCF may be designed and painted to
blend in with the adjacent area, or structure on which it is located.
      5.   Landscape Plan: The WCF site shall be landscaped to provide
sufficient screening in accordance with a landscape plan.
      6.   Wiring: The WCF shall have no exposed wiring. All wiring must be
enclosed within the structure or pole.
(1987 Code § 21-103; amd. Ord. 18-1176, 7-10-2018)
8-7-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights-of-way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the Public
Works Director from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring or jacking shall
be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of boring or
jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after boring or
jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be clearly
marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the City to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system and shall comply with the City’s Tree
Preservation Ordinance.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair or
maintenance on rights-of-way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the Public Works Director.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the Illinois
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right-of-way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off-road location.
         c.   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the City to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT’s Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction. When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the Public Works Director, the utility, at its expense, shall remove
any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place
and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk,
curbs and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the Public Works
Director.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: In addition to the utility permit for construction,
all pavement cuts shall be subject to final approval of the Public Works
Director and shall require a road opening permit. Pavement cuts for facility
installation or repair shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of
the highway is closed to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in
this subsection is permitted under section
8-7-22 of this chapter, the following requirements shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the Public Works Director.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the City.
         c.   All saw cuts shall be full depth and shall be done in a workman
like manner and must be squared off into a rectangular shape that encompasses
the entire area disturbed by the excavation.
         d.   For all rights-of-way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
City.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right-of-way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or City approved jointed
pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is installed
prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or mechanical
joints are of a type approved by the City. Bell and spigot type pipe shall be
encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair;
and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right-of-way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                        Minimum Cover
Electric lines                          30 inches (0.8 m)
Communication, cable or video service   18 inches - 24 inches (0.6 m, as
lines                                   determined by the City)
Gas or petroleum products               30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                              Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                        protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer or drainage Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                    protection
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within City rights-of-way shall be constructed, operated and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois Administrative Code Part 305
(formerly General Order 160 of the ICC) entitled Rules for Construction of
Electric Power and Communications Lines, and the National Electrical Safety
Code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single-pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guy wires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of “moles”, “whip augers” or
other approved method which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation; or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction; or c) cable shall be grounded in
accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code.
         d.   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snowdrops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the City. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snowdrops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of “moles”, “whip augers” or other approved methods which
compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights-of-way shall be constructed, maintained and operated in a City approved
manner and in conformance with the Federal Code of the Office of Pipeline
Safety Operations, Department of Transportation, part 192 - Transportation of
Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Safety Standards (49 CFR
section 192), IDOT’s Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI Standard Code
for Pressure Piping (Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines and
drainage lines within rights-of-way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in
Illinois and the current City of Algonquin Standards for Construction and
Estimating.
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances:
         a.   Ground mounted appurtenances to overhead or underground
facilities, when permitted within a right-of-way, shall be provided with a
vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in width beyond the
appurtenance in all directions.
         b.   The vegetation free area may be provided by an extension of the
mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material approved by the
Public Works Director. With the approval of the Public Works Director,
shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free
area. The housing for ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral
color to blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights-of-way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT’s Standard Specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction, the requirements of the ICC or the standards
established by other official regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right-Of-Way: No material shall be stored on the
right-of-way without the prior written approval of the Public Works Director.
When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross arms or
other materials shall be distributed along the right-of-way prior to and during
installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an obstacle to
right-of- way maintenance or damage to the right-of-way and other property. If
material is to be stored on right-of-way, prior approval must be obtained from
the City.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the City
shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the construction
of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights-of-way may, at the discretion of
the City, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right-of-way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the Public Works Director when
emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the City, the hours of construction
are those set forth in section
6-5A-6 of this Code.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the City shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights-
of-way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The City will make its permit
records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the City or by
JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois Underground Facilities Damage Prevention Act (220 ILCS 50/
1 et seq.)
(1987 Code § 21-104)
8-7-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Electric Utilities - Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right-of-way as dictated by the City Arborist and in
accordance with applicable State laws and regulations, and additionally, with
such local franchise or other agreement with the City as permitted by law.
   B.   Other Utilities - Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right-of-way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable State laws and regulations specifically
governing the same, shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit from the City
Arborist, in addition to any other permit required under this chapter and shall
also comply with the requirements of chapter 3, “Trees, Shrubs And Noxious
Growth”, of this title.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The City’s root pruning
standards must also be adhered to. The City will require compensation for trees
extensively damaged and for trees removed without authorization. The formula
developed by the International Society of Arboriculture will be used as a basis
for determining the compensation for damaged trees or unauthorized removal of
trees. The City may require the removal and replacement of trees if trimming or
radical pruning would leave them in an unacceptable condition.
   C.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The City may require
that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of special
significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side arm
extensions, covered wire or other means.
   D.   Chemical Use:
      1.   Prohibition: Except as provided in the following subsection, no
utility shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs
or vegetation in the City for any purpose, including the control of growth,
insects or disease.
      2.   Permitted When Only Method Of Vegetation Control: Spraying of any
type of brush killing chemicals will not be permitted on rights-of-way unless
the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director that
such spraying is the only practicable method of vegetation control.
(1987 Code § 21-105)
8-7-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the City,
a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the Corporate Authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance or installation
of any City improvement in or upon, or the operations of the City in or upon,
the rights-of-way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the City, any utility that owns, controls or maintains any
unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights-of-way shall,
at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or appurtenances
from the rights-of-way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to removal in
the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee’s license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee’s license, permit or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The City retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights-of-
way of the City, as the City may determine to be necessary, appropriate or
useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances
permit, the City shall attempt to notify the utility, if known, prior to
cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if known, after
cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights-of-way of the City, the utility shall notify the City within ninety (90)
days. Following receipt of such notice, the City may direct the utility to
remove all or any portion of the facility if the Public Works Director
determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health,
safety and welfare. In the event the City does not direct the utility that
abandoned the facility to remove it, by giving notice of abandonment to the
City, the abandoning utility shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or
removal of all or any portion of the facility by another utility or person.
(1987 Code § 21-106)
8-7-19: SMALL CELLS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the City’s jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the City exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Illinois Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act (Public Act 100-0585).
   B.   Conflicts:
      1.   Other Ordinances: This section supersedes all sections or parts
thereof adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of
such conflict.
      2.   State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable Federal or
State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this section, the
wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this section to the
maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws or regulations.
   C.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
   ACT: The Illinois Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act, as may be
subsequently amended.
   ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
   APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing or Mechanical Codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those
codes, including the National Electrical Safety Code.
   APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
   APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the City for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
   COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as
amended; information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(33), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522
(5), as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153
(24), as amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51),
as amended; or a wireless provider.
   FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
   FEE: A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property or site, or
group of buildings, properties or sites that are either: 1) listed in the
National Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for
listing by the keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been
delegated the authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine
their eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section
VI.D.1.a.i through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement
codified at 47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or 2) designated as a locally landmarked
building, property, site or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the
City pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the
Certified Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation
Office, or where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois
State Historic Preservation Office is pending.
   LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order
or local ordinance or resolution.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width and twelve inches (12") in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
   MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the City in
public rights-of- way.
   PERMIT: A written authorization required by the City to perform an action or
initiate, continue or complete a project.
   PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust or other entity or organization.
   PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical or other emergency services to respond
to and manage emergency incidents.
   RATE: A recurring charge.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley or utility easement dedicated for compatible use. Right-
of-way does not include City owned aerial lines.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications: 1) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no
more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has
exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within
an imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and 2) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cutoff switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
   UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part
by a communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting,
traffic control or a similar function.
   WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
1) equipment associated with wireless communications; and 2) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: 1) the structure or improvements on, under or within which the
equipment is collocated; or 2) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the City.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole.
!DEFEND!
   D.   Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities:
      1.   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, but not subject to zoning
review or approval if they are collocated: a) in rights-of-way in any zoning
district; or b) outside rights-of-way in property zoned exclusively for
commercial or industrial use.
      2.   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the City to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
         a.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the City, together with the City’s small cell
facilities permit application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
            (1)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal
utility pole, make ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that
term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989;
            (2)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
            (3)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural
engineer, as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering
Practice Act of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the
application as it is proposed to be installed;
            (4)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
            (5)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of
each small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
            (6)   Certification that the collocation complies with the
collocation requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the
applicant’s knowledge.
            (7)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to
be attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the City, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
         b.   Application Process: The City shall process applications as
follows:
            (1)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
            (2)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the City fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application.
            However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
            The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the ninetieth
day after submission of the complete application or the tenth day after the
receipt of the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the City’s denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this section.
            (3)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the City fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission
of a completed application.
            However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted
activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the City in
writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than
one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
            The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the one
hundred twentieth day after submission of the complete application or the tenth
day after the receipt of the deemed approved notice by the City. The receipt of
the deemed approved notice shall not preclude the City’s denial of the permit
request within the time limits as provided under this section.
            (4)   The City shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this section.
            If the City determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
The City shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific code
provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the City denies an
application.
The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the City and resubmit the
revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of denial is sent
to the applicant without paying an additional application fee. The City shall
approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days after the
applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved. Failure to
resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial shall
require the application to submit a new application with applicable fees, and
recommencement of the City’s review period.
The applicant must notify the City in writing of its intention to proceed with
the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be submitted with
the revised application.
Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies cited
in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the cure
requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
         c.   Pole Attachment Agreement: Within thirty (30) days after an
approved permit to collocate a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility
pole, the City and the applicant shall enter into a master pole attachment
agreement, provided by the City, for the initial collocation on a Municipal
utility pole by the application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate
on a small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the City and the
applicant shall enter into a license supplement of the Master Pole Attachment
Agreement.
         d.   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after
receiving an application, the City shall determine whether the application is
complete and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the City
must specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be
deemed complete if the City fails to provide notification to the applicant
within thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the City’s permit application form are submitted by the applicant
to the City.
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the City sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
         e.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled
by:
            (1)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
City; or
            (2)   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
         f.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate
small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the City shall be allowed,
at the applicant’s discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the City may
remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The City may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
         g.   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a
period of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for
equivalent durations unless the City makes a finding that the small wireless
facilities or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the
applicable City codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in
this section.
If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits
shall be subject to the applicable City Code provisions or regulations in
effect at the time of renewal.
         h.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the City by personal
delivery at the City’s designated place of business, by regular mail postmarked
on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including electronic mail.
   E.   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The City may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the City’s electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the City reasonably determines
that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
section. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies:
         a.   The wireless provider’s operation of the small wireless
facilities shall not interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety
agency for public safety communications.
         b.   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency’s communications equipment.
         c.   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in
accordance with industry standards and the FCC’s regulations addressing
unacceptable interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum
licensed by a public safety agency.
         d.   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the
wireless provider has been given written notice of the interference by the
public safety agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy
the interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC,
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973, and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
         e.   The City may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility
based on such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with
the Code of Federal Regulations cited in the previous subsection. Failure to
remedy the interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   Prohibited Location; Exception:
         a.   The wireless provider shall not collocate small wireless
facilities on City utility poles that are part of an electric distribution or
transmission system within the communication worker safety zone of the pole or
the electric supply zone of the pole.
         b.   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless
facility may be located in the communications space on the City utility pole
and on the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless
provider complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
         c.   For purposes of this subsection, the terms “communications
space”, “communication worker safety zone” and “electric supply zone” have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electrical Safety Code, as
published by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   Code Compliance: The wireless provider shall comply with all
applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.
      6.   Design Standards; Variances: The wireless provider shall comply with
the following design standards and any variations from these design standards
may only be granted pursuant to the variance provisions of section
8-7-22 of this chapter:
         a.   Screening: Whenever any equipment or appurtenances are to be
installed at grade, screening must be installed to minimize the visibility of
the facility and shall not be permitted to obstruct sight lines or to create
other traffic or safety problems.
         b.   Color And Stealth: All wireless facilities subject to this
section, including all related equipment and appurtenances, must be a color
that blends with the surroundings of the pole, structure tower or
infrastructure on which it is mounted. The color must be comprised of
nonreflective materials which blend with the materials and colors of the
surrounding area and structures. The applicant shall use good faith efforts to
employ reasonable stealth techniques to conceal the appearance of the wireless
facilities. Any pole extensions shall not be metallic or wood and shall blend
with the color of the pole upon which they are mounted.
         c.   Wiring And Cabling: Wires and cables connecting the antenna to
the remainder of the facility must be installed in accordance with the National
Electrical Code and National Electrical Safety Code adopted by the City and in
force at the time of the installation of the facility. Any wiring must be
covered with an appropriate cover. No wiring and cabling serving the facility
will be allowed to interfere with any existing uses.
      7.   Alternate Placements:
         a.   Except as provided in this collocation requirements and
conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required to collocate
small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or category of utility
poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems on a single utility
pole. However, with respect to an application for the collocation of a small
wireless facility associated with a new utility pole, the City may propose that
the small wireless facility be collocated on an existing utility pole or
existing wireless support structure within one hundred feet (100') of the
proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it has the right to
use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and conditions, and the
alternate location and structure does not impose technical limits or additional
material costs as determined by the applicant.
         b.   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the City, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this subsection.
      8.   Height Limitations:
         a.   The maximum height of a small wireless facility shall be no more
than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support structure on
which the small wireless facility is collocated.
         b.   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures
on which small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
            (1)   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility
pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in
place on the date the application is submitted to the City, that is located
within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or
wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the City, provided the City may designate which
intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed
utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height limitation
for such facility; or
            (2)   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a variance in the manner provided in section
8-7-22 of this chapter.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the City and a private
property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable to
utility poles and ground mounted equipment located in the right- of-way.
      11.   Ground Mounted Equipment Spacing: Subject to the variance
provisions of section
8-7-22 of this chapter and State law, the wireless provider shall comply with
applicable spacing requirements of this section concerning the location of
ground mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: Subject to the variance provisions of
section
8-7-22 of this chapter and State law, the wireless provider shall comply with
the provisions of this section concerning undergrounding requirements that
prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility poles
in a right-of-way without prior approval.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the City and the wireless provider agree to extend this
period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility pole or
by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site, provided
the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days after
the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and the
additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred sixty
(360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be void
unless the City grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   F.   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be nonrefundable.
      4.   The City shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights-of-way, for:
         a.   Routine maintenance;
         b.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the City at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment type and model numbers for any of the
replacement equipment; or
         c.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable safety codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the City to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   G.   Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this section authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the City or another unit of local government that is not located within rights-
of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure without
the consent of the property owner;
      2.   Property owned, leased or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/16-102 of the Public Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail
carrier, public commuter rail service or electric utility. The provisions of
this section do not apply to an electric or gas public utility or such
utility’s wireless facilities if the facilities are being used, developed and
maintained consistent with the provisions of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
16-108.5(i) of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, “public utility” has the meaning given to
that term in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-105 of the Public Utilities
Act. Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve any person from any
requirement: a) to obtain a franchise or a State issued authorization to offer
cable service or video service; or b) to obtain any required permission to
install, place, maintain or operate communications facilities, other than small
wireless facilities subject to this section.
   H.   Pre-Existing Agreements:
      1.   Existing agreements between the City and wireless providers that
relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way,
including the collocation of small wireless facilities on City utility poles,
that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless
facilities collocated on the City’s utility poles pursuant to applications
submitted to the City before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination
provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall
comply with this section.
      2.   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the City on
the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the
City makes available under this section for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
(2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the City
that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement
remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the City’s utility
poles pursuant to applications submitted to the City before the wireless
provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this subsection.
   I.   Annual Recurring Rate:
      1.   A wireless provider shall pay to the City an annual recurring rate
to collocate a small wireless facility on a City utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals: a) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year; or b) the
actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider’s use of
space on the City utility pole.
      2.   If the City has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct
costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day
after the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of
intent to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   J.   Abandonment:
      1.   A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous
period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the
facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after
receipt of written notice from the City notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment.
      2.   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the City to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the City may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
      3.   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the City if it
sells or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the
City. Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new
wireless provider.
   K.   Dispute Resolution: The Circuit Court of McHenry County shall have
exclusive jurisdiction to resolve all disputes arising under the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for
collocation of small wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the
right-of-way, the City shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its
poles at annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year
per Municipal utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution
of the dispute.
   L.   Indemnification: A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the City
harmless against any and all liability or loss from personal injury or property
damage resulting from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or
occupancy of the City improvements or right-of-way associated with such
improvements by the wireless provider or its employees, agents or contractors
arising out of the rights and privileges granted under this section and the
Act. A wireless provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless
against any liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole
negligence of the City or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall
further waive any claims that they may have against the City with respect to
consequential, incidental or special damages, however caused, based on the
theory of liability.
   M.   Insurance:
      1.   The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider’s own
cost and expense, such insurance as is required by section
8-7-8 of this chapter.
      2.   The wireless provider shall include the City as an additional
insured on the commercial general liability policy and provide certification
and documentation of inclusion of the City in a commercial general liability
policy prior to the collocation of any wireless facility.
      3.   A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirement required by the City. A wireless
provider that self-insures is not required, to the extent of the self-
insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of additional insureds
under this section. A wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall
provide to the City evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to
self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the City.
(Ord. 18-1176, 7-10-2018)
8-7-20: CLEAN UP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights-of-way
are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
utility, all to the satisfaction of the City. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the Public Works Director. Such clean up and
repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading, reseeding,
resodding or any other requirement to restore the right-of-way to a condition
substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the commencement of the
project. The time period provided in this section may be extended by the Public
Works Director for good cause shown.
(1987 Code § 21-107)
8-7-21: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities and any associated screening or landscaping on,
over, above, along, upon, under, across or within rights-of-way are to be
maintained by or for the utility in a manner satisfactory to the City and at
the utility’s expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right-of-way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right-of-way,
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers.
If a hazard does not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency
is such as to require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in
repair operations, adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the
shoulder in such an emergency will only be permitted when no other means of
access to the facility is available.
(1987 Code § 21-108)
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
Public Works Director, or their duly authorized agent, of the emergency,
informing them as to what steps have been taken for protection of the traveling
public and what will be required to make the necessary repairs. If the nature
of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free movement of traffic, the
Police Department shall be notified immediately. If applicant does not act in
accordance with these provisions, the City may do so and all costs incurred by
City must be reimbursed by the applicant.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the City a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right-of-way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair.
(1987 Code § 21-108)
8-7-22: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the Public Works
Director as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify each
provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the reasons
why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The Public Works Director shall decide
whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter identified
in the variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The Public Works Director may
authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right-of-way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are not
practical in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the Public Works Director may require the utility
requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions that may or
may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry out the
purposes of this chapter.
   E.   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the Public
Works Director under the provisions of this chapter, shall have the right to
appeal to the City Council, or such other board or commission as it may
designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to the City
Clerk within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The City Council shall commence its
consideration of the appeal at a City Council’s regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least fourteen (14) days after the filing of the appeal. The City
Council shall timely decide the appeal.
(1987 Code § 21-109)
8-7-23: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this Code. There may be times when the City will
incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the utility
will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this chapter. Unless
the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of undertaking the
requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the City’s costs of
damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying, relocating or
removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No other
administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit related
cost apportionment of the City. Sanctions may be imposed upon a utility that
does not pay the costs apportioned to it.
(1987 Code § 21-110)
8-7-24: FURTHER ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the City may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 21-111)
CHAPTER 8: CURBSIDE MAILBOXES
Section
8-8-1: Defined
8-8-2: Regulations Generally
8-8-3: Permitted Models
8-8-4: Support Structure
8-8-5: Placement Requirements
8-8-6: Damaged Mailboxes
8-8-1: DEFINED:
CURBSIDE MAILBOX: Any design made to be served by a carrier from a vehicle on
any City, rural or highway contract route. This standard is not applicable to
mailboxes intended for door delivery service.
(1987 Code § 21-115)
8-8-2: REGULATIONS GENERALLY:
   A.   Number Permitted; Exception: Only one curbside mailbox per residence or
per nonresidential lot may be placed within the City right-of-way, except for
multiple user mailboxes approved by the United States Postal Service. All
curbside mailboxes placed within the City right-of-way shall conform to the
following regulations.
   B.   Maintenance: Mailbox shall be maintained by the property owner in good
condition at all times, including prompt repair of any element in need of
repair.
   C.   Rebuilt In Conformance: Mailbox may not be rebuilt, enlarged or moved
unless it is in conformance with the regulations as outlined in this chapter.
   D.   Removal When Building Closed: Mailbox shall be removed from the City
right-of-way immediately after the building it serves has closed or been
removed or relocated.
   E.   Removal For Safety Purposes: Mailbox shall be removed from the right-
of-way immediately if the City determines in the exercise of its sole
discretion that such mailbox poses a particular threat to public safety.
(1987 Code § 21-116)
8-8-3: PERMITTED MODELS:
   A.   Required: Permitted models include manufacturers whose mailboxes have
been approved by the United States Postal Service and that meet United States
Postmaster (PMG) guidelines.
   B.   Conforming, Nonconforming Mailboxes: Any curbside mailbox installed as
of September 7, 2016, shall conform to the specifications as described herein.
Nonconforming mailboxes installed prior to September 7, 2016, must serve an
occupied dwelling, business or institution and may remain at the present
location until or unless such mailbox is destroyed, damaged, deteriorated or
not properly maintained.
(1987 Code § 21-117)
8-8-4: SUPPORT STRUCTURE:
   A.   Mailbox Support Structures: Curbside mailboxes permitted within the
City right-of-way shall be mounted on a wooden post no smaller than four inches
by four inches (4" x 4") and firmly secured in the ground. Alternate materials
used for mailbox support structure must be approved by City Administrator and/
or Director of Public Works. Use of masonry columns is prohibited.
   B.   Existing Support Structures: As of September 7, 2016, if an existing
support structure consists of a masonry column, concrete structure, railroad
rails or ties or object, such as, but not limited to, a tractor wheel, plow
blade, milk can, barrel, lawn tractor, or any similar device, under no
circumstances shall it be permitted to be reconstructed, replaced, moved or
repaired.
   C.   Protection Structures Prohibited: Structures erected on the parkway to
protect mailboxes such as large boulders, steel beams, concrete structures,
brick structures or similar devices are prohibited.
   D.   Removal For Nonconformance: Mailboxes that do not conform to the
provisions of this chapter shall be removed.
(1987 Code § 21-118)
8-8-5: PLACEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
Placement of curbside mailboxes within any City right-of-way, except when
required by Federal law or regulations for delivery of United States mail, is
not permitted. The placement and construction of mailboxes and supporting
structures in the public streets shall be deemed a revocable license to the
owner and shall confer no property right or interest in the public street,
except as provided in this chapter.
   A.   Installation: Mailboxes and support structures shall be installed
within but not closer than six inches (6") to eight inches (8") from the edge
of the street pavement or the back of the street curb where such curb exits.
   B.   Bottom Surface: The bottom surface of the mailbox shall be not less
than forty one inches (41") and not more than forty five inches (45") from the
ground surface, as illustrated in figure 1 of this subsection:
   FIGURE 1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2390.png]
 
   C.   Street Intersections: Curbside mailboxes and support structures shall
not be installed within ten feet (10') of the point of curvature at any street
intersection as illustrated in figure 2 of this subsection:
   FIGURE 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2388.png]
 
(1987 Code § 21-119)
8-8-6: DAMAGED MAILBOXES:
Publisher's Note: This Section has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord.
22-65 , adopted 11-7-2022). The text of the amendment will be incorporated
below when the ordinance is codified.
   A.   Snow Removal Damage By City; Exception:
      1.   In the event there is damage to any mailbox that conforms to the
standards set forth in this chapter as a result of and caused by snow removal
activities conducted by the City, the City shall not be responsible for any
cost of repair or replacement thereto in excess of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). Any such reimbursement of cost to the owner of a damaged mailbox
shall be made only upon the presentation of satisfactory evidence of sales
receipts for materials used in such repair and replacement. All labor or cost
of labor to install or reinstall said mailbox shall be the responsibility of
the owner of the mailbox. Mailboxes damaged by the City will be replaced with
mailboxes that conform to the standards outlined in this chapter.
      2.   The City shall not be responsible for mailboxes damaged or knocked
down by snow coming off the City plow and not a direct result of the plow blade
striking the mailbox or support structure.
   B.   Landscaping, Planting Materials: Landscaping and planting materials
added to the parkway around mailboxes or on parkways will be the sole
responsibility of the property owner.
(1987 Code § 21-120)
CHAPTER 9: PREVAILING WAGE RATES
Section
8-9-1: Wage Rates On Public Works Projects
8-9-1: WAGE RATES ON PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS:
   A.   Scope: To the extent and as required by the Illinois Prevailing Wage
Act, 820 Illinois Compiled Statutes 130.1, et seq., the general prevailing rate
of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other workers engaged in
construction of public works coming under the jurisdiction of the City is
hereby ascertained to be the same as the prevailing rate of wages for
construction work in the McHenry County area as determined by the Illinois
Department of Labor, at the time of the construction of the public work, which
determination can be found at:
https://www.illinois.gov/idol/Laws-Rules/CONMED/Pages/2017-Rates.aspx
and which is incorporated herein by reference. The Department of Labor revises
the prevailing wage rates and all City contractors/subcontractors shall have an
obligation to check the department’s website for revisions to prevailing wage
rates. All contractors and subcontractors rendering services to the City must
comply with all requirements of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act, including,
but not limited to, all wage requirements and notice and recordkeeping duties.
   B.   Mail To Employers: The Clerk shall mail a copy of this determination to
any employer, and to any association of employers and to any person or
association of employees who have filed their names and addresses, requesting
copies of any determination stating the particular rates and the particular
class of workers whose wages will be affected by such rates.
   C.   Certified Copy To State Labor Department: The Clerk shall promptly file
a certified copy of this chapter with the Illinois Department of Labor in
Springfield.
   D.   Contract Specifications: A copy of this prevailing wage requirement
shall be attached to all contract specifications.
   E.   Post On City Website: The Clerk shall cause to be posted on the City
website the notice of passage of this chapter, with a hyperlink to the relevant
prevailing wage schedule published on the official website of the Department of
Labor, and such posting shall constitute notice that the determination is
effective and that this is the determination of this public body.
(Ord. 18-1174, 7-10-2018)
TITLE 9: PUBLIC UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1: COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
Section
9-1-1: Combined System
9-1-2: Definitions
9-1-1: COMBINED SYSTEM:
Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/139-1 et seq., the City’s
waterworks and sanitary sewerage treatment facilities are a combined waterworks
and sewerage system.
(1987 Code § 26-0)
9-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the various chapters and articles of
this title:
CLASS 1 USES: These uses shall consist of residential, commercial, industrial,
condominium and apartment uses.
CLASS 2 USES: These uses shall consist of nursing home, congregate care and
hospital uses.
CLASS 3 USE: The sole use within this class is the property located at 1401
North Avenue, McHenry, Illinois.
COMMERCIAL USER: A user whose property, location or operation consists of
transit lodging, retail or wholesale establishments or places engaged in
selling merchandise or rendering services.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
outstanding interest, principal and coverage of a loan, bond, etc.
INDUSTRIAL USER: A user whose property, location or operation involves
manufacturing activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of
materials or substances into products.
RESIDENTIAL USER: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes, apartments
and permanent multi-family home dwellings which are connected and able to
utilize water through a meter from the City’s waterworks system.
UNIT: Each building or part thereof for which a certificate of occupancy has
been issued by the City.
USER: Each residential dwelling unit (whether in a single-family, duplex or
multi-family residential building), or a commercial, industrial or other
building unit, which utilizes water through a meter from the City’s water
system or contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into
the City’s public sewer. (Transient guest rooms in motels and hotels and
patient rooms in hospitals, congregate care facilities and nursing homes shall
not be considered residential units.)
(1987 Code § 26-0)
CHAPTER 2: WATER USE AND SERVICE REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
9-2A-1: Compliance With Plumbing Regulations
9-2A-2: Permits, Notice Required For Connections; Fees, Supervision, Inspection
9-2A-3: Fire Sprinkler System Permit Fees; Monitoring Water Usage
9-2A-4: Who May Turn On Service
9-2A-5: Resale Prohibited
9-2A-6: Tampering
9-2A-7: Municipal Water Service Outside City
9-2A-8: Outdoor Limitation On Use Of Water
9-2A-9: Secondary Metering
9-2A-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING REGULATIONS:
No water shall be turned on for service in premises where plumbing has not been
installed in full compliance with the requirements in regard thereto as set
forth in City ordinances; provided, however, that water for use in construction
work in unfinished buildings or buildings being remodeled may be supplied
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 26-1)
9-2A-2: PERMITS, NOTICE REQUIRED FOR CONNECTIONS; FEES, SUPERVISION,
INSPECTION:
   A.   Permit Required; Notice: No connection with a water main shall be made
without a permit being issued and twenty four (24) hours’ notice having been
given to the City. All such connections shall be inspected by and made under
the supervision of the City plumbing inspector. Application for permits to make
such connections shall be made to the Building Officer.
(1987 Code § 26-2)
   B.   Charges: In addition to any and all other charges for water service,
capital development fees, tapping fees, service connection fees, etc., a charge
for the cost of the water meter supplied by the City shall be payable to the
City at the time application is made for a connection permit. The fee for water
meters is subject to current manufacturers’ list price, plus a ten percent
(10%) administrative fee.
(1987 Code § 26-2; amd. 2019 Code)
   C.   Less Than Three Inch Diameter: All water service lines having a
diameter of less than three inches (3") shall be made of type K copper, shall
consist of a continuous uncut length of copper pipe between the two (2)
terminal ends and shall be connected with flared or compression couplings,
except at the valve prior to water meter which must be flared. The use of
sweated joints, lead pipe and lead solder is prohibited.
   D.   Three Inch Or More Diameter: All water service lines having a diameter
of three (3) or more inches shall be made of polyethylene encased ductile iron,
or C900 PVC or approved equal, with a #10 insulated locating wire, and shall be
connected with push-on or mechanical joints.
   E.   Shutoff Valves: All water meters shall be installed with shutoff valves
on both the inlet and on the discharge sides of the meter.
   F.   Meters In Crawl Spaces Prohibited: The installation of water meters
inside of crawl spaces is prohibited.
   G.   Meters Property Of City: All water meters installed pursuant to this
chapter shall be the property of the City.
(1987 Code § 26-2)
9-2A-3: FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEM PERMIT FEES; MONITORING WATER USAGE:
   A.   Permit Required; Notice: No connection of a fire sprinkler system to a
water main shall be made without a permit being issued and twenty four (24)
hours’ notice having been given to the City. All such connections shall be
inspected by and made under the supervision of the City plumbing inspector.
Application for permits to make such connection shall be made to the Community
Development Department.
   B.   Meter Requirements: All fire sprinkler systems shall have a three-
fourths inch (3/4") water meter which reads in gallons per minute installed at
a location designated by the Building Officer as a bypass for the purpose of
monitoring water leaks and water usage of the sprinkler system.
   C.   Permit Fee: A charge, consisting of a fifty dollar ($50.00) permit fee,
shall be payable to the City at the time application is made for a fire
sprinkler connection permit.
(1987 Code § 26-2.1)
9-2A-4: WHO MAY TURN ON SERVICE:
No water from the Municipal water supply system shall be turned on for service
into any premises by any person other than the Director of Public Works, or the
Director’s designee.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-2A-5: RESALE PROHIBITED:
No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient thereof from the
Municipal supply to any premises other than that for which application has been
made and the meter installed, except in the case of an emergency.
(1987 Code § 26-4)
9-2A-6: TAMPERING:
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the City to tamper with,
alter or injure any part of the City waterworks or supply system, including
water meters.
(1987 Code § 26-5)
9-2A-7: MUNICIPAL WATER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
Municipal water service may be made available to premises located outside the
City corporate limits at the discretion of the Council when approved by three-
fourths (3/4) vote of all members of said Council. In the event such service is
furnished, the user, connection and capital development fees, rates and charges
therefor shall be one and one-half (1-1/2) times the fees, rates and charges
established in this chapter for such service provided within the City corporate
limits. Further, the extension of the water main facilities and service lines
shall be at the sole cost and expense of the user and the specifications and
installation thereof shall be in accordance with the ordinances of the City and
shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works.
(1987 Code § 26-6)
9-2A-8: OUTDOOR LIMITATION ON USE OF WATER:
   A.   Purpose: Based on research from the Illinois State Water Survey, the
Chicago Metropolitan Agency for Planning, local counties and other
organizations, the City recognizes that potable water is a finite natural
resource; that communities within the Northwest Water Planning Alliance rely on
shared groundwater and river water sources; and, that water conservation is a
necessary component of a sustainable water supply.
   B.   Definitions: The following words and phrases, when used in this section
shall, for the purposes of this section, have the following meanings:
   CITY: City of McHenry.
   DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM: An irrigation system that saves water by allowing
water to drip slowly to the roots of plants, either onto the soil surface or
directly onto the root zone. Such systems include, but are not limited to,
soaker hoses.
   HANDHELD WATERING DEVICE: A means of watering that requires the watering
device to be held in order to operate, including watering cans, buckets and
hoses equipped with automatic shutoff valves. This also includes the handheld
use of a hose, provided it is continuously attended.
   HARVESTED RAINWATER: Water that is accumulated and stored during times of
precipitation, such as through rain barrels and cistern systems, is prevented
from entering the stormwater treatment system, and is redirected for reuse on
site.
   IRRIGATION SYSTEM: A system consisting of pipes, valves and sprayers
connected to the potable water supply to manually or automatically irrigate
lawns or landscaping.
   LANDSCAPE: The area of the property planted with vegetation other than
grass.
   LAWN: The area of the property planted with grass.
   LAWN SPRINKLER: A device attached to a hose designed to allow for the
unattended watering of lawns or landscaping, but does not include a drip
irrigation system.
   LAWN WATERING: Any means or methods of applying water to a lawn.
   NORTHWEST WATER PLANNING ALLIANCE (NWPA): An interjurisdictional alliance of
five (5) counties, five (5) councils of government, and roughly eighty (80)
municipalities that collaborate and cooperate on regional water resource
planning issues, particularly concerning shared groundwater aquifer resources.
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization or entity of any kind.
   RECLAIMED GREYWATER: Water that is produced by treating on site wastewater
generated by household activities, such as laundry, dishwashing and bathing, is
prevented from entering the Municipal wastewater treatment system, and is
redirected for reuse on site.
   RECYCLED EFFLUENT: Water that was formerly Municipal wastewater and has been
treated to remove solids and impurities for reuse for nonpotable purposes.
   C.   Application Of Regulations:
      1.   The provisions of this section shall apply to any person using water
within the City and:
         a.   The property is supplied by the City’s water system, regardless
of whether:
            (1)   The property is located within the Municipal boundaries of
the City; or
            (2)   The person using the water has a contract for service with
the City.
      2.   The provisions of subsection D of this section shall apply year-
round, subject to any modifications thereof, including application of these or
other regulations during this or any other time, by an emergency proclamation.
   D.   Permitted Hours And Days For Specified Uses:
      1.   All persons using water shall adhere to the following schedules for
lawn sprinkling, also known as condition "green":
         a.   All properties with even numbered street addresses (i.e., numbers
ending in 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8) may use water for lawn sprinkling only on even
numbered calendar dates.
         b.   All properties with odd numbered street addresses (i.e., numbers
ending in 1, 3, 5, 7 or 9) may use water for lawn sprinkling only on odd
numbered calendar dates.
         c.   All properties which cannot be readily identified as having even
or odd numbered street addresses are hereby designated as even numbered for
water conservation purposes.
         d.   No property will be allowed to use water for lawn sprinkling on
July 31 and August 31 of the calendar year.
      2.   All persons using water shall adhere to the following schedules for
outdoor water use, also known as condition "yellow":
         a.   All properties with even numbered street addresses (i.e., numbers
ending in 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8) may use outdoor water only on even numbered calendar
dates between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) A.M. and nine o’clock (9:00)
A.M., or six o’clock (6:00) P.M. and nine o’clock (9:00) P.M.
         b.   All properties with odd numbered street addresses (i.e., numbers
ending in 1, 3, 5, 7 or 9) may use outdoor water only on odd numbered calendar
dates between the hours of six o’clock (6:00) A.M. and nine o’clock (9:00)
A.M., or six o’clock (6:00) P.M. and nine o’clock (9:00) P.M.
         c.   All properties which cannot be readily identified as having even
or odd numbered street addresses are hereby designated as even numbered for
water conservation purposes.
         d.   No property will be allowed to use water for outdoor water use on
July 31 and August 31 of the calendar year.
      3.   All persons using water shall adhere to the following schedules for
outdoor water use also known as condition "red":
         a.   All outdoor use from the City’s water supply is prohibited.
      4.   There shall be no restrictions as to hours or days when water may be
used for any of the following:
         a.   Lawn watering where such watering is done using reclaimed
greywater, recycled effluent or harvested rainwater.
      5.   There shall be no restrictions under the condition "green" as to
hours or days when outdoor water use may be used for any of the following:
         a.   The watering of landscape, such as trees, shrubs, flowers and
gardens, with a handheld hose not larger than one inch (1") diameter or by
means of an automatic root feed or drip irrigation system;
         b.   Lawn watering where such watering is done with the proper,
attended use of a handheld watering device;
         c.   Vehicle or equipment washing; provided, that all water hoses are
equipped with positive shutoff nozzles; or
         d.   Any other lawful use of water, such as bathing, clothes washing
or other normal household uses not otherwise specifically restricted by the
provisions of this section.
   E.   Waste Of Water Prohibited: No person shall allow a continuous stream of
water to run off into any gutter, ditch, drain or street inlet, nor shall a
person spray or sprinkle streets or sidewalks.
   F.   Exceptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any
commercial or industrial entity for which the use of water is necessary to
continue normal business operations, or to maintain stock or inventory. This
exception shall not apply to any uses of water not essential to normal business
operations or maintenance of inventory or stock, and specifically shall not
apply to lawn watering.
   G.   Emergency Proclamation:
      1.   Whenever the water supply is diminished from any cause, including,
but not limited to, prolonged dry period or drought, increased water demand,
equipment failure or water quality concerns, to an amount which in the opinion
of the Director of Public Works is or is likely to become dangerous to the
health and safety of the public, the City Administrator is hereby authorized
and empowered to issue an emergency proclamation specifying different or
additional regulations on the use of water.
      2.   In the case of regional dry periods or drought, the City
Administrator shall take into account the recommendations of the regional water
supply planning group, the Northwest Water Planning Alliance (NWPA), on making
the decision to issue an emergency proclamation.
   H.   Authority: The authority to prohibit and further regulate the
sprinkling of lawns, shrubbery and gardens shall be expressly reserved and may
be amended from time to time, as necessary, by the Mayor and City Council.
   I.   Violation And Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership
found guilty of violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined
according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and
Penalties, and be responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including
reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
   J.   Signs: The City shall cause signs to be posted in conspicuous public
places at entrances to the City, as well as posting information on the City
website, advising residents of the watering conditions then in effect.
(1987 Code § 26-7) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
9-2A-9: SECONDARY METERING:
No secondary metering shall be allowed for the deduction of billing for any
outside water use. This is to include but not limited to irrigation systems,
pool filling and additional lawn sprinkling.
(Ord. 24-20, 5-20-2024)
ARTICLE B: SERVICE PIPES
Section
9-2B-1: Responsibility For Installation; Supervision
9-2B-2: Specifications For Pipes
9-2B-3: Maintenance Responsibilities
9-2B-1: RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION; SUPERVISION:
All service lines from the mains to the water distribution system of any
premises shall be installed by and at the sole cost and expense of the owner of
the property to be served or the applicant for the service. Such installation
shall be inspected by and made under the supervision of the City plumbing
inspector. Said owner shall extend the public water in said street, alley,
easement or right-of-way to the furthest portion of said premises as determined
by the Director of Public Works.
(1987 Code § 26-15)
9-2B-2: SPECIFICATIONS FOR PIPES:
No service pipe shall be installed unless it is in conformity with
specifications drawn up or approved by the Director of Public Works.
(1987 Code § 26-16)
9-2B-3: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES:
The City has no obligation to repair service pipes or plumbing systems of any
buildings; provided, however, that only authorized personnel of the City may
repair water meters serving any premises. The City may, in case of emergency,
repair any service pipe and, if this is done, the cost of such repair work
shall be paid by the owner of the premises served immediately upon receipt of a
request to do so from the City.
(1987 Code § 26-17)
ARTICLE C: METERS AND CHARGES
Section
9-2C-1: Meters Required
9-2C-2: Location Of Meters; Easy Opening; Bypass
9-2C-3: Installation, Repair And Replacement Charges And Fees
9-2C-4: Reading Meters
9-2C-5: Waterworks User Rates
9-2C-6: Billing And Collection
9-2C-7: Terminating Service For Nonpayment; Turn On Service Charge
9-2C-8: Lien Declared; Notice
9-2C-9: Foreclosure Of Lien
9-2C10: Water During Construction
9-2C-1: METERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Occupancy Prohibited Unless Premises Has Metered Water: No occupancy
permit shall be granted to any premises using the City water supply until a
water meter has been installed thereon as required by this article.
   B.   Meters Required: All premises using the City water supply must be
equipped with a water meter furnished by the City.
   C.   Unmetered Water System Acquired By City: Where an unmetered water
distribution system is acquired by the City and added to its combined sewer and
waterworks system, a water meter, furnished by the City, shall be installed by
the owner of each unmetered premises. The owner of the premises furnished by
such meter shall pay to the City its costs for such water meter in accordance
with the charge for cost of water meter schedule in subsection 9-2A-2B of this
chapter.
(1987 Code § 26-20)
9-2C-2: LOCATION OF METERS; EASY OPENING; BYPASS:
   A.   Location Of Meters: Meters shall be placed in a location of easy access
to the Public Works Department and shall be installed, subject to the approval
of the Public Works Department, in such a manner that any part of such meter
may be removed without having to remove it from the water line to which it is
attached; the owner shall provide a proper opening in the piping provided with
the necessary valves, couplings, unions and bypass required to install the
meter.
   B.   Meter Bypass: Where any water meter two inches (2") or larger is to be
installed, there shall be an approved lockable bypass valve, minimum one inch
(1") in size. The valve on said bypass shall be locked by City Public Works
Water Division personnel and in no case shall said lock be removed without
first notifying the Director of Public Works.
(1987 Code § 26-21)
9-2C-3: INSTALLATION, REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
   A.   Meter Replacement And Repairs: The cost of meter replacement and
repairs shall be paid out of the system generated revenues, except as required
in this section.
   B.   Meter Repairs: Property owners shall bear the entire expense of all
repairs on water meters on their premises due to freezing or from any other
cause owing to the negligence of the said property owner or their tenant. The
repairs shall be made by the City and the cost thereof shall be billed to and
paid by the property owner as herein required.
   C.   Replacement And Testing Program: The Director of Public Works shall
initiate and maintain a program to replace all water meters on a cycle as
determined by the Director of Public Works. All water and/or sewer users using
a water meter which is receiving water and/or discharging wastewater in excess
of seven hundred fifty thousand (750,000) gallons per year shall have their
water/sewer meter tested for accuracy as determined by the Director of Public
Works.
(1987 Code § 26-22; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-2C-4: READING METERS:
   A.   Duty Of Finance Director: The Finance Director shall cause every water
meter used in the City to be read at such time or times as are necessary so
that water bills may be sent out at the proper time.
   B.   Right Of Access To Premises: The City, its servants, agents and
employees shall have a continuing right of access to premises which are served
with Municipal water for the purpose of reading water meters and also for the
purpose of inspecting, repairing, installing, modifying and replacing water
meters. The water supply to any premises may be shut off whenever access has
been hindered or denied by the user and/or owner. In addition to such water
shutoff, any person, firm or corporation violating this subsection shall be
fined according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines
and Penalties, for each day during, or on which such access to the premises has
been prevented.
(1987 Code § 26-23) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
9-2C-5: WATERWORKS USER RATES:
   A.   Established: The following user service rates are established for the
use of and for the service supplied by the City waterworks system, which shall
be billed on a bimonthly basis.
   B.   Rates: Water user rates shall be as follows on or after August 1, 2025:
   Within the corporate limits of the City:
 
Class 1 uses: $3.94 per 1,000 gallons
Class 2 uses: $4.25 per 1,000 gallons
 
   Outside corporate limits of the City:
 
Class 1 uses: $5.91 per 1,000 gallons
Class 2 uses: $6.38 per 1,000 gallons
 
   In addition, on and after January 1, 2022, each user shall pay base charge
with each bi-monthly invoice, which shall be applied to operations and
maintenance and capital costs associated with the City's waterworks system
based upon the following table:
   Within corporate limits of the City:
 
Class 1 uses: $8.00
Class 2 uses: $225.93
Class 3 uses: $313.11
 
   Outside corporate limits of the City:
 
Class 1 uses: $12.00
Class 2 uses: $334.90
Class 3 uses: $465.66
 
   In the event that a user's water account with the City is inactive, such
user shall nonetheless still be billed for such base charge even in the absence
of any use of water.
   In the event that City water is being utilized through a single water meter
servicing more than one category of user, the user category utilizing the
largest percentage of water shall be the applicable rate payable for all such
water being utilized at such location.
   C.   Reading Increments: Metered usage shall be read by the City or its
agents to the lowest even increment of one thousand (1,000) gallons.
   D.   Larger Users: In the case of an apartment, commercial and industrial
buildings having more than one rental unit, each or some of which contain water
service facilities, the bimonthly rate paid for City water shall be not less
than four thousand (4,000) gallons per unit for each rental unit in such
building, or the metered rate for the entire building, whichever is greater. In
the case of motels and hotels which do not provide apartment rentals, nursing
homes, hospitals and congregate care facilities, the bimonthly rate shall be
the metered rate for the entire building.
   E.   Collection: All water charges shall be collected by the Finance
Director. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such
premises, and the service is furnished to the premises by the City upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are
jointly and severally liable therefor to the City.
   F.   Water Sold In Bulk: Effective September 1, 2002 and thereafter, the
rates for water sold in bulk shall be as follows:
 
$25.00 500 gallons
50.00  1,000 gallons
75.00  2,000 gallons
 
   Tickets for water to be sold in bulk may be purchased from the City
Administration Offices during normal business hours.
   Bulk loading times and locations to be determined by the Director of Public
Works.
(1987 Code § 26-24; amd. 2019 Code; Ord. 19-1195, 6-17-2019; Ord. 21-34, 6-21-
2021; Ord. 21-55, 10-18-2021; Ord. 23-41, 7-17-2023; Ord. 24-32, 7-1-2024; Ord.
25-34, 7-21-2025)
9-2C-6: BILLING AND COLLECTION:
   A.   Bimonthly: Charges for water services shall be rendered bimonthly by
the Finance Director.
   B.   Payment Due; Penalty: All water rates shall be collected by the Finance
Director, except as hereinafter provided and all persons shall pay their bills
for water consumed on or before the twentieth day after bimonthly bills are
mailed. Payment of bills for such bimonthly periods after the twentieth day
that bills are mailed shall subject the user to a penalty of ten percent (10%)
of the amount of the unpaid bill. Payment of bills for such bimonthly periods
after the forty second day that bills are mailed shall subject the user to
another penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the unpaid bill.
(1987 Code § 26-26)
9-2C-7: TERMINATING SERVICE FOR NONPAYMENT; TURN ON SERVICE CHARGE:
   A.   Unpaid Bill: The water supply may be shut off from any premises for
which the water bill remains unpaid for thirty (30) days after the bill is
mailed.
   B.   Procedure: The procedures for terminating water service shall be the
same as the procedures set forth in section
9-4B-7 of this title for terminating sewer service; provided, that the notices,
etc., shall refer to water instead of sewer.
   C.   Restoration: Where City water service is shut off for nonpayment,
tampering or for any other reason, there shall be no restoration of such water
service until the user has first paid all unpaid City water charges, including
the costs of making the disconnection and all costs for labor and materials.
   D.   Turn On Charge:
      1.   Normal Working Hours: In addition, there shall be a water service
turn on charge of seventy dollars ($70.00) if the service is turned on during
normal working hours of the Water Division personnel, seven o’clock (7:00) A.M.
to three o’clock (3:00) P.M. Monday through Friday.
      2.   Outside Normal Working Hours: If water service turn on is requested
by the user outside of normal working hours of the Water Division personnel,
the turn on fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
(1987 Code § 26-27)
9-2C-8: LIEN DECLARED; NOTICE:
   A.   Statement; Filing: Charges for water shall be a lien upon the premises
as provided by statute. Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid sixty
(60) days after it has been rendered, the City Clerk may file with the Recorder
of Deeds of McHenry County a statement of lien claim. This statement shall
contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the unpaid
bill, and a notice that the City claims a lien for this amount, as well as for
all charges for water served subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
   B.   Nonowner Consumer: If the consumer of water whose bill is unpaid is not
the owner of the premises, and the City Clerk has notice of this, then notice
shall be mailed to the owner of the premises, if their address is known to the
City Clerk, whenever such bills remain unpaid for a period of sixty (60) days
after they have been rendered.
   C.   Failure Not Affect Right To Foreclose: The failure of the City Clerk to
record such a lien claim or to mail such notice, or the failure of the owner to
receive such notice, shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for
unpaid water bills as provided in the following section.
(1987 Code § 26-28; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-2C-9: FORECLOSURE OF LIEN:
   A.   Authorized; Proceeds: Property subject to a lien for unpaid water
charges shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale
shall be applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in
the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill in equity
in the name of the City.
   B.   City Attorney Authority: The City Attorney is hereby authorized and
directed to institute such proceedings, in the name of the City, in any court
having jurisdiction over such matters, against any property for which the water
bill has remained unpaid sixty (60) days after it has been rendered.
(1987 Code § 26-29)
9-2C-10: WATER DURING CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   Permitted: During the construction of any building and before any water
has been turned on or before any water meter is installed as is herein
provided, the contractor so constructing such building may be permitted to use
the property’s water service by previously making application therefor to the
Director of Public Works or the Director’s designee and by paying a deposit for
a water meter, as listed below, to measure the construction water usage on the
construction site. Water shall not be turned on until inspected and approved by
City plumbing inspector.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   B.   Charges: The contractor shall pay the City the sum of four dollars ten
cents ($4.10) for each one thousand (1,000) gallons, or fraction thereof, of
water used in connection with the construction project as measured by said
water meter.
   C.   Deposit; Refund: The deposit shall be refunded when the water meter is
disconnected by the City and is found to be in good working condition. If for
any reason the meter is lost or has to be repaired, the cost of repair or
replacement shall be deducted from the deposit. Any deficiency shall be paid by
the contractor.
 
Meter Size           Amount Of Deposit
5/8 inch by 3/4 inch $ 225.00
1 inch               325.00
1-1/2  inch          600.00
2 inch               2,050.00
3 inch               2,400.00
 
(1987 Code § 26-30)
ARTICLE D: PRIVATE WATER WELLS AND SUPPLIES
Section
9-2D-1: Private Water Wells Prohibited If Public Supply Available
9-2D-2: Connection Upon Extension Of City Water Mains Required
9-2D-3: County Well Permit
9-2D-4: Occupancy Permits
9-2D-1: PRIVATE WATER WELLS PROHIBITED IF PUBLIC SUPPLY AVAILABLE:
No person shall be permitted to utilize water from any source other than the
Municipal water distribution system where an existing Municipal water main is
located within two hundred feet (200') of the subject premises, or within an
easement adjacent thereto, or within a road right-of-way adjacent thereto.
(1987 Code § 26-35; amd. 2019 Code)
9-2D-2: CONNECTION UPON EXTENSION OF CITY WATER MAINS REQUIRED:
Within one year after any Municipal water main is installed upon any premises,
or adjacent thereto as described in section 9-2D-1 of this article, the owner
shall, at their own expense, install and commence the use of a service line
connecting the Municipal water main to the water distribution system of the
subject premises. All such installations of service line facilities shall be
subject to the prior approval of and inspection by the Director of Public
Works.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-2D-3: COUNTY WELL PERMIT:
The installation of all private wells shall be made pursuant to a well permit
issued by McHenry County and in accordance with the ordinances, rules and
regulations thereof, which are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference.
(1987 Code § 26-37)
9-2D-4: OCCUPANCY PERMITS:
No occupancy permit shall be issued for any premises until the owner has
furnished a written statement from the McHenry County Health Department to the
City stating that the private water well has been installed thereon in
compliance with the County ordinance, rules and regulations.
(1987 Code § 26-38)
CHAPTER 3: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
Section
9-3-1: Installation In Accordance With Plumbing Code
9-3-2: Approval Of Connection
9-3-3: Surveys And Investigations
9-3-4: Right To Enter Premises
9-3-5: Termination Upon Violation Or Contamination
9-3-6: Responsibility For Clean Up Of Water Supply System
9-3-1: INSTALLATION IN ACCORDANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE:
All plumbing installed within the City shall be installed in accordance with
the Illinois State Plumbing Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890. If in
accordance with the Illinois State Plumbing Code or in the judgment of the
Director of Public Works or the Director’s authorized representative, an
approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the safety of the public
water supply system, the Director of Public Works will give notice to the water
customer to install such an approved device immediately. The water customer
shall, at their own expense, install such an approved device at a location and
in a manner in accordance with the Illinois State Plumbing Code and all
applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such
approved devices upon installation and as required by the Illinois State
Plumbing Code and local regulations.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-3-2: APPROVAL OF CONNECTION:
No person, firm or corporation shall establish or permit to be established or
maintain or permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary
or emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the
City enters the supply or distribution system of the City, unless such private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of
such supply shall have been approved by the Director of Public Works and the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
(1987 Code § 26-61)
9-3-3: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works to cause surveys and
investigations to be made of industrial and other properties served by the
public water supply to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the
public water supply may exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a
matter of public record and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or
as often as the Director of Public Works shall deem necessary. Records of such
surveys shall be maintained and available for review for a period of at least
five (5) years.
(1987 Code § 26-62)
9-3-4: RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES:
The Director of Public Works or the Director’s authorized, qualified agent
shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a
connection to the public water supply or distribution system of the City for
the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross connections, and that
the Director of Public Works or the Director’s authorized agent shall have the
right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to
the public water supply or distribution system of the City for the purpose of
verifying information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross
connection control inspection. On demand, the owner, lessees or occupants of
any property so served shall furnish to the Director of Public Works any
information which the Director may request regarding the piping system or
systems or water use on such property. The refusal of such information, when
demanded, shall, within the discretion of the Director of Public Works, be
deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections as provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-3-5: TERMINATION UPON VIOLATION OR CONTAMINATION:
The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue,
after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the water service to any
property wherein any connection in violation of the provisions of this chapter
is known to exist, and to take such other precautionary measures as he may deem
necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply
distribution mains. Water service to such property shall not be restored until
such conditions have been eliminated or corrected in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, and until a reconnection fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) is paid to the City. Immediate disconnection with verbal
notice can be effected when the Director of Public Works is assured that
imminent danger of harmful contamination of the public water supply system
exists. Such action shall be followed by written notification of the cause of
disconnection. Immediate disconnection without notice to any party can be
effected to prevent actual or anticipated contamination or pollution of the
public water supply; provided, that in the reasonable opinion of the Director
of Public Works or the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, such action is
required to prevent actual or potential contamination or pollution of the
public water supply. Neither the public water supply, the Director of Public
Works, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for any injury,
damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said customer’s
water supply in accordance with the terms of this chapter, whether or not said
termination was with or without notice.
(1987 Code § 26-64)
9-3-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR CLEAN UP OF WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM:
The consumer responsible for back siphoned material or contamination through
backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs through an
illegal cross connection or an improperly installed, maintained or repaired
device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of clean up of
the potable water supply system.
(1987 Code § 26-65)
CHAPTER 4: SEWER REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
9-4A-1: Definitions
9-4A-2: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
9-4A-3: Connection Required If Sewer Available
9-4A-4: Unsanitary Deposits Generally
9-4A-5: Treatment Required
9-4A-6: Damaging, Tampering With Facilities
9-4A-7: Excavations
9-4A-8: Municipal Sewer Service Outside City
9-4A-9: Responsibility For Installation; Supervision
9-4A-10: Maintenance Responsibilities
9-4A-11: Correction Of Violations
9-4A-12: Laboratory Measurements, Tests And Analyses Of Industrial Waters And
Wastes
9-4A-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ADMINISTRATOR: The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
and the Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
BOD5: Biochemical oxygen demand which is defined as the quantity of oxygen
required to stabilize biodegradable organic matter under aerobic conditions
within a five (5) day period in accordance with the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater.
BASIC USER CHARGE: The amount to be paid each billing period by all public
sewer users for payment of operation and maintenance costs, plus replacement of
the sewerage works of the City.
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of a building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE: The amount to be paid each billing period by all
unincorporated sewer users for recovery of capital costs which are not
otherwise recoverable from such users.
CHAPTER: This chapter.
CITY: The City of McHenry, McHenry County, Illinois.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive wastewater,
storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
COMMERCIAL USER: Transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or places
engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A structure specifically designed and constructed for sampling
and metering industrial wastes discharged to a public sewer.
DEBT SERVICE CHARGE: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment of
interest, principal and coverage of loan, bond, etc., outstanding.
DIRECTOR: The Director of Public Works of the City or the Director’s duly
authorized deputy or representative.
EASEMENT: A legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EFFLUENT CRITERIA: See applicable “NPDES permit” for definition.
FEDERAL ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) as
amended by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of Amendments of 1972
(Public Law 92-500 and Public Law 93-243).
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
GARBAGE: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL USERS: Establishments engaged in manufacturing activities involving
the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of substance into
products.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE: The wastewater discharged, permitted to flow, or escaping
from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business establishment or
process, or from the development, recovery or processing of any natural
resource as distinct from employees’ wastes or wastewater from sanitary
convenience.
INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER: Schools, hospitals, churches, penal
institutions and users associated with Federal, State and local governments.
mg/L: Milligrams per liter, a unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent used in reporting the results of water and wastewater analysis. One
milligram per liter (1 mg/L) is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand
milliliters (1,000 mL) of water.
MAINTENANCE: All manner of activity required, including, but not limited to,
labor, supply, contract repair work and administrative requirements to maintain
the works, assets and property of the City for the purpose of insuring its
continued and uninterrupted operation.
MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY: An industrial user of the publicly owned treatment
works that:
   A.   Has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more per average work
day; or
   B.   Has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the flow carried by the
Municipal system receiving the waste; or
   C.   Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in
standards issued under section 307(a) of the Federal Act; or
   D.   Is found by the permit issuance authority, in connection with the
issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works receiving
the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with
other contributing industries, or that treatment works or upon the quality of
effluent from that treatment works.
MAY: Permissive.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
Administrator, or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of the
Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
section 402 of the Federal Act.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body
of surface water.
OPERATION: All manner of activity required, including, but not limited to,
labor, electrical power, fuel, chemicals, supplies, depreciation and
administrative requirements, to conduct properly the functions of collection,
conveyance, treatment and disposal of wastewaters generated within the City.
ppm: Parts per million by weight.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, public or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration
expressed in gram molecular weight (moles) per liter.
POPULATION EQUIVALENT: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is
expressed as:
   A.   One hundred (100) gallons of water per person, per day; or
   B.   0.17 pounds of BOD5 per person per day; or
   C.   0.21 pounds of total suspended solids per person per day.
PRETREATMENT: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before discharge into
the public sewer.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: Garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that
all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewer, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2")
(1.27 cm) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights of connection and use, and is operated, maintained and controlled by the
City.
REPLACEMENT: The provision for and the installation of replacement equipment,
accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed.
RESIDENTIAL USER: All dwelling units, such as houses, mobile homes, apartments
and permanent multi-family dwellings.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that conveys sewage and polluted industrial wastes, and
to which stormwater, surface drainage, groundwater or unpolluted wastewater are
not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE: A combination of the wastewater from residential, commercial,
industrial and institutional buildings, together with such groundwater
infiltration and surface water inflow that may be in the sewers.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT: An arrangement of devices, structures and process for
treating sewage.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other wastewater,
including stormwater, surface water and groundwater drainage.
SEWER USER SERVICE CHARGE: The total amount to be paid each billing period by
public sewer users, including the basic user charge, the debt service charge
and the surcharge, if applicable.
SEWERAGE REVENUE FUND: The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage works.
SEWERAGE WORKS: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage and industrial wastes.
SHALL: Mandatory.
SLUDGE: Any discharge of sewage, industrial waste or other wastewater which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.
STATE ACT: The Illinois Environmental Protection Act effective July 1, 1970, as
amended.
STORM SEWER OR STORM DRAIN: A sewer that conveys stormwater runoff and surface
water drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: That portion of precipitation which is not absorbed into the
ground and which is drained from the ground surface to a natural outlet or
watercourse.
SURCHARGE: The amount to be paid each billing period by certain public sewer
users in addition to the basic user charge and the debt service charge.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS: Solids that either float on the surface, or are in suspension
in water, sewage, industrial wastes or other wastewaters; the quantity of which
is determined by standard laboratory filtering test procedures and referred to
as nonfilterable residue expressed in mg/L.
UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER: Wastewater that would not cause any violation of water
quality standards of the Water Pollution Regulations of Illinois when
discharged to a natural outlet or watercourse.
USEFUL LIFE: The estimated period during which components of the sewerage works
will operate.
USER: Any person who is the occupant of a residential dwelling unit (whether in
a single-family, duplex or multi-family residential building), or a commercial,
industrial or other building unit, who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the City’s public sewer. (Transient guestrooms
in motels and hotels and patient rooms in hospitals, congregate care facilities
and nursing homes shall not be considered residential units.)
WASTEWATER: The wastewater from any domestic, commercial, industrial and
institutional uses.
WATERCOURSE: Any stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, slough, gulch, ditch, reservoir, lake, pond, or other natural or
manmade drainageway in or into which stormwater runoff and surface water
drainage flow either continuously or intermittently.
(1987 Code § 26-70; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-4A-2: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Officials Authorized: The Director, the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall be
permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. The Director is authorized to inspect and inquire into the
metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, manufacturing or other
processes for the purpose of determining the kind and source of discharge into
the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment.
   B.   Safety: While performing work on private properties referred to in
subsection A of this section, the Director, the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall observe
all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the sewer user and
the sewer user shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees
and the City shall indemnify the sewer user against loss or damage to its
property by City employees and against liability claims and demands for
personal injury or property damage asserted against the sewer user and growing
out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by
negligence or failure of the sewer user to maintain safe conditions as required
in section 9-4B-21 of this chapter.
   C.   Entrance Permitted: The Director shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the City has an easement for inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, repair or maintenance of any portion of the
sewage works lying within said easement.
(1987 Code § 26-71)
9-4A-3: CONNECTION REQUIRED IF SEWER AVAILABLE:
The owner of any house, building or property situated within the City and
abutting on any street, alley, easement or right-of-way in which there is
located a public sanitary sewer of the City is required at their sole expense
to connect the sanitary sewer facilities thereof directly to the public sewer
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within one year after date
of official notice to do so; provided, that said public sewer is sited as per
McHenry County Department of Public Health requirements. Said owner shall
extend the public sewer in said street, alley, easement or right-of-way to the
farthest portion of their premises, as determined by the Director of Public
Works.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-4A-4: UNSANITARY DEPOSITS GENERALLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited
in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement,
garbage, or other objectionable waste.
(1987 Code § 26-74)
9-4A-5: TREATMENT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the City, or in
any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any improperly treated sewage or
other polluted waters, except when otherwise authorized by an NPDES permit.
(1987 Code § 26-75)
9-4A-6: DAMAGING, TAMPERING WITH FACILITIES:
No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, machinery or
equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly
conduct.
(1987 Code § 26-76)
9-4A-7: EXCAVATIONS:
The provisions of this Code relating to excavations in streets shall be
complied with in making excavations in streets or other public places in
connection with making sewer connections.
(1987 Code § 26-77)
9-4A-8: MUNICIPAL SEWER SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY:
Municipal sanitary sewer service may be made available to premises located
outside of the City corporate limits at the discretion of the City Council when
approved by three-fourths (3/4) vote of all members of said Council. The
connection and capital development fees and charges for such service shall be
one and one-half (1-1/2) times the fees and charges established in this chapter
for service within the corporate limits; further, the extension of the sewer
main and service line shall be at the sole cost and expense of the user and the
specifications and installation thereof shall be in accordance with City
ordinances and shall be subject to the approval of the Director.
(1987 Code § 26-78)
9-4A-9: RESPONSIBILITY FOR INSTALLATION; SUPERVISION:
All service lines from the sewer main to any premises shall be installed by and
at the sole cost and expense of the owner of the property to be served or the
applicant for the service. Such installation shall be inspected by and made
under the supervision of the Director of Public Works.
(1987 Code § 26-79)
9-4A-10: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITIES:
The City has no obligation to repair service pipes, building drains, building
sewers or plumbing systems of any buildings. The City may, in case of
emergency, repair any service pipe, building drain or building sewer and, if
this is done, the cost of such repair work shall be paid by the owner of the
premises served immediately upon receipt of a request to do so from the City.
(1987 Code § 26-80)
9-4A-11: CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS:
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except section
9-4A-6 of this article, shall be served by the City with written notice stating
the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time
stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. The City may revoke
any permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this article.
(1987 Code § 26-72)
9-4A-12: LABORATORY MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES OF INDUSTRIAL WATERS AND
WASTES:
The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of waters and
wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special conditions
for discharge established by the City or regulatory agencies having
jurisdiction over the discharge. The number, type and frequency of laboratory
analyses to be performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the City, but
not less than once a year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the
Federal, State and City standards are being met. The owner shall report the
results of measurements and laboratory analyses to the City at such times and
in such a manner as prescribed by the City. The owner shall bear the expense of
all measurements, analyses and reporting required by the City. At such times as
deemed necessary, the City reserves the right to take measurements and samples
for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
(1987 Code § 26-81)
ARTICLE B: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
Section
9-4B-1: Metered Users Service Charges, Costs
9-4B-2: Unmetered Users Service Charges, Costs
9-4B-3: Metering
9-4B-4: Billing, Due Dates; Delinquency Penalty
9-4B-5: Lien Declared
9-4B-6: Termination Of Service Upon Nonpayment
9-4B-7: Procedure For Termination
9-4B-8: Reinstatement Of Service
9-4B-9: Disposition Of Revenues By Finance Director
9-4B-10: Deposit; Record Of Funds
9-4B-11: Annual Audit Of Accounts
9-4B-12: Access To Records
9-4B-13: Prohibited Discharges
9-4B-14: Permissible Discharge Of Unpolluted Wastes
9-4B-15: Harmful, Dangerous Wastes Prohibited
9-4B-16: Wastes Conditionally Prohibited
9-4B-17: Discharging To Storm Sewer
9-4B-18: Authority To Reject Or Regulate Wastes
9-4B-19: Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors
9-4B-20: Maintenance Of Precautionary Facilities
9-4B-21: Control Manholes
9-4B-22: Measurements, Tests, Analyses
9-4B-23: Special Agreements, Arrangements
9-4B-1: METERED USERS SERVICE CHARGES, COSTS:
   A.   User Service Rates: The following user service rates are established
for the metered use of and for the service supplied by the City sewerage works,
which shall be billed on a bimonthly basis.
      1.   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as recorded by
water meters and/or other City approved metering devices for the purpose of
paying all expenses associated with operation, maintenance and replacement of
the sewerage system. The basic user charge shall be determined by dividing the
total of annual operation, maintenance and replacement expenses by the total
number of gallons billed for sewer service in the twelve (12) month period
immediately preceding the calculation. This calculation shall produce a unit
rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons for sewer service supplied, which shall
be billed to all users as the basic user charge.
The basic user charge will be applicable for average and below average strength
sewage. Average strength sewage is determined to have the following
characteristics:
         a.   A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD5) of two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/L).
         b.   A suspended solids (SS) content of two hundred seventy five
milligrams per liter (275 mg/L).
      2.   A treatment service surcharge will be charged to all users whose
discharges exceed the average concentrations for BOD5 (240 mg/L) and SS (275
mg/L). The surcharge will be based on water usage as recorded by water meters
and/or other City approved metering devices for all wastes which exceed the
parameters outlined above. The unit rate of BOD5 and SS surcharge calculations
shall be computed as follows:
         a.   Proportion the estimated annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities, including equipment replacement to the
major plant categories.
         b.   Proportion the costs of the major plant categories to BOD5 and
SS.
         c.   Estimate the pounds of BOD5 and SS treated.
         d.   Compute the unit costs per pound of BOD5 and SS.
   B.   Annual Review: The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be
reviewed annually and shall be revised periodically to reflect a change in debt
service or a change in operation, maintenance and equipment replacement costs.
   C.   Notification To Users: The users of wastewater treatment services will
be notified annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rates and that
portion of the user charges which are attributable to the wastewater treatment
operation, maintenance and replacement.
   D.   Determination Of Annual Water Use: Annual water use shall be determined
from readings taken from approved water meters and/or other City approved
metering devices for wastewater and flat rate user estimates.
   E.   Treatment Service Surcharge: A treatment service surcharge shall be
levied to all sewer users whose wastewater exceeds normal concentrations of two
hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/L) of BOD5, two hundred seventy five
milligrams per liter (275 mg/L) of suspended solids as determined by waste
sampling, which shall be performed as often as deemed necessary by the Director
and shall be binding as the basis for computing the surcharge.
   F.   User Rates: Basic user rates shall be reflected in the May billing year
for metered service.
      1.   Effective on and after August 1, 2024, the sewer rates shall be as
follows for metered uses:
 
Within the corporate limits of the City:
 Class 1 uses $4.59 per 1,000 gallons
 Class 2 uses 4.43 per 1,000 gallons
Outside corporate limits of the City:
 Class 1 uses 6.89 per 1,000 gallons
 Class 2 uses 6.65 per 1,000 gallons
 
In addition, on and after January 1, 2022, each user shall pay a base charge
with each bi-monthly invoice, which shall be applied to operations and
maintenance and capital costs associated with the City’s sewer treatment and
collection system as well as operating and maintenance expenses associated with
such system based upon the following table:
Within corporate limits of the City:
   Class 1 uses:                   $7.00
   Class 2 uses:                   $197.69
   Class 3 uses:                   $273.97
Outside corporate limits of the City:
   Class 1 uses:                   $10.50
   Class 2 uses:                   $293.04
   Class 3 uses:                   $407.45
 
      2.   The treatment service surcharge rate for sewer users whose
wastewater exceeds two hundred forty milligrams per liter (240 mg/L) of BOD5
shall be twenty one cents ($0.21) per pound in excess of 0.20 pounds per one
thousand (1,000) gallons.
      3.   The treatment service surcharge rate for sewer users whose
wastewater exceeds two hundred seventy five milligrams per liter (275 mg/L) of
suspended solids shall be thirteen cents ($0.13) per pound of suspended solids
in excess of 0.23 pounds per one thousand (1,000) gallons.
      4.   For all users within the corporate limits of the City, there is
hereby established a "2010C fixed debt service charge" of six dollars ($6.00)
bimonthly to be applied to the five million six hundred sixty five thousand
dollar ($5,665,000.00) general obligation bonds, Series 2010C, issued by the
City. In the event that a user’s account with the City is inactive, such user
shall still be billed for such 2010C fixed debt service charge even in the
absence of any use of sewer services.
      5.   For all users outside the corporate limits of the City, there is
hereby established a "2010C fixed debt service charge" of nine dollars ($9.00)
bimonthly to be applied to the five million six hundred sixty five thousand
dollar ($5,665,000.00) general obligation bonds, series 2010C, issued by the
City, except as otherwise provided by an intergovernmental agreement approved
by the City. In the event that a user’s account with the City is inactive, such
user shall still be billed for such 2010C fixed debt service charge even in the
absence of any use of sewer services.
      6.   In addition, on and after January 1, 2022, for each user (metered
and nonmetered) of the City’s sewerage works, there is hereby established an
adjusted “2015 IEPA fixed debt service charge” in the following amount, to be
paid bimonthly to the City, and the revenues received from this IEPA fixed debt
service charge shall be solely dedicated to the repayment of the loan received
by the City from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, pursuant to its
Water Pollution Control Loan Program, in accordance with City Ordinance 21-55,
dated October 18, 2021, adopted by the City Council on October 18, 2021:
Within corporate limits of the City:   
   Class 1 uses:                   $24.53
   Class 2 uses:                   $2,003.07
   Class 3 uses:                   $2,804.29
Outside corporate limits of the City:
   Class 1 uses:                   $36.80
   Class 2 uses:                   $3,004.61
   Class 3 uses:                   $4,206.44
 
      7.   In the event that a user’s account with the City is inactive, such
user shall still be billed for such IEPA fixed debt service charge even in the
absence of any use of sewer services.
   G.   Formula: The total sewer user service charge shall be computed
according to the following formula:
C = W(B) + BC + DU - X + P
Where:   
 C    = Total sewer user service charge
 B    = Basic user rate
 W    = Water use per 1,000 gallons
 X    = Surcharges for excess strength
 P    = Penalties
 DC   = Fixed debt service charge
 DU   = SRF debt service charge
 BC   = Base charge
 
(1987 Code § 26-140; amd. Ord. 32-34, 6-21-2021; Ord. 21-55, 10-18-2021; Ord.
23-41, 7-17-2023; Ord. 24-32, 7-1-2024)
9-4B-2: UNMETERED USERS SERVICE CHARGES, COSTS:
   A.   Within City Limits: All nonmetered users of wastewater facilities
within the corporate limits of the City shall pay the following flat bimonthly
rate on and after August 1, 2017:
 
2010C fixed debt service charge $ 6.00
Basic user charge               40.04
Total per billing cycle         46.04
 
   B.   Outside City Limits: All nonmetered users of wastewater facilities
outside the corporate limits of the City shall pay a flat bimonthly rate.
Charges for nonmetered users may be billed in monthly increments if service was
received for a portion of a bimonthly period on a pro rata basis in increments
of one-half (1/2) of a bimonthly period. The charges for nonmetered users
located outside the corporate limits of the City utilizing City sewer service
areas are as follows on and after August 1, 2017:
 
2010C fixed debt service charge $ 9.00
Basic user charge               60.06
Total per billing cycle         69.06
 
   C.   Fix Debt Service Charge: All nonmetered users shall pay the 2015 IEPA
fixed debt service charge referenced in subsection
9-4B-1F6 of this article, unless prohibited by an intergovernmental agreement
approved by the City.
   D.   Inactive Accounts: In the event that a user’s account with the City is
inactive, said user shall still be billed this rate in the absence of any use
of sewer services.
(1987 Code § 26-141)
9-4B-3: METERING:
   A.   Metering Devices: Sewer users who obtain any portion of their water
service from other than the City’s water supply source shall install and
maintain, at no expense to the City, water meters of a type approved by the
Director for the purpose of metering the water usage obtained from such other
sources.
(1987 Code § 26-143)
   B.   Meter Readings: Metered usage shall be read by the City or its agents
to the lowest even increment of one thousand (1,000) gallons.
(1987 Code § 26-144)
9-4B-4: BILLING, DUE DATES; DELINQUENCY PENALTY:
   A.   Bimonthly Billing: Charges for sewerage services shall be rendered
bimonthly by the Finance Director.
   B.   Payment Due: All bimonthly bills for such sewerage services shall be
paid on or before the twentieth day after bills are mailed. Payment of bills
for such bimonthly periods after the twentieth day that bills are mailed shall
subject the user to a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the unpaid
bill. Payment of bills for such bimonthly periods after the forty second day
that bills are mailed shall subject the user to another penalty of ten percent
(10%) of the amount of the unpaid bill.
   C.   Collection; Responsibility For Payment: All sewerage charges shall be
collected by the Finance Director. The owner of the premises, the occupant
thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and severally liable to
pay for the service on such premises, and the service is furnished to the
premises by the City upon the condition that the owner of the premises,
occupant and user of the service are jointly and severally liable therefor to
the City.
(1987 Code § 26-145)
9-4B-5: LIEN DECLARED:
In the event charges for sewerage services are not paid within sixty (60) days
after the rendition of the bill for such service, such charges shall be deemed
and are hereby declared to be delinquent and thereafter such delinquent charges
shall constitute liens upon the real estate, upon or from which sewerage
services are supplied. The City is hereby directed to file sworn statements
showing such delinquencies in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of McHenry
County, which shall be deemed notice of the lien for payment of such sewerage
service; provided, however, that the City Clerk may refrain from filing such a
statement of delinquencies if the City proposes to sue or shall have sued the
occupant or user of the real estate in a civil action to recover such
delinquent charges.
(1987 Code § 26-146)
9-4B-6: TERMINATION OF SERVICE UPON NONPAYMENT:
It is hereby declared to be a policy of the City that in the event that any
person or other legal entity whose residence or other building is connected to
a sewer which is tributary to the works of the system fails to pay the user
service charges as assessed under this article, said sewer shall be
disconnected from the public sewer.
(1987 Code § 26-147)
9-4B-7: PROCEDURE FOR TERMINATION:
   A.   Notice Of Delinquency: In the event that the user service charges,
after having been billed in accordance with this article, remain unpaid for
twenty two (22) days thereafter, the following notice shall be forwarded by
first class mail, or personal service to the owner, user or occupants, at the
address of the building being served by the City:
   NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY
You are hereby notified that the sewer user service charges billed to you under
date of (insert date) under the Sewer User Service Charge Ordinance of the City
of McHenry for the building located at (insert address) have not been paid and
remain delinquent. If you dispute these delinquent sewer user service charges
that have been billed to you and desire a review thereof, you must, within 10
days hereafter, present your complaint or dispute in writing to the City
Council. In the event that you fail to file a written complaint or dispute with
regard to your bill as aforesaid and also fail to pay said user service charges
within 20 days hereafter, your service will be disconnected and your building
will be red-tagged as unfit for human occupancy on the 28th day after date of
this notice.
Date:                 CITY OF McHENRY, ILLINOIS
By:                
Finance Director
   B.   Occupancy After Red-Tagged: The City Council hereby declares that it is
against public policy for a building to be occupied by human inhabitants which
has been red-tagged by the City after appropriate notice has been given that
the building is "unfit" for human occupancy.
   C.   Additional Notice: In the event that such user service charges remain
unpaid on the twenty first day after the mailing or personal service of the
aforesaid notice, the following notice shall be forwarded by first class mail,
or personal service to the owner, user or occupants of the building, and also
affixed to the front door of the building or housing unit within a building:
   NOTICE OF TERMINATION
You are hereby notified that there has been no response to the Notice of
Delinquency in the payment of the sewer user service charges and the 20-day
period therein stated has lapsed. You are hereby notified that on (insert date
28 days after service of Notice of Delinquency) the City will physically
disconnect the building sewer of your building to which it is connected and
will red-tag the building located at (insert address) as "unfit for human
occupancy".
Date:                 CITY OF McHENRY, ILLINOIS
By:                
Finance Director
   D.   Disconnection; Statement Of Costs: The manner of severance and
procedure for disconnection shall be determined by the City. Upon completion of
said disconnection, the City shall forward to the occupant of the building by
registered mail, return receipt requested, certified mail or personal service,
a bill for the costs of making the disconnection, including all costs for labor
and materials.
(1987 Code § 26-148)
9-4B-8: REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE:
Upon payment to the City of the full delinquency, plus penalties, plus the cost
of disconnection and a one hundred dollar ($100.00) administrative fee, the
City will issue a permit for reconnection of the building service line to the
works of the system. Such reconnection costs, plus inspection fees in
accordance with City ordinances, shall be at the sole expense of the user. Upon
reconnection and payment of all costs described above, the City, through its
agents, shall remove the red-tag from the building. 
(1987 Code § 26-149)
9-4B-9: DISPOSITION OF REVENUES BY FINANCE DIRECTOR:
All of the revenues and monies derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be held by the Finance Director separate and apart from all other
funds of the City, and all of the same, without any deductions, shall be
delivered to the Finance Director not more than ten (10) days after the receipt
of the same or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be
directed by the City Council.
(1987 Code § 26-150)
9-4B-10: DEPOSIT; RECORD OF FUNDS:
The Finance Director shall receive all revenues from the sewerage system and
all other funds and monies incident to the operation of said system as the same
may be delivered to the Director, and shall deposit the same in a separate fund
designated as the "Sewerage Fund" of the City and shall divide and administer
the said Sewerage Fund in every respect as provided by the City Council. The
Finance Director shall establish a proper system of accounts and shall keep
proper books, records and accounts (separate from all other records and
accounts) in which complete and correct entries shall be made of all
transactions relating to the sewerage system.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-4B-11: ANNUAL AUDIT OF ACCOUNTS:
   A.   Required: At regular annual intervals, the Finance Director shall cause
to be made an audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the
receipts and disbursements of the sewerage system.
   B.   Information Shown In Audit: In addition to the customary operating
statements, the annual audit report shall also reflect the revenues and
operating expenses of the wastewater facilities, including a replacement cost,
to indicate that sewer service charges under the user charge system do in fact
meet these regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown
in the audit report shall include the following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant for
the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed.
      3.   Number of users connected to the system.
      4.   Number of nonmetered users.
      5.   A list of users discharging nondomestic wastes (industrial users)
and volume of waste discharged.
      6.   Total pounds BOD5 and total pounds suspended solids received at the
wastewater plant for the current fiscal year.
(1987 Code § 26-152)
9-4B-12: ACCESS TO RECORDS:
The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency or its authorized representative
shall have access to any books, documents, papers and records of the City which
are applicable to the City system of user service charges for this purpose of
making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure
compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to the State.
(1987 Code § 26-153)
9-4B-13: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
   A.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, into any sanitary
sewer.
   B.   It shall be unlawful to discharge wastewater to any public sanitary
sewer, except those wastewaters in compliance with standards promulgated
pursuant to the Federal Act, or the State Act, or any rules, regulations,
ordinances or standards of the City.
(1987 Code § 26-120)
9-4B-14: PERMISSIBLE DISCHARGE OF UNPOLLUTED WASTES:
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by
the Director. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, upon approval of the Director, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(1987 Code § 26-121)
9-4B-15: HARMFUL, DANGEROUS WASTES PROHIBITED:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
   A.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   B.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
   C.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, pipes,
machinery, equipment and personnel of the sewage works.
   D.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and flesh, entrails
and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by
garbage grinders.
(1987 Code § 26-122)
9-4B-16: WASTES CONDITIONALLY PROHIBITED:
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into a public sanitary
sewer the following described substances, materials, water or wastes if it
appears likely in the opinion of the Director or City Engineer that such wastes
can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process, pipes, machinery or
equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise
endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming an
opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the Director or City Engineer
will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of
the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage
treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant
maximum limits established by regulatory agencies, and other pertinent factors.
The substances prohibited are:
   A.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
   B.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials, or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter (100
mg/L) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two decrees Fahrenheit (32°F) (0°C) and one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
   C.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4)
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Director of Public Works.
   D.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
   E.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received at the
sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the City for such
materials.
   F.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the City as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage,
to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies of
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
   G.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the City in compliance with applicable
State or Federal regulations.
   H.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/L as Hg at
any time except as permitted by the City in compliance with applicable State or
Federal regulations.
   I.   Any cyanide in excess of 0.025 mg/L at any time except as permitted by
the City in compliance with applicable State and Federal regulations.
   J.   Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
   K.   Materials which exert or cause:
      1.   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, fuller’s earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate).
      2.   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
      3.   Unusual BOD5, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
      4.   Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
sludge, as defined herein.
   L.   Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
(1987 Code § 26-123)
9-4B-17: DISCHARGING TO STORM SEWER:
   A.   Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge sanitary
sewage or industrial waste water into any storm sewers.
   B.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(1987 Code § 26-124) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
9-4B-18: AUTHORITY TO REJECT OR REGULATE WASTES:
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the
public sanitary sewers, which waters or wastes contain the substances or
possess the characteristics enumerated in section 9-4B-16 of this article, and/
or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in chapter
1, EPA Rules and Regulations, subchapter D, Water Programs, part 128 -
Pretreatment Standards, Federal Register volume 38, no. 215, Thursday, November
8, 1973, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the Director
may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, pipes,
machinery, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the Director may reject the wastes;
require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public
sanitary sewers; require control over the quantities and rates of discharge;
and/or require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the
wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of
section 9-4B-22 of this article. If the Director permits the pretreatment or
equalization of wastewater flows, the design and installation of the plants and
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director and
subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(1987 Code § 26-125)
9-4B-19: GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS:
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the user when, in the
opinion of the Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the Director, and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(1987 Code § 26-126)
9-4B-20: MAINTENANCE OF PRECAUTIONARY FACILITIES:
Where pretreatment or flow equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or
wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at their expense.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-4B-21: CONTROL MANHOLES:
The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install a suitable control manhole or manholes, together with such
necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manholes, sampling
equipment and measuring equipment shall be accessibly and safely located, and
shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director. The
manholes shall be installed by the owner at their expense, and shall be
maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-4B-22: MEASUREMENTS, TESTS, ANALYSES:
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water and
wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and
shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples
taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is
connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to
reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewerage works and to determine the
existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The particular analyses
involved will determine whether a twenty four (24) hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, the samples for solids analyses are
obtained from twenty four (24) hour composites of all outfalls whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples. The cost of measurements, tests and
analysis for the purpose of determining treatment service surcharges shall be
paid for by the user at their expense.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
9-4B-23: SPECIAL AGREEMENTS, ARRANGEMENTS:
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial concern
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by
the City for treatment, subject to payment to the City by the industrial
concern, of such charges as may be required by the City.
(1987 Code § 26-131)
ARTICLE C: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
Section
9-4C-1: Permit Required
9-4C-2: Application For Permit
9-4C-3: Permit, Inspection Fee
9-4C-4: Liability For Costs; Indemnification Of City
9-4C-5: Standards And Specifications For Building Sewers
9-4C-6: Separate Building Sewer; Exception
9-4C-7: Use Of Old Building Sewers
9-4C-8: Unpolluted Wastes Prohibited In Building Sewer
9-4C-9: Manner Of Making Connection
9-4C-10: Notice When Sewer Ready For Connection; Supervision
9-4C-11: Excavations
9-4C-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the Community Development Department.
(1987 Code § 26-101)
9-4C-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Requirements: The owner or their agent shall make application for a
permit on a form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the building official, and the industry, as a
condition of permit authorization, shall provide complete information
describing its wastewater constituents, characteristics and type of activity.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   B.   Considerations For Issuance: A building sewer permit will be issued and
a sewer connection shall be allowed only if it can be demonstrated that the
downstream sewerage works, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater
treatment facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and
efficiently handle the additional anticipated waste load.
(1987 Code § 26-103)
9-4C-3: PERMIT, INSPECTION FEE:
A permit and inspection fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) shall be charged for each sanitary sewer connection and shall be paid
at the time application for permit is filed.
(1987 Code § 26-104)
9-4C-4: LIABILITY FOR COSTS; INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY:
   A.   Owner Liable: All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
   B.   Indemnification: The owner shall indemnify the City from any and all
loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
   C.   Certificate Of Insurance: Before a building sewer permit is issued, the
plumber or sewer contractor shall file with the City Clerk a certificate of
insurance covering public liability insurance in the amount of one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit for bodily injury and property
damage, naming the City as additional insured.
(1987 Code § 26-105)
9-4C-5: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR BUILDING SEWERS:
   A.   Materials: The building sewer shall be schedule 40 PVC or SDR26, or
other suitable materials approved by the Director.
   B.   Pipe Size: The building sewer shall not be less than six inch (6")
diameter size pipe installed at a minimum invert slope of 0.125 inch (1/8 inch)
per foot, or not less than four inch (4") diameter size pipe in length of not
less than ten feet (10') installed at a minimum invert slope of 0.25 inch (1/
4 inch) per foot. Building sewers shall be constructed in accordance with the
requirements of the Director as to trench excavation and backfilling,
installation of pipe and fittings and testing.
   C.   Subdivision Control And Development Applicability: The connection of
the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made in accordance with the
City's Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance. The invert of the
building sewer at the point of connection shall be higher than the mid- point
of the sewer main. A smooth, neat joint shall be made, and the connection made
secure. Special fittings may be used for the connection when approved by the
Director.
   D.   Gravel Bed: The building sewer pipe shall be bedded on a layer of
gravel or crushed stone conforming to ASTM 67 specifications, and shall have a
minimum thickness of four inches (4") under the pipe barrel and two inches (2")
under bells. It shall be carefully placed and compacted around the pipe to
provide uniform support to the bottom quadrant. Washed gravel or washed stone
shall be placed to a depth of twelve (12) vertical inches over the pipe.
   E.   Parallel To Bearing Wall Prohibited; Frost Protection; Lift Stations:
No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet (3') of any
bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to
afford protection from frost. In all buildings in which any building drain is
too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sewage carried by such
drains shall be lifted by approved pumping devices and discharged to the
building sewer.
   F.   Overhead Sewers: Where overhead sewers are required, an eight inch (8")
hole shall be cored through the foundation for a four inch (4") soil pipe. Soil
pipe shall have a cleanout tee at the wall before going out. Hydraulic cement
shall be used on the outside of the wall for the hole patch. Ejector pumps and
basins shall comply with the requirements of the Illinois State Plumbing Code
for sanitary waste below sewer.
(1987 Code § 26-106)
9-4C-6: SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER; EXCEPTION:
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building;
except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and
no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building
through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from
the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole
considered as one building sewer.
(1987 Code § 26-107)
9-4C-7: USE OF OLD BUILDING SEWERS:
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they
are found, on examination and test by the Director, to meet all requirements of
this article.
(1987 Code § 26-108)
9-4C-8: UNPOLLUTED WASTES PROHIBITED IN BUILDING SEWER:
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building
sewer or building drain which in turn is connected to a public sanitary sewer.
(1987 Code § 26-109)
9-4C-9: MANNER OF MAKING CONNECTION:
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the
requirements of the Illinois State Plumbing Code and applicable rules and
regulations of the City. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight.
(1987 Code § 26-110)
9-4C-10: NOTICE WHEN SEWER READY FOR CONNECTION; SUPERVISION:
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Director when the
building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director.
(1987 Code § 26-111)
9-4C-11: EXCAVATIONS:
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be done in accordance
with the provisions of title 8 of this Code and shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Director.
(1987 Code § 26-112)
ARTICLE D: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section
9-4D-1: Prohibited Unless Otherwise Provided
9-4D-2: Required If Sewer Not Available
9-4D-3: McHenry County Permit Required
9-4D-4: When Permit Effective; Inspection
9-4D-5: Occupancy Permit
9-4D-6: Minimum Permissible Lot Area For Private Sewage Disposal System
9-4D-7: Maintenance
9-4D-8: Abandonment When Sewer Becomes Available
9-4D-1: PROHIBITED UNLESS OTHERWISE PROVIDED:
Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any
privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
(1987 Code § 26-85)
9-4D-2: REQUIRED IF SEWER NOT AVAILABLE:
Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions
of section 9-4A-3 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a
private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article.
(1987 Code § 26-86)
9-4D-3: MCHENRY COUNTY PERMIT REQUIRED:
Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit from the appropriate McHenry County
Department of Public Health authorities and file a copy thereof with the
Community Development Department.
(1987 Code § 26-87)
9-4D-4: WHEN PERMIT EFFECTIVE; INSPECTION:
A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until
the installation is completed in accordance with the ordinances and rules and
regulations of the County of McHenry. The Building Officer shall be allowed to
inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the owner
shall notify the Building Officer when the work is ready for final inspection,
and before any underground portions are covered.
(1987 Code § 26-88)
9-4D-5: OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
No occupancy permit will be issued for any premises until and unless the owner
thereof has filed with the Community Development Department a written statement
from the appropriate McHenry County authorities that the private disposal
system servicing said premises complies fully with all McHenry County
ordinances, rules and regulations.
(1987 Code § 26-89)
9-4D-6: MINIMUM PERMISSIBLE LOT AREA FOR PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM:
   A.   Compliance: The type, capacity, location and layout of a private sewage
disposal system shall comply with the rules, regulations and standards as
established from time to time by the ordinances, rules and regulations of
McHenry County.
   B.   Area: No private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil
absorption facilities shall be permitted where the area of the premises is less
than twenty one thousand (21,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall
be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet.
(1987 Code § 26-90)
9-4D-7: MAINTENANCE:
The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in
a sanitary manner at all times.
(1987 Code § 26-91)
9-4D-8: ABANDONMENT WHEN SEWER BECOMES AVAILABLE:
At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, the owner shall connect said system to the
public sewer at the owner’s sole cost and expense in compliance with this
chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal
facilities shall be abandoned, cleared of sludge and filled with sand, as
required by the McHenry County Department of Public Health.
(1987 Code § 26-92)
ARTICLE E: FAT, GREASE AND OIL CONTROL
Section
9-4E-1: Scope, Purpose And Requirement
9-4E-2: Definitions
9-4E-3: Food Service Establishments; Permit Requirement
9-4E-4: Grease Interceptor Requirements
9-4E-5: Grease Trap Requirements
9-4E-6: Enforcement
9-4E-7: Violation
9-4E-1: SCOPE, PURPOSE AND REQUIREMENT:
Any food service establishment connected to the sanitary sewer collection and
treatment system involved in the preparation of foods will be subject to the
conditions of this article. The scope and purpose of this article is to aid in
the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from contributions
and accumulations of fats, oils and greases into the sanitary sewer system from
food service establishments.
(1987 Code § 26-155)
9-4E-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
FATS, OILS AND GREASES: Organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or
plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These
substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures
established in the United States Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 136,
amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as “grease” or
“greases”.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS: Those establishments primarily engaged in
activities of preparing, serving or otherwise making available for public
consumption food, including, but not limited to: restaurants, commercial
kitchens, caterers, hotels, schools, hospitals, prisons, correctional
facilities and care institutions. These establishments use one or more of the
following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all
methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods),
boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting or poaching. Also, included are infrared
heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that
produces a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires
washing.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR: A structure or device designed for the purpose of removing
and preventing fats, oils and grease from entering the sanitary sewer
collection system. These devices are often belowground units in outside areas
and are built as two (2) or three (3) chamber baffled tanks.
GREASE TRAP: A device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and
grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Such traps are typically
compact under the sink units that are near food preparation areas.
MINIMUM DESIGN CAPABILITY: The design features of a grease interceptor and its
ability or volume required to effectively intercept and retain greases from
grease laden wastewaters discharged into the public sanitary sewer system.
USER: Any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of
the City of McHenry, who contributes, causes or permits the contribution or
discharge of wastewater into sewers within the City of McHenry’s boundaries.
(1987 Code § 26-156)
9-4E-3: FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS; PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
All permitted food service establishments discharging wastewater into the City
sanitary sewer collection system are subject to the following requirements:
   A.   Grease Interceptor Requirements: All permitted food service
establishments are required to install, operate and maintain an approved type
and adequately sized grease interceptor/trap necessary to maintain compliance
with the objectives of this article. All grease interceptors must meet the
requirements of the current Illinois State Plumbing Code.
   B.   Implementation:
      1.   All new food service establishment facilities are subject to grease
interceptor/trap requirements. All such facilities must obtain prior approval
from the Public Works Director or designee for grease interceptor/trap sizing
prior to submitting plans for a building permit. All grease interceptor/traps
shall be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Existing
facilities with planned modifications to plumbing improvements will be required
to include plans to comply with the grease interceptor requirements. These
facilities must obtain approval from the Public Works Director or designee for
grease interceptor sizing prior to submitting plans for a building permit.
      2.   All existing food service establishments, determined by the Public
Works Director or designee, having the potential to adversely impact the City’s
sewer system will be notified of their obligation to install a grease
interceptor within the specified period set forth in the notification letter.
   C.   Variance From Grease Interceptor Requirements:
      1.   Grease interceptors required under this article shall be installed
unless the Public Works Director or designee authorizes the installation of an
indoor grease trap or other alternative pretreatment technology and determines
the installation of a grease interceptor would not be feasible. The food
service establishment bears the burden of demonstrating the installation of a
grease interceptor/trap is not feasible. The Public Works Director or designee
may authorize the installation of an indoor grease trap where the installation
of a grease interceptor is not feasible due to space constraints or other
considerations. Financial hardship does not qualify as a consideration. If an
establishment believes the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible
because of documented space constraints, the request for an alternate grease
removal device shall contain the following information:
         a.   Location of sewer main and easement to proposed location outside
building.
         b.   Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for
all services at that site.
      2.   Alternative pretreatment technology includes, but is not limited to:
devices that are used to trap, separate and hold grease from wastewater and
prevent it from being discharged into the sanitary sewer collection system. All
alternative pretreatment technology must be appropriately sized and approved by
the Public Works Director or designee.
(1987 Code § 26-157)
9-4E-4: GREASE INTERCEPTOR REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Conformance With Plumbing Code: Grease interceptor sizing and
installation shall conform to the current edition of the Illinois State
Plumbing Code.
   B.   Design: Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with
design approved by the Public Works Director or designee and shall have a
minimum of two (2) compartments with fittings designed for grease retention.
   C.   Location: Grease interceptors shall be installed at a location where it
shall be easily accessible for inspection, cleaning and removal of grease. The
grease interceptor may not be installed in any part of the building where food
is handled. Location of the grease interceptor must meet the approval of the
Public Works Director or designee.
   D.   Maintenance; Inspection: All such grease interceptors shall be serviced
and emptied of accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain
minimum design capability or effective volume to intercept and retain greases.
These devices should be inspected at least monthly. Users who are required to
maintain a grease interceptor shall:
      1.   Provide a minimum hydraulic retention time in accordance with the
manufacturer and the current edition of the Illinois State Plumbing Code.
      2.   Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket as required.
Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials, such as
grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags,
etc., which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective
volume of the device.
   E.   Records: The user shall maintain a written record of inspection and
maintenance for a minimum of three (3) years. All such records shall be
submitted to the Director of Public Works or designee on an annual basis.
   F.   Sanitary Wastewater Prohibited: Sanitary wastewater is not allowed to
be connected to sewer lines intended for grease interceptor service.
   G.   Manholes: Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of twenty four
inches (24"), shall be provided over each grease interceptor chamber and
sanitary tee. Access to manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be
designed and maintained to prevent water inflow and infiltration. All manholes
shall have readily removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease removal
and wastewater sampling activities.
(1987 Code § 26-158)
9-4E-5: GREASE TRAP REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Scope: Upon approval by the Public Works Director or designee, a grease
trap complying with the provisions of this section must be installed in the
waste line leading from sinks, drains and other fixtures or equipment in food
service establishments where grease may be introduced into the drainage or
sewage system in quantities that can affect line blockage or hinder sewage
treatment or private sewage disposal.
   B.   Conformance To Plumbing Code: Grease trap sizing and installation shall
conform to the current Illinois State Plumbing Code.
   C.   Maintenance: Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating
conditions by regular removal of the accumulated grease. No such collected
material shall be introduced into any drainage piping or public or private
sewer.
   D.   Prohibited Connections: No food waste disposal unit or dishwasher shall
be connected to or discharged into any grease trap.
   E.   Wastewater: Wastewater in excess of one hundred forty degrees
Fahrenheit (140°F) (60°C) shall not be discharged into a grease trap.
(1987 Code § 26-159)
9-4E-6: ENFORCEMENT:
Except as provided herein, grease interceptors/traps will be required, however,
no enforcement actions will be taken under this article for failure to achieve
limits on grease discharges from the facility. If, during this one year period,
an obstruction of a sewer main(s) occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the
extent which adversely impacts the environment and said overflow or failure of
the sanitary sewer collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part
or in whole to an accumulation of grease in the sewer main(s), the City will
pursue enforcement action.
(1987 Code § 26-160; amd. 2019 Code)
9-4E-7: VIOLATION:
If a food service establishment is found to be responsible for excessive grease
accumulation in the sanitary sewer main resulting in reduced flow, backup,
complete blockage and/or flow aboveground, the property owner where said
generator is located shall be subject to any or all of the fines listed in
settlement of offenses as outlined in section 1-4A-2 of this Code; and any/all
costs incurred by the City for removing the accumulation or blockage; any and
all cleanup costs and; may include possible termination of service.
(1987 Code § 26-161)
CHAPTER 5: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND SYSTEM
ARTICLE A: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
9-5A-1: County Stormwater Management Ordinance Adopted
9-5A-1: COUNTY STORMWATER MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE ADOPTED:
The City hereby adopts and authorizes enforcement of the McHenry County
Stormwater Management Ordinance as approved by the McHenry County Board on
January 20, 2004, amended in February 2008, amended in December 2014, April 5,
2016, and as amended or revised by subsequent ordinances from time to time
thereafter. Nothing contained in this Code shall be construed to amend, alter
or otherwise affect the provisions of said McHenry County Stormwater Management
Ordinance. In case of conflict between the McHenry County Stormwater Management
Ordinance and article B of this chapter, article B of this chapter shall
govern.
(1987 Code § 17-25; amd. 2019 Code)
ARTICLE B: ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION TO
STORMWATER SEWER SYSTEM
Section
9-5B-1: Purpose, Intent
9-5B-2: Definitions
9-5B-3: Applicability
9-5B-4: Administration
9-5B-5: Ultimate Responsibility
9-5B-6: Discharge Prohibitions
9-5B-7: Suspension Of MS4 Access
9-5B-8: Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges
9-5B-9: Monitoring Of Discharges
9-5B-10: Requirement To Prevent, Control And Reduce Stormwater Pollutants By
Use Of Best Management Practices
9-5B-11: Watercourse Protection
9-5B-12: Notification Of Spills
9-5B-13: Enforcement
9-5B-14: Appeal Of Notice Of Violation
9-5B-15: Enforcement Measures After Appeal
9-5B-16: Cost Of Abatement Of Violation
9-5B-17: Injunctive Relief
9-5B-18: Compensatory Action
9-5B-19: Violations Deemed Public Nuisance
9-5B-20: Cost Recovery
9-5B-21: Remedies Not Exclusive
9-5B-1: PURPOSE, INTENT:
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the City through the regulation of nonstormwater
discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as
required by Federal and State law. This article establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives
of this article are to:
   A.   Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user.
   B.   Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the Municipal separate
storm sewer system.
   C.   Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and
monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article.
(1987 Code § 26-162)
9-5B-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following shall mean:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures and practices to control site
runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
CITY OF MCHENRY: Includes the City of McHenry and its authorized employees,
consultants and contractors.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.),
and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These
include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five (5) acres
or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of,
or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the MS4,
except as exempted in section 9-5B-6 of this article.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: Either of the following:
Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an
illegal discharge to enter the MS4, including, but not limited to, any
conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage, process
wastewater and wash water to enter the MS4 and any connections to the MS4 from
indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had
been previously allowed, permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement
agency. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land
use to the MS4 which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent
records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined
in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to
waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual,
group or general area wide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely
of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner’s agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordinances and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatable; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether
improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, Municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human
made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of water
from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document which describes the Best
Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, Stormwater Conveyance
Systems and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility.
(1987 Code § 26-163)
9-5B-3: APPLICABILITY:
This article shall apply to all water entering the MS4, unless explicitly
exempted herein.
(1987 Code § 26-164)
9-5B-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The City shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
article.
(1987 Code § 26-165)
9-5B-5: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are
minimum standards; therefor, this article does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(1987 Code § 26-167)
9-5B-6: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges; Exceptions:
      1.   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 or
watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters
containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable
water quality standards, other than stormwater.
      2.   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to
the MS4 is prohibited, except as described as follows:
         a.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water
sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising
groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped
groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than 1 ppm chlorine),
firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
         b.   Discharges specified in writing by the City as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.
         c.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the City prior to the time of the test.
         d.   The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under a NPDES permit, waiver or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental
Protection Agency; provided, that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver or order and other applicable laws and
regulations; and provided, that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the MS4.
   B.   Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      3.   A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue.
(1987 Code § 26-168)
9-5B-7: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
   A.   Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The City
may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United
States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize
danger to persons.
   B.   Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
City will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The
violator may petition the City for a reconsideration and hearing.
   C.   Offense: A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4
access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior
approval of the City.
(1987 Code § 26-169)
9-5B-8: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the City
prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4.
(1987 Code § 26-170)
9-5B-9: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
   A.   Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.
   B.   Access To Facilities:
      1.   The City shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force,
which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the City.
      2.   Facility operators shall allow the City ready access to all parts of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying
of records that must be kept under the conditions of a NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined
by State and Federal law.
      3.   The City shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility
such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the City to conduct monitoring
and/or sampling of the facility’s stormwater discharge.
      4.   The City has the right to require the discharger to install
monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility’s sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure
stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the City and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the City access to a permitted
facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A
person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge
stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person
denies the City reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of
conducting any activity authorized or required by this article.
      7.   If the City has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable
cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there
is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued
hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the City may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court
of competent jurisdiction.
(1987 Code § 26-171)
9-5B-10: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY
USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The City will adopt requirements identifying Best Management Practices for any
activity, operation or facility, which may cause or contribute to pollution or
contamination of stormwater, the MS4 or waters of the U.S. The owner or
operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their
own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited
materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of these
structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a
property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge,
may be required to implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural
and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the
MS4. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit
authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to
the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this
section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan
(SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit.
(1987 Code § 26-172)
9-5B-11: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(1987 Code § 26-173)
9-5B-12: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the MS4 or water of the U.S., said person shall
take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup of
such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person
shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via
emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous
materials, said person shall notify the City in person or by phone or facsimile
no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall
be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City within three
(3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials
emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator
of such establishment shall also retain an on site written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall
be retained for at least three (3) years.
(1987 Code § 26-174)
9-5B-13: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever the City finds that a person has violated
a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the City may
order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such
notice may require, without limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      3.   That violating discharges, practices or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property;
      5.   Payment of a fine and administrative, legal, engineering and
remediation costs; and
      6.   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   B.   Deadline: If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected
property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise
that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established
deadline, the work will be done by the City, its designated governmental agency
or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator.
(1987 Code § 26-175)
9-5B-14: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a Notice of Violation may appeal the determination of the
City to the City Administration. The notice of appeal must be received within
five (5) days from the date of the Notice of Violation. Hearing on the appeal
before the City Administration shall take place within fifteen (15) days from
the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the City
Administration shall be final.
(1987 Code § 26-176)
9-5B-15: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the Notice of Violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within fourteen (14)
days of the decision of the City Administration upholding the decision of the
City, then representatives of the City shall enter upon the subject private
property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person,
owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
City or its designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes
set forth above.
(1987 Code § 26-177)
9-5B-16: COST OF ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION:
   A.   Notification; Protest: Within fourteen (14) days after abatement of the
violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement,
including administrative, legal and engineering costs. The property owner may
file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within five
(5) days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by
the decision of the City or by the expiration of the time in which to file an
appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and
shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.
   B.   Liability; Interest: Any person violating any of the provisions of this
article shall become liable to the City by reason of such violation. Interest
at the rate of eight percent (8%) per annum shall be assessed on the balance
beginning on the fourteenth day following discovery of the violation.
(1987 Code § 26-178)
9-5B-17: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this article, the City may petition for
a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation.
(1987 Code § 26-179)
9-5B-18: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties and remedies authorized by this
article, the City may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions,
such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek
cleanup, etc.
(1987 Code § 26-180)
9-5B-19: VIOLATIONS DEEMED PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
article is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator’s
expense and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(1987 Code § 26-181)
9-5B-20: COST RECOVERY:
The City shall be entitled to recover from any person or corporation found to
be in violation of this article all attorney fees, engineering, consultant,
contractor and court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of
this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
(1987 Code § 26-182)
9-5B-21: REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable Federal, State or local law and it is within the
discretion of the City to seek cumulative remedies.
(1987 Code § 26-183)
CHAPTER 6: WATER AND SEWER CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT FEE
Section
9-6-1: Established
9-6-2: Amount Of Fees
9-6-3: Against Whom Assessed; When Payable
9-6-4: Disposition Of Revenue
9-6-5: Filing With Recorder Of Deeds; Enforcement
9-6-1: ESTABLISHED:
   A.   Authority: Pursuant to the authority granted in 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-150-1, and upon authority contained in other provisions of the
State Statutes, there is hereby established within the City a charge, which
shall be known as the “water and sewer capital development fee”.
   B.   Additional Charge: This charge shall be in addition to all other water
and sewer connection or tap- on fees now in existence in the City.
(1987 Code § 26-201)
9-6-2: AMOUNT OF FEES:
Effective November 1, 2020, the water and sewer capital development fee for
residential and non-residential buildings shall be as indicated in the
following tables. These fees shall be subject to annual Council review and may
adjusted by Council at any time.
   A.   Residential Building Uses: Effective November 1, 2020.
 Connection To Water Only Connection To Sewer Only Connection To Both City
                                                   Water And Sewer
                   Connection To Water Connection To Sewer Connection To Both
                   Only                Only                City Water And Sewer
Detached single-
family:
   2 bedroom or $2,399              $2,844              $5,243
less
   3 bedroom    $4,157              $4,080              $9,237
   4 bedroom    $4,470              $5,224              $9,694
   5 bedroom or $4,470              $5,311              $9,781
more
Attached single-
family:
   1 bedroom    $1,418              $1,678              $3,096
   2 bedroom    $2,361              $2,805              $5,166
   3 bedroom    $2,839              $3,437              $6,276
   4 bedroom or $3,738              $4,426              $8,164
more
Apartments:
   Efficiency   $1,536              $1,827              $3,363
   1 bedroom    $2,085              $2,479              $4,564
   2 bedroom    $2,274              $2,695              $4,969
   3 bedroom or $3,627              $4,301              $7,928
more
 
   B.   Nonresidential Building Uses: Effective November 1, 2020.
Water Meter Size Connection To Water Connection To Sewer Connection To Both
                 Only                Only                City Water And Sewer
Water Meter Size Connection To Water Connection To Sewer Connection To Both
                 Only                Only                City Water And Sewer
3/4"             $2,590              $1,923              $4,513
1"               $7,252              $5,384              $12,636
1 ½"            $12,432             $9,230              $21,662
2"               $20,720             $15,384             $36,104
3"               $46,620             $34,614             $81,234
4"               $77,700             $57,690             $135,390
6"               $129,500            $96,150             $225,650
8" or larger to be determined by City Staff with Council approval.
 
   C.   Separate Charge For Meter Size Increase: A separate charge shall also
be assessed to each user for connection to either the water or sewerage system,
or to both, whenever such user increases the size of its water meter (whether
to City water or otherwise); such separate charge shall be calculated by
deducting the amount of the charge specified in subsection B of this section
for the then existing water meter size from the amount of the charge specified
in subsection B of this section for the diameter to which the water meter is to
be increased.
   D.   Fire Suppression Not Charged: Nothing in this section shall be
interpreted to assess a capital development fee for fire suppression systems.
(1987 Code § 26-202; amd. Ord. 18-1181, 9-24-2018; Ord. MC-19-1212, 12-2-2019;
Ord. 20-38, 11-2-2020)
9-6-3: AGAINST WHOM ASSESSED; WHEN PAYABLE:
The water and sewer capital development fee shall be assessed against new or
additional users where the new or additional use is the result of future
building construction which requires a building permit and which also involves
or contemplates connection to the sewage collection and treatment system or the
water system of the City; provided however, that said fee shall be assessed to
all connecting users whose property is annexed to the City after the effective
date of amendatory Ordinance O-77-115, unless such fees are expressly waived or
otherwise modified by preannexation agreement. The charges shall be payable at
the time a building or connection permit is issued.
(1987 Code § 26-203)
9-6-4: DISPOSITION OF REVENUE:
The revenue received by the City from the water and sewer capital development
fee charges shall be deposited into a fund which shall be known as the
“Waterworks and Sewer Capital Development Fund”, and shall be used in the
manner provided by law. The monies to the credit of such fund may be invested
from time to time by the Finance Director as provided by law. All accrued
interest on any investments shall be credited to such fund.
(1987 Code § 26-204)
9-6-5: FILING WITH RECORDER OF DEEDS; ENFORCEMENT:
A copy of this chapter, as amended, properly certified by the City Clerk, shall
be filed in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of McHenry County, and shall be
deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their liability for service
supplied to any user of the service of the combined waterworks and sewerage
system of the City on their properties. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk
and such other officers of this City to take all action necessary or required
by the laws of the State to file all claims and liens for money due to the City
and to prosecute and enforce such claims in the manner, form and time as
permitted by the laws of the State.
(1987 Code § 26-205)
TITLE 10: BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: ADMINISTRATION, PERMITS, CERTIFICATES, FEES, PENALTY
Section
10-1-1: Office Of Director Of Community Development Department
10-1-2: Appointment Of Director
10-1-3: Permits In Advance Of Work
10-1-4: Permit Fees Established; Penalty Fee
10-1-5: Cash Contributions Required As Condition Of Approval
10-1-6: Duration Of Permit
10-1-7: Filing Certificate Of Occupancy
10-1-8: Occupancy Certificate Required Prior To Occupancy Or Use
10-1-9: Full Compliance Required Prior To Issuance Of Occupancy Certificate
10-1-10: Minimum Floor Space Requirements
10-1-11: Minimum Floor Elevation
10-1-12: Where Noninflammable Materials Required
10-1-13: Exterior Wall Materials
10-1-14: Use Of Streets Restricted
10-1-15: Obstructing, Removing Sidewalks
10-1-16: Sidewalks In Commercial And Office Districts
10-1-17: Portable Toilets On Job Sites
10-1-18: Burning Construction Waste Materials Prohibited
10-1-19: On Site Storage Of Waste Materials
10-1-20: Safeguards
10-1-21: House Numbering
10-1-22: Garages Required
10-1-23: Subsoil Drains; Discharge Into Sanitary Sewer
10-1-24: Spotted Surveys
10-1-25: Residential Rental Registration
10-1-26: Requirements Declared Minimum
10-1-27: Effect Of Conflicts
10-1-28: Violations
10-1-1: OFFICE OF DIRECTOR OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT:
The Office of Director of Community Development is hereby created in which is
vested the power and duty to administer and enforce all of the provisions of
this title and such related regulations as shall be assigned to that office
from time to time by the City Council. That officer is meant, wherever in this
chapter the term Building Officer, building inspector or similar description is
used. The Director of Community Development shall be the head of the Community
Development Department and shall be responsible for the efficient management
and operation thereof, and for the enforcement of the building regulations,
Zoning Ordinances and such other ordinances as the Council may from time to
time specify.
(1987 Code § 7-1)
10-1-2: APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR:
The Director of Community Development shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
consent of the Council.
(1987 Code § 7-1.1)
10-1-3: PERMITS IN ADVANCE OF WORK:
   A.   Permit Required: It is hereby required that a permit be obtained in
advance and all other requirements of this title be complied with whenever a
building or structure, or parts or appurtenances thereof, such as water supply,
sewage disposal, plumbing installation and electrical installation, which are
regulated by this title, or a utility shed, is erected, installed, altered,
converted, remodeled, structurally repaired, moved, demolished or changed.
   B.   Foundations: No permit may be issued for the construction of a building
foundation exclusive of the permit for the construction of the building to
which the foundation relates.
(1987 Code § 7-2)
10-1-4: PERMIT FEES ESTABLISHED; PENALTY FEE:
The following fees shall be charged for permits required by this chapter:
Type Of Construction/Project Fees
Type Of Construction/Project               Fees
A. Residential Construction:                
 1. a. New construction (single-family,   $0.25/sq. ft.
  2-family, multi-family)
  Plus plumbing review/inspection fees:   
   Single-family dwelling               $112.00
   2-family or multi-family dwelling    $84.00/unit plus $28.00/building
 b. Additions                             $0.25/sq. ft. ($50.00 minimum fee)
  Plus plumbing review/inspection fee    $56.00
  Plus fee per plumbing fixture          1.50/fixture
 c. Remodeling                            $0.25/sq. ft. ($50.00 minimum fee)
  Plus plumbing review/inspection fee    $56.00
  Plus fee per plumbing fixture          1.50/fixture
  d. Minor permit extension (any permit
 other than subsection A1a, A1b or A1c of  
  this section):
  6 month extension                      1-1/2 times the original building
                                           permit fee
  Major permit extension (any permit as
 referenced in subsection A1a, A1b or A1c  
  of this section):
  6 month extension                      1/2 the cost of the original
                                           building permit fee
  1 year extension                       Cost of the original building permit
                                           fee
 2. Air conditioning                      $40.00
 3. Antenna/satellite dish                30.00
 4. Backflow prevention installation      50.00
 5. Deck                                  $30.00 plus $0.05/sq. ft.
 6. Demolition of principal building on   $100.00
  premises
 7. Door replacement                      25.00
 8. Driveway                              25.00
 9. Electrical installation/upgrade       50.00
 10. Fence                                25.00
 11. Fireplace                            50.00
 12. Furnace (changing source or new      35.00
  unit)
 13. Gazebo                               $30.00 plus $0.05/sq. ft.
 14. Garage                               $ 0.15/sq. ft.
 15. Lawn sprinkler system                50.00
 16. Pools and hot tubs:                   
 a. Aboveground                           60.00
 b. In ground                             115.00
 c. Hot tub                               35.00
 d. Storable swimming pool                30.00
 17. Raising, shoring or underpinning of  15.00
  structures
 18. Re-roof                              25.00
 19. Sewer repair                         25.00
 20. Shed                                 30.00
 21. Siding                               25.00
 22. Stone, brick veneer                  37.50
 23. Water repair                         25.00
 24. Window replacement                   25.00
  25. Minimum fee for all new residential
 construction, including miscellaneous    22.50
  construction unless otherwise specified
 26. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy   50.00
 27. Plan review fee: new construction/   80.00
  addition/alteration
 28. Water heater replacement             35.00
 29. All private walks that have steps    25.00
  and stoops
 30. Retaining walls over 4 feet in       25.00
  height
B. Nonresidential Construction:             
 1. a. New construction:                   
  First 200 sq. ft.                      250.00
  201 sq. ft. - 20,000 sq. ft.           0.08/sq. ft.
  20,001 sq. ft. and above               0.05/sq. ft.
  Plus plumbing review/inspection fee    215.00
  Plus fee per plumbing fixture          1.50/fixture
 b. Additions:                            $0.25/sq. ft. ($50.00 minimum fee;
                                           $10,000.00 maximum fee)
  Plus plumbing review/inspection fee    $86.00
  Plus fee per plumbing fixture          1.50/fixture
 c. Remodeling:                           $0.25/sq. ft. ($50.00 minimum fee)
  Plus plumbing review/inspection fee    $86.00
  Plus fee per plumbing fixture          1.50/fixture
  d. Minor permit extension (any permit
 other than subsection B1a, B1b or B1c of  
  this section):
  6 month extension                      1-1/2 times the original building
                                           permit fee
  Major permit extension (any permit
 referenced in subsection B1a, B1b and     
  B1c of this section)
  6 month extension                      1/2 the cost of the original
                                           building permit fee
  1 year extension                       Cost of the original building permit
                                           fee
 2. Accessory structure (garage, shed,    $0.15/sq. ft. ($50.00 minimum fee)
  etc.)
 3. Air conditioning, central             $ 75.00
 4. Antenna/satellite dish                60.00
 5. Awning/canopy                         50.00
 6. Backflow prevention installation      50.00
 7. Deck                                  65.00
 8. Demolition                            200.00
 9. Door replacement                      50.00
 10. Driveway                             45.00
 11. Electrical installation/upgrade      110.00
 12. Elevator                             120.00
 13. Fence                                35.00
 14. Fire protection/sprinkler system     200.00
 15. Furnace (new unit only)              75.00
 16. Gazebo                               65.00
 17. Incinerator/crematory                50.00
 18. Irrigation/lawn sprinkler system     60.00
 19. Parking lot                          45.00
 20. Raising, shoring, underpinning       200.00
  structure
 21. Re-roof                              75.00
 22. Sewer repair                         75.00
 23. Siding                               50.00
 24. Signs:                                
 a. Nonilluminated                        50.00
 b. Illuminated                           55.00
                                           $30.00 fee plus $30.00 deposit1.
                                           Following the expiration of the
                                           portable/temporary sign permit to
                                           whom the permit was issued must
                                           contact the Community and Economic
                                           Development Department, during
                                           normal business hours (8:00 A.M. to
                                           5:00 P.M. Monday through Friday,
                                           excluding recognized holidays which
                                           the office is not open), at
                                           (815)363-2170, within 5 business
 c. Portable/temporary                    days to schedule an inspection to
                                           verify its removal. If the sign has
                                           been removed, the permit will be
                                           closed and the $30.00 deposit will
                                           be refunded to the applicant. If the
                                           applicant does not contact the
                                           Community and Economic Development
                                           Department within 5 business days
                                           following the expiration of the
                                           portable/temporary sign permit, the
                                           deposit will be permanently retained
                                           by the City.
 25. Site development permit              $ 50.00
 26. Stone, brick veneer                  37.50
 27. Water repair                         75.00
 28. Window replacement                   50.00
 29. Temporary Certificate of Occupancy   100.00
 30. Certificate of Occupancy             0.00
 31. Plan review fee for new              $0.00/$50.00/$200.00
  construction/addition/alteration
  32. Minimum fee for all new
 nonresidential construction unless       $45.00
  otherwise specified herein
 33. Water heater replacement             35.00
 34. Seal coating of all nonresidential   45.00
  parking lots
 35. All private walks that have steps    45.00
  and stoops
 36. Retaining walls over 4 feet in       25.00
  height
 37. Dumpster enclosures nonresidential   35.00
  only
C. Reinspection fees:                       
 1. Plumbing - residential                28.00
 Plumbing - nonresidential                43.00
 2. All others (after second failed       37.50
  inspection)
 
Note:
   1.    A portable/temporary $100.00 deposit shall be required exclusively for
grand opening signs. Grand opening signs must comply with all other provisions
outlined in subsection B24c of this section, in addition to all regulations
included in section
10-20-13, “New Business Grand Opening Signs”, of this title.
   D.   Increase Due To Construction Prior To Permit: The aforesaid residential
and nonresidential permit fees shall be increased by fifty percent (50%) where
construction has been commenced before a permit is issued for such work.
   E.   Collection And Deposit: All fees as are herein established or made, by
amendment, or hereinafter established by the City Council, shall be collected
by the Community Development Department and deposited with the Finance
Director.
(1987 Code § 7-3)
10-1-5: CASH CONTRIBUTIONS REQUIRED AS CONDITION OF APPROVAL:
   A.   Required; Fees: As a condition of approval of an application for a
residential building permit for the construction of any residential dwelling
unit anywhere in the City on land for which a cash contribution has not been
previously paid under the terms and provisions of title 12, chapter 8 of this
Code, the City Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance, the applicant for
such residential dwelling unit building permit shall be required to pay for
school districts, park, fire protection district and library district purposes,
a cash contribution per each residential dwelling unit to be constructed,
calculated in accordance with the following schedule, which contributions shall
be increased each May 1 by the percentage increase in the Chicago Area Consumer
Price Index for the previous year, for purposes of this section, the price
index to be used for comparative purposes shall be that index published for the
Annual Average Chicago Area CPI-U, as published by the U.S. Department of
Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, beginning May 1, 1997:
   CONTRIBUTION PER RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT FOR:
Type Of Residential Schools Park Library Fire District Total Contribution Per
Dwelling Unit                                          Unit
Type Of Residential Schools  Park      Library Fire District Total Contribution
Dwelling Unit                                                Per Unit
Single-family                                             
detached:
 2 bedrooms or     $797.00  $2,420.00 $356.00 $356.00       $3,929.00
  less
 3 bedrooms        2985.00  3,478.00  356.00  356.00        7,175.00
 4 bedrooms        4,976    4,517.00  356.00  356.00        10,205.00
 5 bedrooms or     3,805.00 4,524.00  356.00  356.00        9,041.00
  more
Single family
attached                                                  
(townhouse,
dupluxes, etc.):
 1 bedroom         0.00     1,432.00  356.00  356.00        2,144.00
 2 bedrooms        715.00   2,338.00  356.00  356.00        3,815.00
 3 bedrooms        1,376.00 2,870.00  356.00  356.00        4,958.00
 4 bedrooms        2,678.00 3,774.00  356.00  356.00        7,164.00
Multi family                                              
(apartments):
 Efficiency        0.00     1,553.00  356.00  356.00        2,265.00
 1 bedroom         0.00     2,110.00  356.00  356.00        2,839.00
 2 bedrooms        718.00   2,297.00  356.00  356.00        3,727.00
 3 bedrooms or     1,961.00 3,664.00  356.00  356.00        6,337.00
  more
 
   B.   Payable: The cash contributions required by subsection A of this
section shall be payable to the City at the time application is made to the
City for the issuance of such residential building permit. Such cash
contributions shall be calculated pursuant to the above schedule on the basis
of the type of residential unit to be constructed and the number of bedrooms
specified in said application.
   C.   School Contributions:
      1.   Sixty five percent (65%) of the cash contributions for school
purposes shall be remitted to the grade school district affected by said
subdivision development and thirty five percent (35%) shall be remitted to the
affected high school district.
      2.   The City shall remit the cash contributions to the affected school
district on a periodic basis no less frequently than annually. Such cash
contributions, in lieu of school sites, shall be held in a special fund by the
school district and disbursed by the school district for use in the acquisition
of land for a school site to serve the immediate or future needs of children
from that subdivision or development or for the improvement to any existing
school site which already serves such needs, but not for the construction of
any school building or additions thereto.
(1987 Code § 7-4; amd. Ord. MC-19-1213, 12-2-2019)
10-1-6: DURATION OF PERMIT:
   A.   Duration Of Minor Permits: A minor permit shall be any permit issued
for an accessory use listed in section
11-14-4, “Table 1, Permitted Obstructions Of Required Yards”, of this Code. A
minor permit shall expire and become invalid if a substantial construction
start is not made within ninety (90) days after the issuance of said permit,
and/or if construction is not fully completed within six (6) months after the
issuance of said permit. In any of the aforesaid cases, no further construction
shall be permitted until a new application has been submitted and approved and
all fees have been paid in connection with the application for said minor
permit.
   B.   Duration Of Major Permits: A major permit shall be any permit not
classified as a minor permit. A major permit shall expire and become invalid if
a substantial construction start is not made within sixty (60) days after the
issuance of said permit, construction is not completed, and a final inspection
passed (Temporary Occupancy Agreement issued), within one year after the
issuance of said permit, or, if the building whose construction is authorized
thereby has not had and passed a final inspection and a Certificate of
Occupancy is not issued within two (2) years after the issuance date of said
permit. In any of the aforesaid cases, no further construction shall be
permitted until a new application has been submitted and approved and all fees
have been paid in connection with the application for said major permit.
   C.   Building Permit Extensions: A building permit extension may be granted
by the Director subsequent to the payment of the fees specified in section
10-1-4 of this chapter.
   D.   Number Of Building Permit Extensions: No more than one permit extension
shall be granted per building permit.
(1987 Code § 7-5)
10-1-7: FILING CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
The Director of Community Development shall file a Certificate of Occupancy,
when issued, with the Township Supervisor of Assessments.
(1987 Code § 7-6)
10-1-8: OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE REQUIRED PRIOR TO OCCUPANCY OR USE:
   A.   No building or structure, or addition thereto, erected, constructed,
enlarged, remodeled, altered, reconstructed or moved after the effective date
of this section shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose
unless and until an Occupancy Certificate shall have been issued by the
Community Development Department certifying that the proposed use or occupancy
complies with all provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable
ordinances of the City.
   B.   Any person who erects or constructs any house, dwelling place, business
or establishment or any other type of building or structure within the City
pursuant to a building permit issued by the Community Development Department
before transferring possession to the whole or any part of such building or
structure to any other person for any use as a dwelling, business
establishment, or for any other purpose, shall secure an Occupancy Certificate
from the Community Development Department certifying that such building or
structure conforms to all applicable provisions and requirements of the City
Building Codes and the City Zoning Ordinance.
(1987 Code § 7-7)
10-1-9: FULL COMPLIANCE REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE:
No Occupancy Certificate for a new use or a structure or addition thereto
erected, constructed, enlarged, remodeled, altered, reconstructed or moved
shall be issued until the premises has been inspected by the Community
Development Department and determined to be in full compliance with all of the
applicable regulations for the zoning district in which it is located and
construction completed pursuant to the following schedule:
   A.   Single-Family Dwelling Building Permits: No Occupancy Certificate for
single-family dwelling building permits shall be issued unless and until the
entire residence or residential structure or addition thereto shall have been
substantially completed to the satisfaction of the Community Development
Department.
   B.   Multiple-Family Dwelling Building Permits: No Occupancy Certificate for
multiple-family dwelling building permits shall be issued unless and until any
apartment unit or units of such building or addition thereto, shown by the
plans and specifications of the permittee as an “area” or “suite”, or an entire
floor of the building or addition thereto shall have been completed and
adequate safety measures provided pursuant to subsection D of this section.
   C.   Commercial And Industrial Building Permits: No Occupancy Certificate
for commercial and industrial building permits shall be issued unless and until
any unit or units of such building or addition thereto, shown by the plans and
specifications of the permittee as an “area” or “suite” to be treated as such
unit shall have been completed and adequate safety measures provided pursuant
to subsection D of this section.
   D.   Safety Precautions: In each instance where an Occupancy Certificate is
requested for other than an entire building or addition to an existing
building, the permittee shall have first provided and shall continue to
maintain during the remaining construction to be done on said premises and
until an Occupancy Certificate has been issued for every part of such building:
      1.   Fully completed ingress to and egress from the units for which the
Occupancy Certificate is sought in order not to jeopardize the lives or
property of the general public or any resident of such building;
      2.   Complete and total quarantine and isolation of all areas or units in
the said building for which an Occupancy Certificate has not been issued; and
      3.   Separate ingress to and egress from areas under construction so as
to keep workers and building materials separate from the completed units to
such building.
(1987 Code § 7-8)
10-1-10: MINIMUM FLOOR SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
No building permit for new residential construction shall be granted unless the
floor area of the proposed residential construction shall equal or exceed the
amount of the square footage hereinafter indicated opposite the residential use
for which the permit is being sought:
   MINIMUM SQUARE FEET OF HABITABLE LIVING SPACE
 
Type Of Residential Construction  Area Required
Single-family dwelling            1,000 square feet
Multi-family dwelling, 1 bedroom  650 square feet
Multi-family dwelling, 2 bedrooms 775 square feet
Condominium units                 900 square feet
Efficiency apartment              550 square feet
 
(1987 Code § 7-12)
10-1-11: MINIMUM FLOOR ELEVATION:
The basement, crawl space or lowest floor elevation of any building shall be a
minimum of one foot (1') above the seasonal high water level as determined by
an Illinois licensed professional soils engineer.
(1987 Code § 7-27)
10-1-12: WHERE NONINFLAMMABLE MATERIALS REQUIRED:
   A.   Industrial: Any industrial building or structure erected shall be
constructed of brick, cement or metal.
   B.   Commercial: Any commercial building or structure erected shall be
constructed of brick, cement or metal or shall have a minimum of two (2) hour
fire rated walls. Abutting walls shall be constructed of brick, cement or other
material authorized by the Community Development Department.
   C.   Multi-Family Dwellings: The fire walls of all multi-family dwelling
structures shall be constructed of brick, masonry or stone.
(1987 Code § 7-13)
10-1-13: EXTERIOR WALL MATERIALS:
   A.   RM-1, RM-2 Districts: A minimum seventy five percent (75%) of the
exterior walls of all buildings and structures, and of all additions to
existing buildings and structures, hereafter erected upon any premises which
are classified under the Zoning Ordinance of the City as RM-1 Low Density
Multi-Family Residential District and RM-2 High Density Multi-Family
Residential District shall be faced with brick, brick or masonry veneers,
natural or case stone veneers or other masonry materials.
   B.   RA-1 District: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the exterior walls
of all buildings and structures, and of all additions to existing buildings and
structures, hereafter erected upon any premises which are classified under the
Zoning Ordinance of the City as RA-1 Attached Residential District shall be
faced with brick, brick or masonry veneers, natural or cast stone veneers or
other masonry materials.
(1987 Code § 7-19)
10-1-14: USE OF STREETS RESTRICTED:
The use of streets for the storage of materials in the process of construction
or alteration of a building shall be as specified in section 6-5A-18 of this
Code.
(1987 Code § 7-14; amd. 2019 Code)
10-1-15: OBSTRUCTING, REMOVING SIDEWALKS:
No sidewalk shall be obstructed in the course of building construction or
alteration without a special permit from the City and whenever the removal of a
sidewalk is required in such work, a special permit from the City shall be
obtained.
(1987 Code § 7-15)
10-1-16: SIDEWALKS IN COMMERCIAL AND OFFICE DISTRICTS:
No construction permit shall be issued in connection with any premises zoned
Commercial or Office District unless a sidewalk meeting the specifications set
forth in the City Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance for commercial
and business property is then in existence along the entire frontage of said
premises, or, unless, the application for such construction permit shall
include, as an integral part thereof, the construction of such sidewalk at the
sole expense of the applicant or owner of the premises, in accordance with the
terms and specifications of the City Subdivision Control and Development
Ordinance. No occupancy in connection with such construction permit shall be
allowed until such sidewalk is properly installed and accepted by the City.
(1987 Code § 7-23)
10-1-17: PORTABLE TOILETS ON JOB SITES:
In the absence of permanent toilet facilities on the job site premises, an
operable portable toilet shall be installed on the job site from the time that
construction or remodeling begins until it is completed. In case of unusual
circumstances, this requirement may be waived by the Community Development
Department.
(1987 Code § 7-11)
10-1-18: BURNING CONSTRUCTION WASTE MATERIALS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to burn construction waste materials anywhere in the City.
(1987 Code § 7-24)
10-1-19: ON SITE STORAGE OF WASTE MATERIALS:
Prior to their disposal from the construction site, all construction waste
material shall be stored in a dumpster or shall be confined in such a manner so
as to prevent the material from being scattered about by wind, persons or
animals.
(1987 Code § 7-25)
10-1-20: SAFEGUARDS:
It shall be the duty of the person doing any construction, altering or wrecking
work in the City to do the same with proper care for the safety of persons and
property. Warnings, barricades and lights shall be maintained wherever
necessary for the protection of pedestrians or traffic; and temporary roofs
over sidewalks shall be constructed wherever there is danger to pedestrians
from falling articles or materials.
(1987 Code § 7-16)
10-1-21: HOUSE NUMBERING:
   A.   USPO Numbering System: All houses, buildings and structures in the City
shall be numbered in accordance with the United States Postal Department
recommended numbering system.
   B.   Occupancy Permit Requires Numbering: No occupancy permit shall be
issued in connection with any building permit until and unless the numbering
requirements of this section are satisfied.
(1987 Code § 7-20)
   C.   Duty To Place And Maintain: It shall be the duty of the owner and
occupant of every house, building and structure in the City to have placed and
maintained thereon, in a place clearly visible at all times from the street,
figures no less than four inches (4") in height showing the number of the
house, building or structure.
(1987 Code § 7-20; amd. 2019 Code)
   D.   Numbering Chart And Plan: The authorized numbering chart and plan shall
be kept on file in the Office of the Community Development Department.
(1987 Code § 7-20)
10-1-22: GARAGES REQUIRED:
   A.   Required: No permit for the construction of a new single-family
residence shall be issued and no new single-family residence may be constructed
unless at least a one car garage (either attached or detached) is included in
the plans and specifications in such residential construction. No occupancy
permit for such residence shall be issued until such garage is completed. A
carport shall not satisfy the garage requirements of this section. When an
attached garage is sought to be converted to habitable living space, a new
substitute garage must be constructed prior to the issuance of a conversion
permit.
   B.   Size: No garage shall be smaller than twelve feet (12') wide by twenty
feet (20') deep, with a door opening no less than nine feet (9') wide by seven
feet (7') high.
   C.   Maintenance: All single-family residences constructed with a garage
shall be required to continue to maintain a garage. In the event that a
required garage is damaged or destroyed the property owner shall obtain a
building permit for repairs or a replacement garage within one hundred eighty
(180) days.
(1987 Code § 7-21) (amd. Ord. 23-53, 10-2-2023)
10-1-23: SUBSOIL DRAINS; DISCHARGE INTO SANITARY SEWER:
Subsoil drains shall be provided around all foundations enclosing habitable or
usable spaces located below grade and which are subject to groundwater
conditions. Drains shall be installed at or below the area to be protected and
shall discharge by gravity or mechanical means into a drainage system approved
by the Community Development Department. The outlet of sump pump discharge
piping shall be oriented to discharge water in the direction of the engineered
drainage for the subdivision. No person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged stormwater, foundation drain water, groundwater, roof runoff,
surface drainage, cooling waters, or any other unpolluted water into any
sanitary sewer, onto any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way, or onto
abutting or nearby property, in such a manner as to cause a public or private
nuisance.
(1987 Code § 7-22)
10-1-24: SPOTTED SURVEYS:
A stamped and signed spotted survey, performed by a licensed professional land
surveyor in the State of Illinois, shall be required for all new major permits
after a building foundation has been poured and passed inspection, but prior to
the start of any framing. Said spotted survey shall indicate the finished
elevation of the top of the building foundation, the distance from the
foundation to the location of all property corners and any additional
information as required. The installation of metal property pins at all
property corners shall be required prior to the beginning of framing.
(1987 Code § 7-26)
10-1-25: RESIDENTIAL RENTAL REGISTRATION:
No person shall lease, rent, occupy or otherwise allow a rental unit within the
City to be occupied unless the owner has registered the property on a form
provided by Community Development Department.
(1987 Code § 7-28)
10-1-26: REQUIREMENTS DECLARED MINIMUM:
These rules and regulations set forth requirements which are considered
reasonable and are held in every instance to be the minimum for the promotion
of public health, safety and the general welfare.
(1987 Code § 7-9)
10-1-27: EFFECT OF CONFLICTS:
In the event of a conflict between this title, or any part thereof, and
regulations and standards adopted by reference, the more restrictive provisions
shall govern and prevail.
(1987 Code § 7-10; amd. 2019 Code)
10-1-28: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
(1987 Code § 7-30)
   B.   Professionals: A person licensed or registered by the State or a
subdivision thereof to do work regulated by this title or to render
professional architectural or engineering service in connection therewith who
violates the law or ordinance under which licensed or registered, or who
violates this title while carrying out such work or rendered service in
connection therewith shall be reported by the Community Development Department
to the licensing authority.
(1987 Code § 7-30) (amd. 2019 Code; Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 2: BUILDING CODE
Section
10-2-1: International Building Code; Buildings And Structures, Other Than One-
Or Two- Family Dwellings
10-2-1: INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE; BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES, OTHER THAN ONE-
OR TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
A certain document, copies of which are on file with the City Community
Development Department, being marked and designated “International Building
Code 2015” and annual supplements thereto, as published by the International
Code Council (ICC), be and is hereby adopted for the control of buildings and
structures, other than detached one- or two-family dwellings, as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Building Code 2015, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the following additions, insertions, deletions and changes:
   A.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International Plumbing
Code and insert Illinois State Plumbing Code.
   B.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International
Electrical Code and insert 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code.
   C.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International Energy
Conservation Code and insert the currently adopted and amended Illinois State
Energy Conservation Code.
   D.   Insert the City of McHenry in the second line of Section 101.1 on page
1 of the Code.
   E.   Delete Sections 105.1.1 Annual Permits and 105.1.2 Annual Permit
Records and 105.2 Work Exempt from Permit.
   F.   Delete Section 105.2.3
   G.   Section 114.4 shall read as follows:
Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved
plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be punishable by a fine
according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and
Penalties. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   H.   Section 115.3 shall read as follows:
Unlawful Continuance: Any person who shall continue any work in or about the
structure after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe conditions,
shall be liable to a fine according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title
15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties. Each day that a violation continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
   I.   Delete the provisions of Code Sections 113.1 through 113.3 inclusive;
insert Section 113.1 which shall read as follows:
Appeals: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Building Officer may
appeal therefrom to the City Council which may affirm, modify or reverse the
decisions of the Building Officer. Thereupon, the Building Officer shall take
action in accordance with the decisions of said City Council.
   J.   Insert “City of McHenry” in Section 1612.3 and “November 16, 2006".
   K.   Add new section 107.6 of the International Building Code (IBC), stating
“Landmark Commission approval required prior to demolition.”
   L.   Section 111.2 of the International Building Code (IBC), Certificate
Issued, delete line 5 starting with “that contains the following” to the end of
Section 111.3.
   M.   Appendix B - Board of Appeals, Delete Section B101 General, and insert
the following:
Appeals: Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Building Officer may
appeal therefrom to the City Council, which may affirm, modify or reverse the
decisions of the Building Officer. Thereupon, the Building Officer shall take
action in accordance with the decisions of said City Council.
   N.   Adopt Appendix B, as modified.
   O.   Replace Section 3001 Elevators and Conveying Systems, Section 3001
General, subparagraph 3001.2 referenced standards with the following text:
Except as otherwise provided for in this code, the design, construction,
installation, alteration, repair and maintenance of elevators and conveying
systems and their components shall conform to Illinois Elevator Safety Rules
and ASCE 24 for construction in flood hazard areas established in Section
1612.3.
(1987 Code § 7-51) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 3: PLUMBING CODE
Section
10-3-1: Plumbing Code Adopted
10-3-2: Overhead Sewers Required
10-3-1: PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
That a document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as the Illinois State Plumbing Code,
current edition and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as and for the minimum code of standards of the City for
plumbing and the fixtures, materials, design and installation methods of
plumbing systems.
(1987 Code § 7-41)
10-3-2: OVERHEAD SEWERS REQUIRED:
For all new structures, an overhead sewer shall be installed in the lowest
level when the lowest level is three feet (3') or less above the elevation of
the crown of the street adjacent to the structure. Where installation of an
overhead sewer is not possible due to building design, a check valve shall be
installed within the interior of the structure.
(1987 Code § 7-42)
CHAPTER 4: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE
Section
10-4-1: Energy Conservation Code Adopted
10-4-1: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, copies of which are on file with the City Community and
Economic Development Department, being marked and designated Illinois State
Energy Conservation Code, current edition and amendments thereto, are hereby
adopted and incorporated herein by reference as and for the minimum code of
standards of the City for energy conservation.
(1987 Code § 7-61)
CHAPTER 5: FIRE CODE
Section
10-5-1: Fire Code Adopted
10-5-1: FIRE CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, copies of which are on file with the City Community
Development Department, being marked and designated International Fire Code
2015, and annual supplements thereto, as published by the International Code
Council (ICC), be and is hereby adopted as mandated by the State of Illinois
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
International Fire Code 2015, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part
hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the following additions,
insertions, deletions and changes:
   A.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International Plumbing
Code and replace with Illinois State Plumbing Code.
   B.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International
Electrical Code and replace with 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code.
   C.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International Energy
Conservation Code and replace with currently adopted and amended Illinois State
Energy Conservation Code.
   D.   Insert “City of McHenry” in the second line of Section F-101.1 on page
1 of the Code.
   E.   Section 104.1 Add “The Building Officer is hereby referred to as the
Fire Official.”
   F.   Delete the provisions of Section 108 Board of Appeals and replace with
the following:
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Building Officer may appeal
therefrom to the City Council, which may affirm, modify or reverse the
decisions of the Building Officer. Thereupon, the Building Officer shall take
action in accordance with the decisions of the City Council.
   G.   Section 111.4, line 5 insert $50.00 in the less than box in line 5, and
$500.00 in more than box in line 5.
(1987 Code § 7-71)
CHAPTER 6: FUEL GAS CODE
Section
10-6-1: Fuel Gas Code Adopted
10-6-1: FUEL GAS CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, copies of which are on file with the City Community and
Economic Development Department, being marked and designated International Fuel
Gas Code 2015, and annual supplements thereto, as published by the
International Code Council (ICC), be and is hereby adopted as mandated by the
State of Illinois for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Fuel Gas Code 2015, are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the following additions, insertions, deletions and changes:
   A.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International Plumbing
Code and replace with Illinois State Plumbing Code.
   B.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International
Electrical Code and replace with the 2014 edition of the National Electrical
Code.
   C.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International Energy
Conservation Code and replace with the currently adopted and amended Illinois
State Energy Conservation Code.
   D.   Insert “the City of McHenry” in Section 101.1.
   E.   Delete the provisions of Section 109 (IFGC) Means of Appeal in its
entirety and replace with:
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the code official may appeal therefrom
to the City Council, which may affirm, modify or reverse the decisions of the
code official. Thereupon, the code official shall take action in accordance
with the decisions of the City Council.
   F.   Delete Section 106.6.2 Fee Schedule and replace with the following:
Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal
or demolition for work done in the connection to or concurrently with the work
authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of
the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
   G.   Delete Section 106.6.3 Fee Refunds and replace with the following:
   Refunds. The Building official is authorized to establish a refund policy.
   H.   Delete Section 108.4 Violation penalties and replace with the
following:
Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved
plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be punishable by a fine
according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and
Penalties. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   I.   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders:
Insert $50.00 in less than amount and $500.00 in more than amount.
(1987 Code § 7-81) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 7: MECHANICAL CODE
Section
10-7-1: Mechanical Code Adopted
10-7-1: MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, copies of which are on file with the City Community and
Economic Development Department, being marked and designated International
Mechanical Code 2015, and annual supplements thereto, as published by the
International Code Council (ICC), be and is hereby adopted as mandated by the
State of Illinois for the control of buildings and structures as herein
provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Mechanical Code 2015 are hereby
referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the following additions, insertions, deletions and changes:
   A.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International Plumbing
Code and replace with Illinois State Plumbing Code.
   B.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International
Electrical Code and replace with 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code.
   C.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International Energy
Conservation Code and replace with currently adopted and amended Illinois State
Energy Conservation Code.
   D.   Insert “City of McHenry” in the second line of Section 101.1 on Page 1
of the Code.
   E.   Delete Section 106.5, Fees to the end of this section and replace with
the following:
Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal
or demolition for work done in the connection to or concurrently with the work
authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of
the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
   F.   Insert Section 106.5.3 Fee Refunds:
Refunds. The Building official is authorized to establish a refund policy.
   G.   Delete Section 108.4, Violation Penalties and replace with the
following:
Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this Code or
shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect,
construct, alter or repair a building or structure in violation of an approved
plan or directive of the Building Official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this Code, shall be punishable by a fine
according to the Fines and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and
Penalties. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.
   H.   Section 108.5 Stop Work Orders, insert $50.00 in amount box in line 13,
and $500.00 in amount box in line 14.
   I.   Delete the provisions of Section 109.1 through 109.7 inclusive and
replace with the following:
Section 109.1 Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Building
Officer may appeal there from to the City Council. Said City Council may
affirm, modify or reverse the decisions of the Building Officer. Thereupon, the
Building Officer shall take action in accordance with the decisions of said
City Council.
(1987 Code § 7-91) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 8: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
10-8-1: Property Maintenance Code Adopted
10-8-1: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, three (3) copies of which are on file in the Office of the
City Clerk, and which have been on file therein for a period of thirty (30)
days prior to the adoption of this section, being marked and designated as the
International Property Maintenance Code 2015, and annual supplements thereto,
as published by the International Code Council (ICC), be and is hereby adopted
for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the
International Property Maintenance Code 2015, are hereby referred to, adopted
and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the following
additions, deletions, insertions and changes:
   A.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International Plumbing
Code and replace with the Illinois State Plumbing Code.
   B.   Delete all references to the 2006 edition of the International Energy
Conservation Code and replace with the edition of the International Energy
Conservation Code as mandated by the State of Illinois.
   C.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International
Electrical Code and replace with the 2014 edition of the National Electrical
Code.
   D.   Delete the following text from Section (f) 304.3 “Address numbers shall
be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches
(10mm) high with a minimum stroke of 0.5 inch (17.7mm).”
   E.   Delete all references to the International Zoning Code and replace with
the City of McHenry Zoning Ordinance.
   F.   Insert “the City of McHenry” in Section 101.1.
   G.   Delete Section 103.1 in its entirety and replace as follows:
Section 103.1 General. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Building
Officer to enforce the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code. The
Building Officer is hereby referred to as the code official.
   H.   Delete Section 103.5 Fees and replace with the following:
Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal
or demolition for work done in the connection to or concurrently with the work
authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of
the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
   I.   In Section 111.1 delete Board of Appeals and replace with City Council.
   J.   In Section 111.2 delete entire section thru and including Section
111.2.5.
   K.   Delete Section 111.3.
   L.   In Section 111.4 delete entire last sentence.
   M.   Delete Section 111.4.1.
   N.   Delete Section 111.5.
   O.   Delete Section 111.7.
   P.   In Section 112.4 insert $50.00 in not less than and $500.00 in not more
than.
   Q.   In Section 302.2 Enclosures: delete “containing more than 24 inches”
and replace with “is capable of holding 24 inches or more.”
   R.   Add Section 302.2.1:
Sump Pump and Gutters: All sump pump and gutters from all buildings shall be
connected to a storm sewer, provided an existing storm sewer is adjacent to or
within the boundaries of the property where the building is located. If no
storm sewer exists, the sump pump and/or roof gutter shall discharge not less
than five feet beyond the building but no more than ten feet from the building.
Discharge shall not terminate within ten feet of any property line. In no case
shall the discharge cause a nuisance to adjoin properties. The termination
distance may be extended upon the approval of the Code Official.
   S.   In Section 302.4 insert “eight (8) inches.”
   T.   Section 303.3:
Maintenance. Pools and spas and related mechanical, electrical and plumbing
systems, both existing and new, and parts thereof, shall be maintained in
proper operating condition in accordance with the original design in a safe and
sanitary condition. Devices or safeguards that are required by this Code shall
be maintained in compliance with the edition of the Code under which they were
installed.
The owner(s) authorized agent shall be responsible for maintenance of systems.
To determine compliance with this provision, the code official shall have the
authority to require any system to be re-inspected.
   U.   In Section 303.14 insert “April 1st to November 15th”.
   V.   Add Section 308.3.3:
Trash Enclosures: All multi-family, commercial and/or industrial buildings
utilizing exterior storage for refuse containers shall construct and maintain
screened trash enclosures. Exterior refuse containers shall be enclosed behind
a permanent, opaque enclosure constructed of wood, metal, masonry or other
appropriate material authorized by the building official. Such enclosures shall
extend from the ground level to two feet above the top of the highest container
and shall be equipped with access gates. The gates shall be equipped with an
inside release to preclude child entrapment. Access walls and gates shall be
maintained plumb and in good repair.
   W.   Insert Section 506.4 “Cross connection of sanitary and storm sewers
shall not be permitted.”
   X.   In Section 602.3 insert September 15th to June 1st.
   Y.   In Section 602.4 insert September 15th to June 1st.
   Z.   In Section 705:
Carbon Monoxide Detector. Every dwelling unit shall be equipped with at least
one approved carbon monoxide alarm in an operating condition within 15 feet of
every room used for sleeping purposes. The installation, placement and
maintenance of Carbon monoxide detectors shall comply with the state of
Illinois Carbon Monoxide Alarm Detector Act.
(1987 Code § 7-101)
CHAPTER 9: RESIDENTIAL CODE
Section
10-9-1: Residential Code Adopted
10-9-1: RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, copies of which are on file with the City Community
Development Department, being marked and designated International Residential
Code for One and Two Family Dwellings 2015, and annual supplements thereto, as
published by the International Code Council (ICC), be and is hereby adopted as
mandated by the State of Illinois for the control of buildings and structures
as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of the International Residential Code for One and Two
Family Dwellings 2015, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof,
as if fully set out in this chapter, with the following additions, insertions,
deletions and changes:
   A.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International Plumbing
Code and replace with Illinois State Plumbing Code.
   B.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International
Electrical Code and replace with 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code.
   C.   Delete all references to the 2015 edition of the International Energy
Conservation Code and replace with the currently adopted and amended Illinois
State Energy Conservation Code.
   D.   Add climatic and geographic design criteria to Table R301.2(1). (Needed
to complete code section.)
 
          Wind Design                         Subject To Damage From
Ground                        Wind-  Seismic
Snow Load Speed   Topographic Borne  Design   Weathering Frost Line Termite
          (mph)   Effects     Debris Category            Depth
                              Zone
25        90 Gust 70          No     B        Severe     42"        Med-High
                  Sustained
 
 
Winter Design Temp Ice Barrier                                   Mean Air Temp
(Fahrenheit)       Underlayment Flood Hazards Air Freezing Index (Fahrenheit)
                   Required
-4                 Yes          Nov. 16, 2006 >1000-2000         47.6
 
Added Wind Design with Speed (mph), Special Wind Region and Wind-Borne Debris
Zone.
   E.   Delete Chapter 42 Swimming Pools Using the NEC Article 680 Swimming
Pools, Fountains, and Similar Installations, 2014. Note: Chapter 41 has been
changed to Chapter 42 in the 2015 IRC.
   F.   Delete Section 309.5 Fire Sprinklers.
   G.   Delete Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems.
   H.   Insert Section M1308 Pan and Drain Required
Add require Pan where a storage tank-type water heater, not water storage tank
or washing machine, is installed in a location where water leakage will cause
damage, there shall be installed a pan constructed of one of the following:
Galvanized steel or aluminum of not less than 0.0236 inches in thickness.
Plastic not less than 0.-36 inches in thickness.
Other approved materials.
A plastic pan shall not be installed beneath a gas fired water heater.
Pan size and drain: The pan shall be not less than 1-1/2" inches deep and shall
be of sufficient size and shape to receive dripping or condensate from the tank
or water heater. The pan shall be drained by an indirect waste pipe of not less
than 3/4 inch diameter. Piping for safety pan drains shall be of those
materials indicated in the Illinois Plumbing Code.
(1987 Code § 7-111)
CHAPTER 10: HOUSING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY CODE
Section
10-10-1: Legislative Findings
10-10-2: Title
10-10-3: Purpose And Scope
10-10-4: Definitions
10-10-5: Responsibilities Of Owners And Occupants
10-10-6: Minimum Standards For Basic Equipment And Facilities
10-10-7: Safe And Sanitary Maintenance
10-10-8: Enforcement
10-10-9: Emergencies
10-10-10: Penalty
10-10-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS:
It is hereby found that there exists and may, in the future, exist within the
City premises, dwelling units, rooming units, or parts thereof, which by reason
of their structure, equipment, sanitation, maintenance, use or occupancy,
affect or are likely to affect adversely the public health (including the
physical, mental and social well being of persons and families), safety and
general welfare. To correct and prevent the existence of such adverse
conditions, and to achieve and maintain such levels of residential
environmental quality as will protect and promote public health, safety and
general welfare, it is further found that the establishment and enforcement of
minimum housing standards are required.
(1987 Code § 11-135)
10-10-2: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the HOUSING MAINTENANCE AND
OCCUPANCY CODE OF THE CITY OF MCHENRY, hereinafter referred to as “this
chapter”.
(1987 Code § 11-138)
10-10-3: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: It is hereby declared that the purpose of this chapter is to
protect, preserve and promote the physical and mental health and social well
being of the people, to prevent and control the incidence of communicable
diseases, to reduce environmental hazards to health, to regulate privately and
publicly owned dwellings for the purpose of maintaining adequate sanitation and
public health, and to protect the safety of the people and to promote the
general welfare by legislation which shall be applicable to all dwellings now
in existence or hereafter constructed. It is further declared that the purpose
of this chapter is to ensure that the quality of housing is adequate for
protection of public health, safety and general welfare, including: safety from
fire and accidents; provision for an adequate level of maintenance;
determination of the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of
dwellings; and provision for the administration and enforcement thereof.
(1987 Code § 11-136)
   B.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall apply uniformly to the
construction, maintenance, use and occupancy of all residential buildings and
structures, where applicable, and shall apply uniformly to the alteration,
repair, equipment, use, occupancy and maintenance of all existing residential
buildings and structures, within the jurisdiction of the City, irrespective of
when or under what code or codes such buildings or structures were originally
constructed or rehabilitated.
(1987 Code § 11-137)
10-10-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
APPROVED: Approved by the local or State authority having such administrative
authority.
ASHES: The residue from the burning of combustible materials.
BUILDING: A fixed construction with walls, foundation and roof, such as a
house, factory, garage, etc.
BULK CONTAINER: Any metal garbage, rubbish and/or refuse container having a
capacity of two (2) cubic yards or greater, and which is equipped with fittings
for hydraulic and/or mechanical emptying, unloading and/or removal.
DILAPIDATED: No longer adequate for the purpose of use for which it was
originally intended.
DORMITORY: A building or a group of rooms in a building used for institutional
living and sleeping purposes by four (4) or more persons.
DWELLING: Any enclosed space wholly or partly used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating; provided, that temporary housing, as
defined in this section, shall not be classified as a dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT: A room or group of rooms located within a dwelling forming a
single habitable unit with facilities used or intended to be used by a single
family for living, sleeping, cooking and eating purposes.
EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved
by the local or State authority having such administrative authority.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, serving and nonconsumption of food. (See definitions of
refuse, rubbish, as defined in this section.)
GUEST: An individual who shares a dwelling unit in a nonpermanent status for
not more than thirty (30) days.
INFESTATION: The presence within or around a dwelling of any insects, rodents
or other pests.
LEAD BASED PAINT: Any paint containing more than the level established by the
U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission as being the “safe” level of lead in
residential paint and paint products.
MEANING OF CERTAIN WORDS: Whenever the words “dwelling”, “dwelling unit”,
“rooming units”, “premises”, “structure” are used in this chapter, they shall
be construed as though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof”.
Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, the
masculine gender includes the feminine and the feminine the masculine.
MULTIPLE DWELLING: Any dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units.
OCCUPANT: Any individual living, sleeping, cooking and eating in or having
possession of a dwelling unit or a rooming unit; except that in a dwelling
unit, a guest shall not be considered an occupant.
OWNER: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
   A.   Shall have legal title to any premises, dwelling or dwelling unit, with
or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
   B.   Shall have charge, care or control of any premises, dwelling or
dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or an executor, administrator,
trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus
representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of
this chapter and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto, to the same
extent as if he were the owner.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership,
cooperative or governmental agency.
PLUMBING: All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes,
gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water
closets, sinks, installed dishwasher, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths,
installed clothes washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other
similar supplied fixtures, and the installation thereof, together with all
connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
PREMISES: A platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land or
plot of land, either occupied or unoccupied by any dwelling or nondwelling
structure, and includes any such building, accessory structure or other
structure thereon.
PROPERLY CONNECTED: Connected in accordance with all applicable codes and
ordinances of the City of McHenry; provided, however, that the application of
this definition shall not require the alteration or replacement of any
connection in good working order and not constituting a hazard to life or
health.
REFUSE: All putrescible and nonputrescible solids (except body wastes),
including garbage, rubbish, ashes and dead animals.
REFUSE CONTAINER: A watertight container that is constructed of metal, or other
durable material impervious to rodents, that is capable of being serviced
without creating unsanitary conditions, or such other containers as have been
approved by the appropriate authority. Openings into the container, such as
covers and doors, shall be tight fitting.
RODENT HARBORAGE: Any conditions or place where rodents live, nest or seek
shelter.
RODENT PROOFING: A form of construction which will prevent the ingress or
egress of rodents to or from a given space or building, or from gaining access
to food, water or harborage. It consists of the closing and keeping closed of
every opening in foundations, basements, cellars, exterior and interior walls,
ground or first floors, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings, and other
places that may be reached and entered by rodents by climbing, burrowing or
other methods, by the use of materials impervious to rodent gnawing and other
methods approved by the Building Officer.
ROOMING HOUSE: Any dwelling other than a hotel or motel or that part of any
dwelling, containing one or more rooming units and/or one or more dormitory
rooms, and in which persons either individually or as families are housed, with
or without meals being provided.
ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used
or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking purposes.
RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of either:
   A.   Combustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, plastic containers, yard
clippings, and wood; or
   B.   Noncombustible wastes, such as metal cans, glass and crockery.
SAFETY: The condition of being reasonably free from danger and hazards which
may cause accidents or diseases.
TEMPORARY HOUSING: Any tent, trailer, mobile home or any other structure used
for human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to any other structure, or to any utility system on the
same premises.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES: Any chemical product applied on the surface of or
incorporated into any structural or decorative material which constitutes a
potential hazard to human health at acute or chronic exposure levels.
UNDEFINED WORDS: Words not specifically defined in this chapter shall have the
common definition set forth in a standard dictionary.
(1987 Code § 11-139 - 170)
10-10-5: RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS:
   A.   Premises Fit For Occupancy: No owner or other person shall occupy or
let to another person any dwelling or dwelling unit unless it and the premises
is clean, sanitary, fit for human occupancy, and comply with all applicable
legal requirements of the State of Illinois, the County of McHenry and the City
of McHenry.
(1987 Code § 11-176)
   B.   Shared Public Access Areas: Every owner of a dwelling containing two
(2) or more dwelling units shall maintain in a clean and sanitary condition the
shared or public area of the dwelling and premises thereof; every occupant
shall refrain from any conduct which contributes to the uncleanliness or
unsanitary conditions of the shared public areas.
(1987 Code § 11-177)
   C.   Occupant Maintain: Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
maintain in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling
unit and premises thereof that they occupy and control.
   D.   Rubbish: Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall store and
dispose of all their rubbish in a clean, sanitary and safe manner.
   E.   Garbage And Refuse: Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
store and dispose of all their garbage, refuse and any other organic waste
which might provide food for insects and/or rodents in a clean, sanitary, safe
manner. All garbage cans and refuse containers shall be rodentproof,
insectproof, watertight, structurally strong to withstand handling stress,
easily filled, emptied and cleaned; shall be provided with tight fitting covers
or similar closures; and shall be maintained at all times in clean sanitary
condition.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   F.   Sufficient Capacity Of Containers: The total capacity of all provided
garbage and/or refuse cans and bulk storage containers shall be sufficient to
meet the needs of the occupants of the dwelling.
(1987 Code § 1-181)
   G.   Furnishing Containers: Every owner of a dwelling containing three (3)
or more dwelling units shall supply facilities or refuse containers for the
sanitary and safe storage and/or disposal of rubbish and garbage. In the case
of a single- or two-family dwellings, it shall be the responsibility of each
occupant to furnish such facilities or refuse containers.
(1987 Code § 11-182)
   H.   Infestation Extermination: Every occupant of a dwelling containing a
single dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination of any
infestation whenever their dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
rodentproof or reasonable insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two (2) or more
units of the dwelling, or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling
containing two (2) or more dwelling units, extermination thereof shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   I.   Accumulation Causing Rodent Harborage: No occupant of a dwelling or
dwelling unit shall accumulate rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any
other materials in such a manner that may provide a rodent harborage in or
about any dwelling or dwelling unit.
(1987 Code § 11-184)
   J.   Multiple Dwelling Units Permitting Rodent Harborage: No owner of a
dwelling containing three (3) or more dwelling units shall accumulate or permit
the accumulation of rubbish, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, or any other materials
in such a manner that may provide a rodent harborage in or about the shared or
public areas of a dwelling or its premises.
(1987 Code § 11-185)
   K.   Food Accumulation For Rodents: No owner or occupant of a dwelling or
dwelling unit shall store, place or allow to accumulate any materials which may
serve as food for rodents in a site accessible to rodents.
(1987 Code § 11-186)
   L.   Heat Temperature:
      1.   From September 15 until June 1 and from six thirty o’clock (6:30)
A.M. to ten thirty o’clock (10:30) P.M., in every dwelling unit and/or rooming
unit when the control of the supplied heat is the responsibility of a person
other than the occupant, a temperature of at least sixty eight degrees
Fahrenheit (68°F) shall be maintained in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, water
closet compartments, recreation rooms, laundries and communicating corridors
immediately adjacent to a dwelling unit at a distance of thirty six inches
(36") above the floor level. A minimum temperature of sixty five degrees
Fahrenheit (65°F) shall be maintained at all other times during this period.
      2.   Failure to furnish the heat required by this subsection L shall not
constitute an offense where it is due to a breakdown of the heating plant, if
diligence is used to have such plant repaired (unless such breakdown has been
caused by a violation of this chapter), nor where it is due to strikes, to a
general shortage of fuel, to any act of the tenant who makes the complaint or
to any cause beyond the owner’s control.
(1987 Code § 11-187)
   M.   Lead Based Paint: No owner or occupant shall apply a lead based paint
to any surface in any dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming house and/or rooming
unit.
(1987 Code § 11-188)
10-10-6: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES:
No person shall occupy as owner or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements:
(1987 Code § 11-190)
   A.   Cooking Area: Every dwelling unit shall have a room or portion of a
room in which food may be prepared and/or cooked, which shall have adequate
circulation area, and which shall be equipped with the following:
      1.   A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly connected to a
water supply system which is approved by the appropriate authority and which
provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated running water
under pressure, and which is connected to a sewer system approved by the
appropriate authority.
      2.   Cabinets and/or shelves for the storage of eating, drinking, and
cooking equipment and utensils and of food that does not under ordinary summer
conditions, require refrigeration for safekeeping; and a counter or table for
food preparation; said cabinets and/or shelves and counter or table shall be of
sound construction furnished with surfaces that are easily cleanable and that
will not impart any toxic or harmful effect to food.
      3.   A stove or similar device, for cooking food, and a refrigerator, or
similar device, for the safe storage of food at temperatures less than forty
five degrees Fahrenheit (45°F) (7°C) but more than thirty two degrees
Fahrenheit (32°F) (0°C) under average maximum summer conditions, which are
properly installed with all necessary connections for safe, sanitary and
efficient operation; provided, that such stove, refrigerator and/or similar
devices need not be installed when dwelling unit is not occupied and when the
occupant is expected to provide same on occupancy, and that sufficient space
and adequate connections for the safe and efficient installation and operation
of said stove, refrigerator and/or similar devices are provided.
(1987 Code § 11-191)
   B.   Nonhabitable Room: Within every dwelling unit there shall be a
nonhabitable room which affords privacy to a person within said room and which
is equipped with a flush water closet in good working condition. Said flush
water closet shall be equipped with easily cleanable surfaces, be properly
connected to a water system that at all times provides an adequate amount of
running water under pressure to cause the water closet to be operated properly,
and shall be properly connected to a sewer system which is approved by the
appropriate authority.
(1987 Code § 11-192)
   C.   Lavatory Sink: Within every dwelling unit there shall be a lavatory
sink. Said lavatory sink may be in the same room as the flush water closet, or,
if located in another room, the lavatory sink shall be located in close
proximity to the door leading directly into the room in which said water closet
is located. The lavatory sink shall be in good working condition and properly
connected to a water supply system which is approved by the appropriate
authority and which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and
unheated running water under pressure, and which is properly connected to a
sewer system approved by the appropriate authority. Water inlets for lavatory
sinks shall be located above the overflow rim of these facilities.
(1987 Code § 11-193)
   D.   Bathing Facilities: Within every dwelling unit there shall be a room
which affords privacy to a person within said room and which is equipped with a
bathtub or shower in good working condition. Said bathtub or shower may be in
the same rooms as the flush water closet or in another room and shall be
properly connected to a water supply system which is approved by the City and
which provides at all times an adequate amount of heated and unheated water
under pressure and which is connected to a sewer system approved by the City.
Water inlets for bathtubs shall be located above the rim of these fixtures.
(1987 Code § 11-194)
10-10-7: SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE:
No person shall occupy as owner or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements:
(1987 Code § 11-200)
   A.   Construction Standards: Every foundation, roof, floor, exterior and
interior wall, ceiling, inside and outside stair, every porch, and every
appurtenance thereto, shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the loads
that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound
condition and good repair. Every inside and outside stair or step shall have
uniform risers and uniform treads.
(1987 Code § 11-201)
   B.   Stormwater Drainage: Where required, gutters, leaders and downspouts
shall be provided and maintained in good working condition so as to provide
proper drainage of stormwater.
(1987 Code § 11-202)
   C.   Rodent Control: Every dwelling, multiple dwelling, rooming house or
accessory structure and the premises on which they are located shall be
maintained in a rodent free and rodentproof condition.
      1.   All openings in the exterior walls, foundations, basements, ground
or first floors which have a one-half inch (1/2") diameter or more opening,
shall be rodentproofed in an approved manner if they are within forty eight
inches (48") of the existing exterior ground level immediately below such
openings, or if they may be reached by rodents from the ground by climbing
unguarded pipes, wires, cornices, stairs, roofs and other items, such as trees
or vines, or by burrowing.
      2.   All windows located at or near ground level used or intended to be
used for ventilation, all other openings located at or near ground level, and
all exterior doorways which might provide an entry for rodents, shall be
supplied with adequate screens or such other devices as will effectively
prevent the entrance of rodents into the structure.
      3.   All sewers, pipes, drains or conduits and openings around such pipes
and conduits shall be constructed to prevent the ingress or egress of rodents
to or from a building.
      4.   Interior floors of basements, cellars and other areas in contact
with soil shall be rodentproofed in an approved manner.
      5.   Materials stored outside the dwelling shall be stacked and elevated
so that there will be at least an eighteen inch (18") opening between the
material and the ground level so as to prevent the creation of a rodent
harborage area. No stacking or piling of material shall take place against the
exterior walls of the structure.
      6.   Any materials used for rodentproofing shall be acceptable to the
Building Enforcement Officer.
(1987 Code § 11-203)
   D.   Fencing: All fences shall be constructed in accordance with the Fence
Ordinance and shall be maintained in good condition and shall not create a
harborage for rodents. Any fence that is to be painted, shall be painted with a
nonlead base paint.
(1987 Code § 11-204)
   E.   Accessory Structures: Accessory structures present or provided by the
owner, agent or tenant occupant on the premises of a dwelling shall be
structurally sound, and be maintained in good repair and free of insects and
rodents, or such structures shall be removed from the premises. The exterior of
such structures shall be made weather resistant through the use of decay
resistant materials or the use of lead free paint or other preservatives.
(1987 Code § 11-205)
   F.   Plumbing Fixtures: Every plumbing fixture and all water and waste pipes
shall be properly installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition.
(1987 Code § 11-206)
   G.   Impervious Surfaces: Every water closet compartment, bathroom and
kitchen floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be
reasonably impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
(1987 Code § 11-207)
   H.   Discontinuance Of Services: No owner, operator or occupant shall cause
any service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this
chapter to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied
dwelling or dwelling unit let or occupied by them; except for such temporary
interruption as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in
process, or during temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is
approved by the appropriate authority.
   I.   Negligent Housing Management: No person having personal management or
control of residential real estate, whether as a legal or equitable owner of
residential real estate or as a managing agent or otherwise, shall knowingly
permit by their gross carelessness or neglect, the physical condition or
facilities of the residential real estate to become or remain so deteriorated
that the health, welfare or safety of any inhabitant or other person is
endangered or otherwise adversely affected thereby.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
10-10-8: ENFORCEMENT:
The Building Officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, and in
connection therewith, the Building Officer shall possess all of the enforcement
powers and authority conferred upon the Building Officer by this title.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
10-10-9: EMERGENCIES:
Whenever in the opinion of the Mayor or the Building Enforcement Officer,
because of the condition of the premises, immediate action is required to
protect the public health, safety or welfare, an emergency order may be issued
by the Mayor or the Building Enforcement Officer to order and require the
occupants to vacate the same forthwith, to prohibit any person from going
thereon except for the purpose of correcting or abating the emergency, and to
employ the necessary labor and materials to correct or abate the condition
which gave rise to the emergency as expeditiously as possible. The costs
incurred by the City in correcting or abating such condition shall be charged
against such land as a lien by filing a notice of claim of lien in the Office
of the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds and such costs may also be recovered in
a suit at law against the owner of said premises, together with attorney fees
and costs incurred by the City in such litigation.
(1987 Code § 11-217)
10-10-10: PENALTY:
Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the
City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(1987 Code § 11-218) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 11: ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
10-11-1: Electrical Code Adopted
10-11-2: Electrical Inspection Department
10-11-3: Licensing And Registration Of Electrical Contractors
10-11-4: Permit, Compliance Required
10-11-5: Electrical Service, Wiring And Grounding
10-11-6: Rough-In Inspections
10-11-7: Final Inspections And Certificates Of Approval
10-11-8: Annual Inspections
10-11-1: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
A certain document, copies of which are on file with the City Community
Development Department, being marked and designated the National Electrical
Code, 2014 edition NFPA 70, promulgated by the National Fire Protection
Association, and amendments thereto, are hereby adopted by reference as and for
the safe and practical standards for the installation, alteration and use of
electrical wiring, apparatus and equipment in the City; provided, however, that
where the provisions of the National Electrical Code and amendments thereto are
in conflict with the provisions of the followings sections of this chapter, or
such amendments thereof as the City may hereafter adopt, such sections and
amendments shall control.
(1987 Code § 7-124)
10-11-2: ELECTRICAL INSPECTION DEPARTMENT:
   A.   Established; Composition: There is hereby established an Electrical
Inspection Department for the regulation of the installation, alteration and
use of all electrical wiring, apparatus and equipment as provided in this
chapter. Such Electrical Inspection Department shall consist of the electrical
inspector and such other employees as may, from time to time, be provided for
by the City Council, and shall be a division of the Community Development
Department, under the supervision of such department. Such electrical inspector
shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of the rules and
regulations relating to the installation, alteration and use of electrical
equipment, as provided for in this chapter, and shall function under the
immediate supervision and control of the Director.
(1987 Code § 7-126)
   B.   Building Inspector Act As Electrical Inspector: The building inspector
shall act as the electrical inspector and shall have all of the powers and
perform all of the duties connected with that office.
(1987 Code § 7-127)
10-11-3: LICENSING AND REGISTRATION OF ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS:
All persons, including electrical contractors, as defined herein, engaged in
the business of installing or altering electric equipment shall hold a valid
electric license/registration from a community in the State of Illinois, or
master electrician license from the State of Illinois.
(1987 Code § 7-131)
10-11-4: PERMIT, COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
No electric wiring for light, heat or power shall be installed, altered or
extended in any buildings, structures or developments regulated by this title,
except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and such rules as may
be adopted and promulgated by the Building Officer under the provisions of this
chapter, and after receiving a permit.
(1987 Code § 7-123)
10-11-5: ELECTRICAL SERVICE, WIRING AND GROUNDING:
The following exceptions and modifications are found necessary to meet
conditions and shall prevail in the case of conflict thereof with any of the
provisions in the National Electrical Code:
   A.   Commercial, Industrial, Multi-Family Residence: All commercial,
industrial and multi-family residence service shall be in rigid conduit. All
interior wiring in commercial, industrial and multi- family residences shall be
in thin wall (EMT) conduit.
   B.   Detached, Single-Family Residence: Detached, single-family residence
and associated accessory structures service shall be in rigid, IMC or in thin
wall (EMT) metal conduit. All interior wiring in single-family residences shall
be in BX or in thin wall (EMT) conduit or shall be grounded NM cable.
   C.   Grounding: All metal noncurrent carrying parts of enclosures of
electrical equipment and metal boxes shall be grounded. The ground wire shall
be secured to a cold water pipe when such pipe is available. If such pipe is
not available, then the ground shall be secured to a ground rod at least eight
feet (8') in length. No ground shall be secured to any fixture or fitting. All
buildings having metal siding shall be grounded by means of two (2) ground
rods, eight feet (8') in length, located on opposite corners.
   D.   Lighting Fixtures: All lighting fixtures located above tubs and showers
shall be ground fault interrupter (GFI) protected.
   E.   Wiring: Wiring for dining rooms, kitchens, laundries and utility rooms
in all residences shall not be smaller than no. 12 AWG wire and no more than
three (3) appliance outlets shall be located on any separate individual
circuit. All furnaces, boilers, washers, dishwashers, air conditioners, wells
and sump pumps shall be wired on separate circuits of wire not smaller than no.
12 AWG.
   F.   Wiring In Existing Structures: The existing type of wiring may be
followed where additional outlets are being installed in any existing
structure. However, where a building addition is being constructed, the type of
wiring in the existing structure shall not be followed unless such existing
wiring complies with the provisions of this chapter.
   G.   Meter Sockets: Meter sockets on new single-family construction shall be
located on the side of the house closest to the source.
(1987 Code § 7-125)
10-11-6: ROUGH-IN INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Required: No electrical installation or alteration shall be covered up
or concealed before the electrical wiring, equipment and apparatus has been
inspected and approved by the electrical inspector.
   B.   Request For Inspection; Failure To Comply: Whenever an electrical
installation or alteration is ready for a rough-in inspection, a request for
such inspection shall be made to the Community Development Department at least
one full work day in advance thereof. The rough-in inspection shall be made as
soon thereafter as it is practical for the department to do so. Any electrical
installation or alteration which has been concealed or covered up in violation
of the provisions of this section shall be completely opened up and uncovered
by the owner of the premises upon the request of the electrical inspector. In
addition thereto, the initial failure to have any electrical installation or
alteration uncovered or opened for inspection shall be punishable by the
payment of the fine provided for in section 10-1-28 of this title.
(1987 Code § 7-128)
10-11-7: FINAL INSPECTIONS AND CERTIFICATES OF APPROVAL:
   A.   Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on electrical
power into any electrical wire or apparatus for temporary or for permanent
electrical service, unless a certificate of approval has first been issued for
such purpose by the Community Development Department.
   B.   Request For Inspection: When temporary or permanent electrical service
is desired, it shall be the responsibility of the electrical contractor or
other installer performing the electrical work to make a request to the
department for an inspection of the electrical work, such request to be at
least one full working day in advance of the requested inspection. No
certificate of approval for such temporary or permanent electrical service
shall be issued until after the department has completely inspected the
electrical work and until such inspection discloses that the provisions and
requirements of this chapter have been fully complied with.
   C.   Issuance Of Certificates: Certificates of approval shall be issued by
the department. One copy thereof shall be retained as part of the records of
the department. No electric utility company shall energize any temporary or
permanent electric service until it has received a copy of the aforesaid
certificate of approval.
(1987 Code § 7-129)
10-11-8: ANNUAL INSPECTIONS:
The electrical installations in all buildings and structures located in areas
that are zoned for industrial, commercial, office or multi-family dwelling
(where the dwelling consists of more than 2 units) uses shall be subject to
annual reinspections by the electrical inspector. Changes and alterations in
the electrical installations may be ordered by the electrical inspector as a
consequence of such annual inspection, where the public safety requires.
Written notice of such changes or alterations shall be given to the owner of
the premises by the Community Development Department, and such changes or
alterations shall be made within thirty (30) days after such written notice is
given. The Community Development Department shall have the power to cause the
current in any wire or conductor to be turned off wherever this becomes
necessary, in its judgment, for the protection of life, limb or property. All
changes and alterations made pursuant to such notice shall be inspected and
approved by the Community Development Department.
(1987 Code § 7-130)
CHAPTER 12: SOLAR ENERGY
Section
10-12-1: Definitions
10-12-2: Scope
10-12-3: Permit Required
10-12-4: Location; Height And Setback
10-12-5: Minimum Roof Slope
10-12-6: Low Sloped Roof Installation
10-12-7: Other Than Low Sloped Roof Installation
10-12-8: Access
10-12-9: Leakproof Components
10-12-10: Wind Pressure
10-12-11: Innovative Designs
10-12-12: Inspections, Repairs
10-12-13: Interference With Adjoining Property
10-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings,
unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
COLLECTOR: Same as solar collector.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: The Building Officer of the City, or any employee
authorized by the Building Officer to act under this chapter.
LOW SLOPE ROOF: A roof with a slope of less than four inches (4") vertically
for every twelve inches (12") horizontally, or less than thirty three
centimeters (33 cm) vertically for every meter horizontally.
REFLECTOR: Any device designed or intended to reflect the sun’s rays to a solar
collector or designed to concentrate the sun’s rays on a solar collector.
SNOW LOAD: The greatest weight of snow to be anticipated from any snowfall in
the City, to be calculated from United States Weather Bureau statistics.
SOLAR CELL: Any device designed or intended to produce electricity directly
from the energy of sunlight, without moving parts.
SOLAR COLLECTOR: Any device designed or intended to collect energy from the sun
and use that energy to heat air, other gas or liquid to be transmitted through
pipes or ducts for heating or energy purposes. A window letting sunlight
directly into a room to be heated is not a solar collector.
SOLAR COMPONENT: Any solar collector, solar engine, reflector, pipe, duct or
other component of a system using solar collectors or solar engines.
SOLAR ENERGY ENGINE: Any device designed or intended to produce motion from
heat generated by sunlight; such motion may be by turning a wheel, pulley or
gear, or by moving a shaft back and forth. The motion may be produced by a
sterling engine, a steam engine, or any mechanical device using heat and light
from the sun.
SOLAR PANEL: A solar collector in the shape of a panel, regardless of the
thickness of the panel.
WIND LOAD: Pressure of wind against any object or structure, such as a solar
collector.
(1987 Code § 7-216; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
10-12-2: SCOPE:
This chapter shall apply to all solar collectors and all component parts of a
solar system using solar collectors, installed in the City. Solar energy
engines are also regulated by this chapter, whenever such an engine or any part
of such engine is mounted on a roof. This chapter shall cover not only solar
collectors on new buildings being constructed but also solar collectors on
existing buildings. No such solar collector shall be installed without
complying with the terms of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 7-217)
10-12-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No solar collector or solar engine shall be installed or constructed without a
permit having been issued for the solar collector. Applications shall be
accompanied by drawings or blueprints showing the locations and clearances from
the roof of all existing and proposed solar collectors, ducts, pipes, controls
and other components, including those parts of the system to be installed on
the roof or above the roof and those parts of the system to be installed
elsewhere in the building. Methods for installing pipes through the roof shall
be indicated. The slope of the roof shall be indicated. The application shall
be accompanied by specifications for any manufactured components to be
installed and shall contain a complete description of any components to be
fabricated on or off the site for the installation.
(1987 Code § 7-218)
10-12-4: LOCATION; HEIGHT AND SETBACK:
All solar collectors shall be installed either on the roof of the main building
or shall be otherwise incorporated into and made an integral part of the main
building itself. The maximum height and setback regulations of the City Zoning
Ordinance shall be observed.
(1987 Code § 7-219)
10-12-5: MINIMUM ROOF SLOPE:
No solar collector, solar engine or accessories, pipes or ducts for any solar
collector or solar engine shall be installed on any roof having a slope of less
than two percent (<2%) (1/4 of an inch per foot or 2 centimeters per meter).
(1987 Code § 7-220)
10-12-6: LOW SLOPED ROOF INSTALLATION:
Installations on low sloped roofs shall comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Clearances: All collectors, reflectors, engines, pipes, ducts and other
components shall have sufficient clearance between the roof and the
installation to permit roof repairs to be made and to permit circulation of air
to avoid constant dampness, considering the configuration and location of the
solar components and the roof. A space of two feet (2') or sixty one
centimeters (61 cm) shall be adequate clearance in all instances; provided,
that a smaller space shall be permitted if it can be demonstrated that all
normal repairs and resurfacings of the roof may be made under the proposed
clearances. The clearances required herein shall not apply to vertical pipes
installed through the roof surface or installed outside of the outside walls to
provide access to solar components.
   B.   Load Capacity: No solar component shall be installed on any roof unless
the roof has sufficient capacity to hold the weight of the roof, the weight of
the solar components and the anticipated snow load. The weight of fluid to be
used in any panels, pipes or other components will be included in the
calculations of load. In determining the anticipated snow load, the effect of
the solar components on causing drifting shall be considered. If the rated
capacity of the roof structure is at least one and one-half (11/2) times the
weight of the roof components, the solar components and the anticipated snow
load, the roof structure shall be deemed to have sufficient load capacity.
   C.   Protection From Drifting Or Sliding Snow: On any installation where
solar collectors, solar engines and reflectors may cause snow to drift on a
roof, provisions shall be made by snow fences, chutes or other barriers to
prevent snowdrifts from accumulating on the roof. Wherever a solar collector,
or other solar component may cause snow to slide, the part of the roof where
the snow may accumulate as a result of sliding shall have sufficient capacity
to hold the weight of the snow anticipated to accumulate because of sliding.
Wherever the location and slope of a solar collector or other solar component
may cause snow to slide onto any doorway, sidewalk or other place used by
pedestrian traffic, protection in the form of chutes, awnings or other devices
shall be provided to prevent any snow from sliding onto any such doorway,
sidewalk or other place.
   D.   Roof Penetration: Wherever any pipe, duct or other solar component
penetrates the surface of a roof, the roof shall be protected from leaks in the
manner provided for any stack, pipe or conduit penetrating the roof surface.
   E.   Roof Preparation: Before any solar component is installed, the roof
shall be inspected and any repairs and maintenance work needed shall be done to
put the roof in leakproof condition.
(1987 Code § 7-221)
10-12-7: OTHER THAN LOW SLOPED ROOF INSTALLATION:
All of the requirements for installations on low sloped roofs shall apply to
installations on roofs other than low sloped roofs, except that in lieu of
clearance from the roof, a solar panel may be attached flush to the roof. Such
solar panel may be an integral part of the roof, providing a waterproof cover,
with a waterproof seal between the panel and the rest of the roof. If such
panel is not made an integral part of the roof but is attached flush with the
roof, the top and sides of the panel shall be sealed where they meet the roof
surface or shingles, to prevent water from getting under the panel.
(1987 Code § 7-222)
10-12-8: ACCESS:
Any roof over three (3) stories above the ground shall be provided with a means
of access other than an outside ladder against an outside wall. No solar
components shall be installed in a location so as to interfere with walkways on
any roof.
(1987 Code § 7-223)
10-12-9: LEAKPROOF COMPONENTS:
Each solar component which may contain any liquid or gas shall be designed and
constructed to prevent the leakage of any liquid or gas under any combination
of temperature and pressure possible either during use or when the system is
not in use.
(1987 Code § 7-224)
10-12-10: WIND PRESSURE:
Each solar collector, solar panel and solar engine shall be securely anchored
to withstand the maximum wind pressure anticipated, considering the effects, if
any, of the solar components in channeling wind, and without considering the
weight of any liquid in the components.
(1987 Code § 7-225)
10-12-11: INNOVATIVE DESIGNS:
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as prohibiting any innovative
design. Any design not specifically permitted by this chapter may be installed,
upon a showing that the proposed system of solar components will achieve the
safety objectives and structural objectives of the provisions of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 7-227)
10-12-12: INSPECTIONS, REPAIRS:
Each solar collector, reflector, solar engine and all solar components shall be
inspected at least once each year. Such inspections shall be at the owner’s
expense, and may be made by any qualified person selected by the owner. The
inspection shall include looking for any evidence of dampness on the roof due
to shading, lack of air circulation or leaks, and shall include examining the
structural parts securing all components. A certified report of such inspection
shall be filed annually by, or on behalf of, the owner/applicant with the
Building Officer on or before March 1 of each year.
(1987 Code § 7-226)
10-12-13: INTERFERENCE WITH ADJOINING PROPERTY:
Nothing herein contained nor any permit issued hereunder, shall be constructed
to restrict or limit the use and development of any adjoining or other
premises.
(1987 Code § 7-228)
CHAPTER 13: FENCES
Section
10-13-1: Permit To Erect; Compliance Required
10-13-2: Required Fencing Within Railroad Right-Of-Way
10-13-3: General Standards
10-13-4: Residentially Zoned Lot Standards
10-13-5: Nonresidentially Zoned Lot Standards
10-13-6: Dangerous Or Encroaching Fences
10-13-1: PERMIT TO ERECT; COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
   A.   Requirements: No fence shall be erected in the City unless a permit is
obtained in advance and unless such fence is erected in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter ninety (90) days after such permit is issued. An
accurate sketch showing the proposed location of the fence on the premises
shall be furnished to the Department of Community and Economic Development at
the time application is made for the permit to erect a fence. No fence permit
shall be required for the installation of no more than two (2) sections of
fencing used for decorative or landscape purposes only with a maximum height
not to exceed forty two inches (42").
   B.   Fees: Fees for residential and nonresidential fences shall be as
established in section
10-1-4 of this title.
   C.   Relief From Restrictions -- Nonresidential: Applications for
nonresidential fence permits that require relief from restrictions shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator. Upon the Zoning Administrator’s
determination that the application is complete, according to applicable
requirements and City policies, the Zoning Administrator prepare a report and
schedule the item for consideration by City Council. The City Council shall
take action in the form of approval, approval with conditions, or denial.
   D.   Relief From Restrictions -- Residential: Applications for residential
fence permits that require relief from restricts may be reviewed and approved
administratively. The Zoning Administrator will review and approve
administrative variations for residential fence permits that meet the following
standards:
      1.   A complete application has been filed with the Zoning Administrator;
      2.   A notice has been delivered via certified mail, return receipt
requested, to adjacent property owners that are abutting or across a public
right-of-way; and
      3.   a.   No written objections have been received. If any noticed
property owner files a written objection to the administrative variation within
fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of such notice or if the Zoning
Administrator believes approval of the request would create an adverse
condition, the administrative variation shall be denied.
         b.   If denied, the property owner may appeal the decision to be
considered by the City Council. Other procedures and requirements shall be as
provided for in section
10-13-1C1 and
10-13-1C2.
(1987 Code § 7-141; amd. Ord. 20-32, 8-17-2020; Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022)
10-13-2: REQUIRED FENCING WITHIN RAILROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY:
Hereafter, no occupancy permit shall be issued for or in connection with a
residential dwelling consisting of two (2) or more dwelling units whose
premises abuts upon a railroad right-of-way, unless the owner thereof
constructs a chainlink fence at least six feet (6') in height along the entire
length of the common boundary line between the premises and said railroad
right-of-way.
(1987 Code § 7-142)
10-13-3: GENERAL STANDARDS:
In addition to the standards prescribed in the following sections of this
chapter, the following standards shall be followed in connection with all
fences:
   A.   Fence To Face Interior Of Premises: All fence posts and supporting
fence members shall be erected so that after the fence is constructed they will
face to the interior of the premises for which the fence permit is issued.
   B.   Prohibited Fences: Electrified fences, snow fences, chicken wire, hog
and farm-style fences are prohibited.
   C.   Stone, Masonry Or Concrete Fences: No stone, masonry or concrete fence
shall be constructed unless it is supported by a foundation and footing which
shall extend at least forty two inches (42") below the finished grade of the
ground on both sides of the fence.
   D.   Nonresidential Sport Venues: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed to restrict or limit the height of chainlink fencing for the
enclosure of nonresidential sport venues, such as tennis courts, baseball
diamond backstops, etc.
(1987 Code § 7-143)
10-13-4: RESIDENTIALLY ZONED LOT STANDARDS:
The following standards shall apply to any site used for residential purposes:
   A.   Front And Corner Side Yards: No fence shall be installed closer than
the required front or corner side yard setback established by the zoning
district, except as follows:
      1.   Split rail, picket and wrought iron style fences may be installed in
a required front yard so long as the fence does not exceed fifty percent (50%)
opacity and the height of said fence does not exceed forty eight inches (48");
      2.   Any style fence may be installed in a corner side yard; provided,
that the maximum height of said fence shall not exceed seventy two inches
(72"), is located no closer than five feet (5') from a corner side lot line,
and providing that a clear line of sight for pedestrians and vehicles is
maintained.
   B.   Through-Lots (Double Frontage Lots):
   1.   Any fencing greater than fifty percent (50%) opacity may be installed
in a required front yard of a through lot; provided:
      a.   Said yard shall not provide a means of vehicular access to the site;
and
      b.   Maximum height of fencing shall not exceed seventy two inches (72').
      2.   Any fencing greater than fifty percent (50%) opacity may be
installed in a required front yard of a through lot; provided:
         a.   Said yard shall not provide a means of vehicular access to the
site; and
         b.   Maximum height of fencing shall not exceed seventy two inches
(72'); and
         c.   Is located a minimum of five feet (5') from the street lot line.
   C.   Side And Rear Yards: Fences in side and rear yards shall not exceed
seventy two inches (72") in height, except that where a residential lot abuts
any nonresidential lot, a fence shall not exceed ninety six inches (96") in
height.
   D.   Obstructions: No fence shall obstruct the clear view of vehicular
traffic using any abutting streets or public ways.
   E.   Fence Materials
      1.   Permitted Fences. Fences shall only be constructed of the following
materials:
         a.   Wood or simulated wood;
         b.   Wrought iron or simulated wrought iron;
         c.   Decorative brick or stone;
         d.   Masonry or stucco wall;
         e.   PVC; or
         f.   Chain link
      2.   Prohibited Fences. The following fences are prohibited:
         a.   Chicken wire, barbed wire, welded mesh wire and electrically
charged wire fences.
         b.   Snow fences, except for exclusive control of snow between
November 1 and March 31 and as authorized by the Zoning Administrator for
special events or construction sites.
         c.   Fences made of solid plywood, scrap lumber, temporary fencing and
similar noncustomary materials.
         d.   Fences on any portion of any public right-of-way, except fences
erected by a governmental entity.
         e.   All other noncustomary materials at the determination of the
Zoning Administrator.
   F.   Chainlink Fencing: Chainlink fencing must be installed knuckle-side up.
The use of spikes, broken glass or other sharp or pointed instruments or
materials intended or likely to cause injury to any person coming into contact
therewith is prohibited.
(1987 Code § 7-144) (amd. Ord. 21-2, 1-18-2021; Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022; Ord. 23-
53, 10-2-2023)
10-13-5: NONRESIDENTIALLY ZONED LOT STANDARDS:
The following standards shall be followed in connection with fences constructed
upon premises used for nonresidential purposes:
   A.   Front And Corner Side Yards: No fence shall be installed closer than
the required front or corner side yard setback established by the zoning
district, except as follows:
      1.   Split rail fences may be installed in a front or corner side yard;
provided, that the maximum height of said fence shall not exceed seventy two
inches (72");
      2.   A fence in a corner side yard may be located no closer than fifteen
feet (15') from a corner side lot line, except where a corner side yard abuts
another corner side yard, the fence may be located no closer than five feet
(5') from the corner side lot line.
   B.   Height: No fence shall exceed ninety six inches (96") in height from
the ground level.
   C.   Use Of Barbed Wire: The use of barbed wire is permitted only at heights
in excess of seventy two inches (72") above the ground level and all barbed
wire supporting arms may either slope inward, toward the premises for which the
fence permit is issued, or outward, providing the barbed wire fence is over
seventy two inches (72") in height, and that no part of the arm or barbed wire
extends beyond the property line.
   D.   Chainlink Fencing: Chainlink fencing may be installed with or without
the knuckle-side up. Other than the installation of barbed wire per the
regulations of subsection C of this section, the use of spikes, broken glass or
other sharp or pointed instruments or materials intended or likely to cause
injury to any person coming into contact therewith is prohibited.
(1987 Code § 7-145)
10-13-6: DANGEROUS OR ENCROACHING FENCES:
It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or person in custody of any
premises in the City having a fence thereon, to permit such fence in a state or
condition of any such disrepair which is liable to cause injury to any person
or to property, or which is liable to collapse, or which encroaches upon or
leans upon the premises of another. If one or more sections of a fence and/or
posts are removed because of damage, disrepair or otherwise, the sections and/
or posts must be replaced with a fence similar in style, appearance and height
consistent with the fencing immediately adjacent to, on either side of, the
piece being replaced so as to have a consistent line of fence.
(1987 Code § 7-146)
CHAPTER 14: MOVING BUILDINGS
Section
10-14-1: Permit Required; Application
10-14-2: Approval Of Permit; Fee
10-14-3: Bond Required
10-14-4: Lights And Warnings
10-14-5: Utility Interference
10-14-6: Fire Alarm Wire Interference
10-14-1: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION:
No person shall move any building on, through or over any street, alley,
sidewalk or other public place in the City without having obtained a permit
therefor from the City. Applications for such permits shall be made in writing
to the City and shall state thereon the proposed route and the number of days
it is intended that the building should occupy any portion of any street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place.
(1987 Code § 7-161)
10-14-2: APPROVAL OF PERMIT; FEE:
Upon the approval of the intended route by the City, a fee of two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for each day, or fraction thereof, that it is intended that
the building shall occupy any such portion of any such public place shall be
paid to the City and the permit will be issued.
(1987 Code § 7-162)
10-14-3: BOND REQUIRED:
Every person applying for a permit under this chapter shall submit with their
application a cash bond or bond with a lawful corporate surety to be approved
by the City, conditioned on their compliance with all the provisions of this
chapter, and agreeing to pay and holding the City harmless from any claim which
may be made against it by reason of the occupation of any street, sidewalk,
alley or other public place by the building or structure moved.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
10-14-4: LIGHTS AND WARNINGS:
Whenever a street or alley is blocked by a house or structure which is being
moved, warnings to that effect shall be placed by the Police Department so as
to warn vehicles and persons from entering that portion of the street blocked.
The person moving any building through the streets shall keep warning signs or
lights on the building at night so as to guard against any person or vehicle
from colliding with it.
(1987 Code § 7-164)
10-14-5: UTILITY INTERFERENCE:
Whenever it shall be necessary to interfere with wires or cables of a public
utility in moving a building, the terms of any special or franchise ordinance
governing shall apply and the bond therein specified shall be given. If no such
terms apply, then the City shall estimate the expense of fixing the wires and
the bond shall be given to cover this.
(1987 Code § 7-165)
10-14-6: FIRE ALARM WIRE INTERFERENCE:
When any moving building shall approach any fire alarm wire or pole which shall
be endangered by the removal of such building, it shall be the duty of the
mover to notify the Chief of the Fire Department at least six (6) hours before
reaching such wire or pole so that they may be removed or cared for by the
authorities of the Municipality.
(1987 Code § 7-166)
CHAPTER 15: PARABOLIC DISH TYPE ANTENNAS
Section
10-15-1: Defined
10-15-2: Residential Property
10-15-3: Nonresidential Property
10-15-4: Application Fees
10-15-1: DEFINED:
Parabolic or dish type communication antennas, as used herein, shall mean any
circular or similar dish shaped transmitting or receiving antenna for
communications or for transmitting or receiving television signals from a
satellite.
(1987 Code § 7-181)
10-15-2: RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
   A.   No Permit Required: No permit shall be required for the installation
and operation of a parabolic or dish type antenna where such antenna is totally
enclosed within a residential building or where such antenna is one meter (1 m)
or less in diameter and meets all of the following requirements:
      1.   The maximum height does not exceed thirty five feet (35') as
measured in accordance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance applicable
to the zoning district classification of the subject property.
      2.   Shall not be located in a front or side yard of the subject property
as such yards are defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
      3.   Shall comply with the remainder of the setback provisions applicable
to such property as provided for by the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
   B.   Permit Required: No parabolic or dish type antenna which is not totally
enclosed within a building or which, if not so enclosed, is greater than one
meter (1 m) in diameter shall be installed until and unless an application for
a construction permit has been filed with the City and approved by the
Community Development Department. No such application shall be approved unless
the construction plans and specifications accompanying said application shall
comply with the following requirements:
      1.   The manufacturer’s installation and operational manual, or a copy
thereof, shall be filed with the application.
      2.   Said antenna shall be installed and operated in accordance with the
specifications contained in the manufacturer’s manual; provided, however, that
such installation and operation shall otherwise comply with the terms and
provisions contained in this chapter.
      3.   The maximum height of the installation from ground level at the site
shall not exceed fifteen feet (15').
      4.   The antenna shall not be located in any front or side yard as such
yards are defined for the subject property according to the terms and
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
      5.   The antenna and pertinent structures in connection therewith shall
comply with the minimum setback requirements for the subject property as
provided in the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
      6.   The parabolic or dish type antenna shall not be in excess of ten
feet (10') in diameter.
      7.   Such antenna shall be mounted directly upon the ground; the
installation or mounting of such antenna on any roof or tower or similar form
of structural support is hereby prohibited.
      8.   Such antenna shall be screened from the public view by a wood or
masonry fence or shrubs having a minimum height of six feet (6').
(1987 Code § 7-182)
10-15-3: NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTY:
   A.   No Permit Required: No permit shall be required for the installation
and operation of any parabolic or dish type antenna in a Nonresidential Zone
within the City if such antenna is either fully enclosed within the building
structure or, if not so enclosed, is one meter (1 m) in diameter or less in
size and otherwise complies with the height and setback requirements for such
property as provided in the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
   B.   Permit Required: No such antenna whose diameter exceeds one meter (1 m)
and which is not wholly enclosed within a building shall be installed and
operated within the City unless and until an application for a permit has been
filed with the City and approved by the Community Development Department. No
permit shall be issued for such antenna unless the following requirements are
met:
      1.   The manufacturer’s installation and operational manual, or a copy
thereof, shall be filed with the application.
      2.   Said antenna shall be installed and operated in accordance with the
specifications contained in the manufacturer’s manual; provided, however, that
such installation and operation shall otherwise comply with the terms and
provisions contained in this chapter.
      3.   The maximum height of the installation from ground level at the site
shall not exceed fifteen feet (15').
      4.   The antenna shall not be located in any front or side yard as such
yards are defined for the subject property according to the terms and
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
      5.   The antenna and pertinent structures in connection therewith shall
comply with the minimum setback requirements for the subject property as
provided in the Zoning Ordinance of the City.
      6.   All the terms and provisions of the Building Code of the City are
met.
(1987 Code § 7-183)
10-15-4: APPLICATION FEES:
Application fees shall be as established in section
10-1-4 of this title.
(1987 Code § 7-184)
CHAPTER 16: RESIDENTIAL TEARDOWN SITES AND
INFILL PROPERTIES
Section
10-16-1: Applicability
10-16-2: Definitions
10-16-3: Design Guidelines
10-16-4: Teardown Committee Established
10-16-5: Duties Of Teardown Committee
10-16-6: Application To Appear Before Committee; Fee
10-16-7: Review Process
10-16-8: Appeals
10-16-9: Landmark Commission Access For Salvage Purposes
10-16-10: Perimeter Fencing
10-16-11: Tree Removal Fee
10-16-12: Violation; Penalty
10-16-1: APPLICABILITY:
All residential teardown sites and infill parcels that meet one of the
conditions below are exempt from sections
10-16-4 through
10-16-8 of this chapter:
   A.   The proposed development falls within twenty five percent (25%) lot
coverage of the adjoining homes.
   B.   A lot of record with recorded architectural guidelines written in an
annexation agreement that is still active.
(1987 Code § 7-191)
10-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
herein described:
ADJOINING PROPERTIES: Parcel of real estate abutting or across a street or
alley from any boundary of the property affected by the application.
DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT: The Community Development Department of the City of
McHenry.
INFILL PARCEL: Residentially zoned property that is vacant, underutilized, or
contains a building that has been unoccupied for a minimum of ten (10) years.
The parcel’s boundaries shall have remained consistent for a minimum of ten
(10) years.
LOT COVERAGE: The portion of the lot that is occupied by a principal building
and a detached garage where applicable, expressed as a percentage of total lot
area.
TEARDOWN SITE: Residentially zoned property having an existing older residence
on it, which will be razed and removed from the site so that a new residential
building can be constructed in its place.
(1987 Code § 7-192)
10-16-3: DESIGN GUIDELINES:
The Design Guidelines for Residential Teardowns and Infill Parcels, prepared by
the City of McHenry Community Development Department and bearing a date of
August 2005, is hereby adopted by reference.
(1987 Code § 7-193)
10-16-4: TEARDOWN COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED:
A Teardown Committee, consisting of five (5) members, shall be charged with
reviewing the demolition plans, site layout and all building plans for the
exterior of a new home on a teardown site or infill parcel. The committee shall
include:
   A.   The Council member then holding office in the ward in which the
demolition/construction is proposed;
   B.   The Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or their
designee;
   C.   The Chairperson of the Landmark Commission, or their designee;
   D.   One staff member from the Community Development Department; and
   E.   A member of the public, appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
10-16-5: DUTIES OF TEARDOWN COMMITTEE:
The Teardown Committee is charged with reviewing the demolition plans, site
layout and building plans for the exterior of a new home on a teardown site or
infill parcel. The committee shall review said plans for:
   A.   Conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Conformance with the Design Guidelines for Residential Teardowns and
Infill Parcels.
   C.   Compatibility with the existing characteristics of the site and
surrounding area.
   D.   Compatibility with the architecture style and character of existing
buildings along the same street.
   E.   Conformance with the goals and objectives of the Official Comprehensive
Plan, the Downtown Plan, and the Historic Preservation Plan of the City.
(1987 Code § 7-196)
10-16-6: APPLICATION TO APPEAR BEFORE COMMITTEE; FEE:
Applications to appear before the Teardown Committee shall be on forms provided
by the City. Every application shall include as a minimum, the items indicated
on the application, and a filing fee of one hundred seventy five dollars
($175.00).
(1987 Code § 7-197)
10-16-7: REVIEW PROCESS:
   A.   Submittal; Meeting Date: Upon receipt of six (6) copies of a completed
original application to appear before the Teardown Committee, a date shall be
established for a public meeting and the copies of the application shall be
forwarded to the members of the Teardown Committee.
   B.   Notice Of Commencement Of Demolition Or Construction: The applicant
shall cause notice of the proposed demolition or construction:
      1.   Within seven (7) days after submitting a completed application to
appear before the Teardown Committee, the applicant must provide notice of the
pending demolition or construction, by certified mail, return receipt, to the
owners of all properties directly abutting the site or across a street, alley
or other public way. A list of these property owners shall be submitted with
the application, and must be approved by the City prior to mailing. Current
ownership (taxpayer) information can be obtained at the McHenry County
Assessor’s Office, 667 Ware Road, Woodstock, Illinois 60098, (815)334-4290.
Postal return receipts (white mailing receipts and green return cards) from the
certified mailing shall be provided to the Development Department within
fourteen (14) days after said mailing occurs.
      2.   Within seven (7) days after submitting a completed application to
appear before the Teardown Committee, the applicant must post the subject
property, in a prominent place, with a sign announcing such commencement. The
size, shape, color and message of such sign shall be as provided by the
Development Department. Such sign shall include notice that the rules and
regulations applicable to demolition and construction work are available at the
Development Department. Such sign shall be maintained on the subject property
until all work on the subject property has been completed and approved, or
until removal of the sign is approved by the Director of the Community
Development Department.
      3.   No demolition or construction on a teardown site or infill parcel
shall occur until thirty (30) days after the notice requirements of this
chapter have been fulfilled or an application is approved by the Teardown
Committee, whichever occurs last.
   C.   Public Meeting: The Teardown Committee shall hold a public meeting to
consider the application. No meeting shall be held in the absence of a quorum,
which shall consist of three (3) members of the committee. During the meeting,
an applicant may present witnesses to speak on behalf of their project and the
committee shall have the right to question the applicant and any witnesses.
   D.   Teardown Committee Decisions: The Teardown Committee shall render a
decision on an application, passed by a majority of its members in attendance,
at the close of the public meeting. The committee shall approve, approve with
conditions or deny an application based on the criteria herein. The committee
may not defer voting on any application for more than one meeting unless the
applicant agrees to any further postponement. Applications approved, approved
with conditions or denied shall be forwarded to the Development Department and
kept on file.
   E.   Resubmission: No application that has been denied by the Teardown
Committee shall be resubmitted within sixty (60) days of the date of denial,
except on the grounds of new factual evidence or a change in conditions found
to be valid by the Teardown Committee.
(1987 Code § 7-198)
10-16-8: APPEALS:
Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the Teardown Committee may appeal to
the City Council.
   A.   Notice Of Appeal: A notice of appeal shall be filed with the
Development Department within thirty (30) days of the decision being appealed.
The notice shall include the name, address and telephone number of the person
filing the appeal, the address of the property affected by the decision being
appealed, identification of the section of this chapter governing the decision
being appealed, a statement of the grounds upon which the appeal is based, the
reason given by the Teardown Committee for the decision, a summary of factual
evidence upon which the appeal is based, and all plans and specifications of
the use affected by the decision being appealed.
   B.   Stay Of Proceedings: The filing of a notice of appeal shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from.
   C.   Hearing And Action: Upon receipt, the Development Department shall
transmit the notice of appeal and the complete record of the decision to the
City Council. The Council shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing on the
appeal and shall give a minimum of ten (10) days’ notice to the party filing
the notice.
   D.   Approval Criteria For Appeals: The Council shall reverse the order
appealed only if it finds that the decision appealed: 1) was arbitrary or
capricious; or 2) was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact; or 3)
constituted an abuse of discretion; or 4) was based on erroneous interpretation
of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 7-199)
10-16-9: LANDMARK COMMISSION ACCESS FOR SALVAGE PURPOSES:
Prior to the demolition of any structure on a teardown site or infill parcel,
the property owner shall grant to the City Landmark Commission permission to
access such structures for the purpose of salvaging items that may be of
historical significance. These items may be placed into a museum for display
purposes or sold to raise funds for historical preservation activities in the
City.
(1987 Code § 7-200)
10-16-10: PERIMETER FENCING:
   A.   Requirements: If a permit issued by the City authorizes demolition or
construction of a new structure, then the applicant shall install a six foot
(6') chainlink fence around the perimeter of the structure under construction,
around the perimeter of the entire site, or around the perimeter of adjacent
structures concurrently under construction, and such installation shall be in a
location and manner approved by the Development Department. The fencing shall
be installed not more than seven (7) days, nor less than four (4) days before
commencement of any work on the subject property, including mass grading and
the installation of site utilities, pursuant to any permit issued by the City.
Such fencing shall remain in place until a certificate of occupancy is issued
for the structure. The location of the perimeter fencing may be changed during
the construction period with the approval of the development department. “No
Trespassing” signs shall be mounted on the fencing in conspicuous locations
around the site.
   B.   Gates Closed, Locked: Any gate in a perimeter fence must be closed at
all times, except to allow ingress and egress to and from the site. Such gate
must be locked at all times, other than permitted hours of construction, and at
any other time when no work is being performed on the site, for example Sunday
or holidays.
   C.   Additional Fencing: Fencing, as provided in this section, shall also be
required around any activity, whether a building permit is required or not,
where construction or landscaping materials are stored or stockpiled.
   D.   Tree Fencing: In addition to perimeter fencing as required in this
section, the permit applicant shall cause safety fencing to be installed around
every tree in the parkway abutting the subject property. Such tree fencing
shall be located, as far as feasible, at the dripline of the tree, whether on
public or private property; provided, however, that this subsection shall not
be construed or applied to authorize placement of tree fencing on private
property not owned by the applicant, unless proper permission for such tree
fencing has been secured from the property owner by the applicant. If placement
of tree fencing is not feasible at the dripline of the tree, then such fencing
shall be installed in a location approved by the Development Department.
   E.   Notification Of Violation; Stop Work Order: When a violation of this
section is observed, the permittee, general contractor or property owner shall
be notified promptly and shall correct the violation within two (2) hours of
receiving notice thereof. If the violation is not corrected, the City shall
have the right, but not an obligation, to correct the violation. The costs and
fees associated with such corrective action shall be charged to the permittee
or property owner, and the City may place a lien on the property to collect
such costs. The City shall also have the right to issue an immediate stop work
order applicable to the site until compliance is achieved and/or the costs,
fees or fines are paid.
(1987 Code § 7-203)
10-16-11: TREE REMOVAL FEE:
A fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per inch caliper shall be paid at the time of
permit issuance, for any tree having a caliper of ten inches (10") or more,
measured four inches (4") from the ground, that is removed from a teardown or
infill site. The fine for removing any tree not specified on an approved permit
shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) for every inch caliper.
(1987 Code § 7-204)
10-16-12: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
   B.   Issuance Of Certificate Of Occupancy: No certificate of occupancy shall
be issued for any construction undertaken in conjunction with the provisions of
this chapter until such time that all penalties and fines have been resolved to
the satisfaction of the Director of the Community Development Department.
(1987 Code § 7-207) (amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 17: STORM DRAIN CONSTRUCTION
Section
10-17-1: Drainage Required
10-17-2: Inspection And Approval
10-17-3: Rain Barrels
10-17-1: DRAINAGE REQUIRED:
Roofs, paved areas, yards, courts and courtyards shall be drained into a storm
sewer system or a combined sewer system where such systems are available.
(1987 Code § 7-241)
10-17-2: INSPECTION AND APPROVAL:
All storm drain construction, including connection to the Municipal storm sewer
system, shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the Director of
Public Works, and no installation shall be covered in such manner as to prevent
reasonable inspection until forty eight (48) hours after notice has been given
to the Director of Public Works that such construction is ready for inspection.
(1987 Code § 7-242)
10-17-3: RAIN BARRELS:
   A.   Definitions: The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall
have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context:
COLLECTING STRUCTURE: A home or garage that possesses a rooftop drainage
system.
FRONT YARD: For the purpose of this section only, the front yard is the
property from the front of the residence to the street.
RAIN BARREL: A manufactured container designed to capture and disperse
rainwater from the rooftop of a collecting structure. Underground cisterns and
rain gardens do not fall under the definition of rain barrels and are not
addressed by this section.
   B.   General Standards:
      1.   Location: Rain barrels shall not be connected to any downspout that
is in the front yard of a residence. Rain barrels shall not be more than two
feet (2') away from the collecting structure.
      2.   Number and Capacity: The maximum capacity of a rain barrel shall not
exceed fifty-five (55) gallons. Rain barrels shall be directly connected to the
downspout. Two (2) rain barrels may be interconnected.
      3.   Mosquito Barrier: All rain barrels shall be equipped with a mosquito
proof screen covering any open holes in the rain barrel.
      4.   Height: Rain barrels may be elevated. The maximum height for the
bottom of a rain barrel is three feet (3') above grade.
      5.   Nonconforming Rain Barrels: Damaged or inoperable rain barrels shall
be replaced or removed.
(Ord. 22-22, 4-5-2022)
CHAPTER 18: CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTIES
Section
10-18-1: Abatement Of Chronic Nuisance Property
10-18-2: Definitions
10-18-3: Remedy
10-18-4: Abatement Of Nuisance
10-18-5: Procedure
10-18-6: Commencement Of Action; Burden Of Proof
10-18-7: Emergency Closing Procedure
10-18-1: ABATEMENT OF CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY:
   A.   Violation: Any certain property within the City that becomes a chronic
nuisance property is in violation of this chapter and is subject to its
remedies. (1987 Code § 7-256)
   B.   Persons In Violation: Any person in charge who permits property under
their ownership or control to be a public nuisance property shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to its remedies.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
10-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CHRONIC NUISANCE PROPERTY: Property upon which two (2) or more of the behaviors
listed below have occurred during any one hundred eighty (180) day period, as a
result of any two (2) separate factual events that have been independently
investigated by any law enforcement agency unless expressly permitted by this
chapter.
   A.   Disorderly conduct as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/26-1.
   B.   Unlawful use of weapons as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
24-1 et seq.
   C.   Mob action as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/25-1.
   D.   Discharge of a firearm as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
24-1.2 and 1.5.
   E.   Gambling as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/28-1.
   F.   Possession, manufacture or delivery of controlled substances as defined
in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/401 et seq.
   G.   Assault or battery, or any related offense, as defined in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/12-1 et seq.
   H.   Sexual abuse or related offenses as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1.150 et seq.
   I.   Public indecency as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-30
et seq.
   J.   Prostitution as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-14 et
seq.
   K.   Criminal damage to property as defined in 720 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-1 et seq.
   L.   Possession, cultivation, manufacture or delivery of cannabis, as
defined in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq.
   M.   Illegal consumption or possession of alcohol as defined in 235 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1 et seq.
   N.   Violation of any City ordinance or State of Illinois Statute
controlling or regulating the sale or use of alcoholic beverages.
CONTROL: The ability to regulate, restrain, dominate, counteract or govern
conduct that occurs on that property.
OWNER: Any person, agent, firm or corporation having any legal or equitable
interest in the property. Owner includes, but is not limited to: a) a mortgagee
in possession in whom is vested: 1) all or part of the legal title to the
property; or 2) all or part of the beneficial ownership and the right to the
present use and enjoyment of the premises; or b) an occupant who can control
what occurs on the property.
PERMIT: To suffer, allow, consent to, acquiesce by failure to prevent, or
expressly ascent or agree to the doing of an act.
PERSON: Any natural person, association, partnership or corporation capable of
owning or using property in the City.
PERSON IN CHARGE: Any person in actual or constructive possession of a
property, including, but not limited to, an owner, occupant of property under
their domain, ownership or control.
PROPERTY: Any real property, including land in that which is affixed,
incidental or pertinent to land, including, but not limited to, any premises,
room, house, building or structure, or any separate part or portion thereof,
whether permitted or not.
(1987 Code § 7-257; amd. Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
10-18-3: REMEDY:
   A.   Authority Of Administrative Law Judge: In the event the Administrative
Law Judge determines property to be a chronic nuisance property, the Judge may
order that the property be closed and secured against all use and occupancy for
a period of not less than thirty (30) days, but not more than one hundred
eighty (180) days, or the Administrative Law Judge may employ any other remedy
deemed by the Judge to be appropriate to abate the nuisance.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   B.   Civil Penalty: In addition to the remedy provided in subsection A of
this section, the Administrative Law Judge may impose upon the owner of the
property a civil penalty in the amount of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per day, payable to the City, for each day the owner had actual knowledge that
the property was a public nuisance property and permitted the property to
remain public nuisance property.
   C.   Additional Conduct On Property: In determining what remedy or remedies
shall be allowed, the Administrative Law Judge may consider evidence of other
conduct that has occurred on the property, including but not limited to:
      1.   The disturbance of neighbors.
      2.   The recurrence of loud and obnoxious noises.
      3.   Repeated consumption of alcohol in public.
      4.   The repeated sale or possession of controlled substances on the
premises.
(1987 Code § 7-258)
10-18-4: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE:
The City may commence an action to abate a public nuisance as described
hereinabove. Upon being satisfied by affidavits or other sworn evidence that an
alleged public nuisance exists, the Administrative Law Judge may, without
notice, enter a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction to
enjoin any defendant from maintaining such nuisance and may enter an order
restraining any defendant from removing or interfering with all property used
in connection with the public nuisance.
(1987 Code § 7-259)
10-18-5: PROCEDURE:
When the Chief of Police receives two (2) or more police reports documenting
the occurrence of nuisance activity on or within a property, the Chief of
Police shall independently review such reports to determine whether they
describe criminal acts. Upon such findings, the Chief may:
   A.   Notice: Notify the person in charge in writing that the property has
been determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the
following information:
      1.   The street address or a legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
      2.   A statement that the Chief of Police has information that the
property may be a chronic nuisance property, with a concise description of the
nuisance activities that may exist, or that have occurred. The Chief of Police
shall offer the person in charge an opportunity to propose a course of action
that the Chief of Police agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise
to the violation.
      3.   Demand that the person in charge respond to the Chief of Police
within ten (10) days to discuss the nuisance activities.
   B.   Third Nuisance Activity: After complying with the notification
procedures described herein, when the Chief of Police receives a police report
documenting the occurrence of a third nuisance activity at or within a property
and determines that the property has become a chronic nuisance property, the
Chief of Police shall:
      1.   Notify the person in charge in writing that the property has been
determined to be a chronic nuisance property. The notice shall contain the
following information:
         a.   The street address or legal description sufficient for
identification of the property.
(1987 Code § 7-260)
         b.   A statement that the Chief of Police has determined the property
to be chronic nuisance property with a concise description of the nuisance
activities leading to their findings.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
         c.   Demand that the person in charge respond within ten (10) days to
the Chief of Police and propose a course of action that the Chief of Police
agrees will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the violation.
      2.   Service shall be made either personally or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, addressed to the person in charge at the address of the
property believed to be a chronic nuisance property, or such other place which
is likely to give the person in charge notice of the determination by the Chief
of Police.
      3.   A copy of the notice shall be served on the owner at such address as
shown in the McHenry County tax records for the property, and/or the occupant
at the address of the property, if these persons are different than the person
in charge and shall be made either personally or by first class mail, postage
prepaid.
      4.   A copy of the notice shall also be posted at the property after ten
(10) days has elapsed from the service or mailing of the notice to the person
in charge, and the person in charge has not contacted the Chief of Police.
      5.   The failure of any person to receive notice that the property may be
a chronic nuisance property shall not invalidate or otherwise affect the
proceedings under this chapter.
      6.   If after the notification, but prior to the commencement of legal
proceedings by the City pursuant to this chapter, a person in charge stipulates
with the Chief of Police that the person in charge will pursue a course of
action the parties agree will abate the nuisance activities giving rise to the
violation, the Chief of Police may agree to postpone legal proceedings for a
period of not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days, except in
the case of a nuisance activity where a search warrant was executed at the
property. If the agreed course of action does not result in the abatement of
the nuisance activity or if no agreement concerning abatement is reached within
thirty (30) days, the City may commence a legal proceeding to abate the
nuisance.
      7.   Concurrent with the notification procedures set forth herein, the
Chief of Police shall maintain copies of the notice, as well as any other
documentation, which supports legal proceedings.
   C.   Admission; Evidence: When a person in charge makes a response to the
Chief of Police as required above, any conduct or statements made in connection
with the furnishing of that response shall not constitute an admission that any
nuisance activities have or are occurring. This subsection does not require the
exclusion of any evidence that is otherwise admissible or offered for any other
purpose.
   D.   Delegation Of Authority: The Chief of Police shall have the authority
to delegate procedural responsibilities to enforce this chapter to another
member of the Police Department, while maintaining oversight of the process.
(1987 Code § 7-260)
10-18-6: COMMENCEMENT OF ACTION; BURDEN OF PROOF:
   A.   Burden Of Proof By City: In an action seeking closure of a chronic
nuisance property, the City shall have the initial burden of showing the
preponderance of the evidence that the property is a chronic nuisance property.
   B.   Defense To Action: It is a defense to an action seeking the closure of
chronic nuisance property that the owner of the property at the time in
question could not, in the exercise of reasonable care or diligence, determine
that the property had become a public nuisance property, or could not, in spite
of the exercise of reasonable care and diligence, control the conduct leading
to the finding that the property is a chronic nuisance property.
   C.   Considerations In Imposing Civil Penalty: In establishing the amount of
any civil penalty requested, the Administrative Law Judge may consider any of
the following factors if they need to be found appropriate, and shall cite
those found applicable:
      1.   The actions or lack of action taken by the person in charge to
mitigate or correct the problem at the property.
      2.   Whether the problem at the property was repeated or continuous.
      3.   The magnitude or gravity of the problem.
      4.   The cooperation of the person in charge with the City.
      5.   The cost of the City investigating and correcting or attempting to
correct the condition.
(1987 Code § 7-261)
10-18-7: EMERGENCY CLOSING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Interim Relief: In the event that it is determined that the property is
an immediate threat to the public safety and welfare, the City may apply to the
Administrative Law Judge for such interim relief as is deemed by the Chief of
Police to be appropriate. In such an event, the notification provision set
forth in section
10-18-5 of this chapter need not be complied with; however, the City shall make
a diligent effort to notify the person in charge prior to a hearing before the
Administrative Law Judge.
   B.   Order; Civil Fine: In the event the Administrative Law Judge finds that
the property constitutes a “chronic nuisance property”, as defined in section
10-18-2 of this chapter, the Administrative Law Judge may order the remedy set
out above. In addition, in the event that he also finds the person in charge
had knowledge of activities or conditions of the property constituting or
violating this article and permitted the activities to occur, the
Administrative Law Judge may assess a civil fine as provided in this article.
   C.   Security Property: The Administrative Law Judge may authorize the City
to physically secure the property against use or occupancy in the event that
the owner fails to do so within the time specified by the court. In the event
the City is authorized to secure the property, all costs reasonably incurred by
the City to affect a closure shall be made and assessed as a lien against the
property. If used herein, “costs” mean the costs actually incurred by the City
for the physical securing of the property.
   D.   Statement Of Costs; Lien: The City shall prepare a statement of cost
and thereafter submit said statement to the court of its review. If no
objection of the statement is made within the period described by the court, a
lien in said amount may be recorded against said property.
   E.   Liability For Payment: Any person who is assessed the cost of closure
and/or civil penalty by the Administrative Law Judge shall be personally liable
for the payment thereof by the City.
   F.   Relocation Costs Of Tenant: A tenant is entitled to their reasonable
relocation costs, as those are determined by the court if without actual
notice, the tenant moved in the property, after either:
      1.   The owner or tenant received notice as described herein of the Chief
of Police’s determination as described above.
      2.   Unknown owner or other agent received notice of an action brought
pursuant to this section.
      3.   Any person who is assessed with costs of closure and/or civil
penalty by the court shall be personally liable for the payment thereof to the
City.
(1987 Code § 7-262)
CHAPTER 19: WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS)
Section
10-19-1: Defined
10-19-2: Permitted In All Zoning Districts
10-19-3: Application For Permit
10-19-4: Height
10-19-5: Setbacks
10-19-6: Minimum Design Standards
10-19-7: Designation Of Agent For Service Of Notice
10-19-8: Failure To Comply; Dismantling Of WECS
10-19-1: DEFINED:
WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS) shall mean any device that converts wind
power to another form of energy, such as electricity or heat (also referred to
by such common names as wind charger, wind turbine or windmill).
(1987 Code § 7-271)
10-19-2: PERMITTED IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS:
WECS shall be considered a permitted use in all zoning districts within the
City and shall comply with the terms and provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of
the City applicable to the subject property and with the terms and provisions
of this chapter, whichever are the more stringent.
(1987 Code § 7-272)
10-19-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
No WECS shall be installed or operated within the City unless a written
application shall first have been made to the City and a permit issued to allow
such construction and operation. The applicant requesting a permit for a WECS
shall furnish the City scaled drawings and other information with sufficient
detail to show full compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter,
including, but not limited to, a plot plan of the premises showing lot lines,
the precise location of all buildings and structures on the subject premises,
the precise location of the proposed WECS device, and the location of all
buildings and structures having a height in excess of fifteen feet (15') on all
residential properties located within sixty feet (60') of the WECS and all
nonresidential properties located within one hundred feet (100') of the WECS.
(1987 Code § 7-273)
10-19-4: HEIGHT:
The maximum height of a WECS located on Residentially zoned property shall not
be in excess of sixty feet (60') nor more than seventy five percent (75%) of
the distance from the closest property line, whichever is less. The maximum
height of a WECS located on Nonresidentially zoned property shall not be in
excess of one hundred feet (100') nor more than seventy five percent (75%) of
the distance from the closest property line, whichever is less. The height
shall be measured from the base of the WECS structure to the rotor-hub, top of
the tower or the tip of the blade in its vertical position, whichever is
higher.
(1987 Code § 7-274)
10-19-5: SETBACKS:
No part of a WECS may be located within, or above, any front yard or side yard
of the subject property as such yard is defined in the Zoning Ordinance of the
City.
(1987 Code § 7-275)
10-19-6: MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS:
All WECS shall meet the following minimum design standards:
   A.   Braking Device: An automatic braking device capable of halting
operation in high winds (40 mph or greater) shall be incorporated within the
system.
   B.   Interference: The WECS shall be designed, constructed and operated so
as not to create electromagnetic interference with any radio, television or
communications transmissions or receptions.
   C.   Noise: The operation of any WECS at a noise level which either annoys,
injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others is
prohibited and is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and hazard.
   D.   Prevent Climbing: The WECS shall be designed and constructed so as to
prevent climbing of the structure by unauthorized persons. As a minimum
requirement, the first twelve feet (12') of the structure shall be unclimbable
by design or shall be enclosed by a six foot (6') high nonclimbable fence with
secured access.
   E.   Lightening: The WECS shall be designed and installed to withstand
natural lightning strikes.
   F.   Electrical Compliance: The WECS electrical equipment and connections
shall comply with all laws and ordinances.
(1987 Code § 7-276)
10-19-7: DESIGNATION OF AGENT FOR SERVICE OF NOTICE:
The aforesaid application for a permit for a WECS shall also specify the name
and address of the applicant’s agent for the purpose of receiving notice from
the City pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 7-277)
10-19-8: FAILURE TO COMPLY; DISMANTLING OF WECS:
Any WECS which fails to comply with any law or ordinance of the City, shall
cease operating immediately upon receipt of notice of such noncompliance and
shall be brought into compliance within thirty (30) days after receipt of such
notice, or shall be dismantled. Any WECS which ceases to operate for any twelve
(12) consecutive months shall be dismantled. In the event that the WECS is not
dismantled within thirty (30) days after notice is served upon or mailed to the
applicant’s aforesaid agent, the City shall be deemed to have been empowered
and authorized by the applicant and owner to enter upon the premises on which
such WECS is located without any prior or further notice, to dismantle such
WECS, to dispose of such dismantled WECS in any manner the City deems
convenient and to file a lien in the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds Office
against the subject premises in the amount of the City’s costs associated with
the dismantling and disposition of such WECS.
(1987 Code § 7-278)
CHAPTER 20: SIGNS
Section
10-20-1: Purpose
10-20-2: Definitions
10-20-3: Applicability
10-20-4: Permit Requirements And Administrative Provisions
10-20-5: Exempt Signs
10-20-6: Exempt Changes To Signs
10-20-7: Prohibited Signs
10-20-8: Nonconforming Signs
10-20-9: Maintenance And Repair Required
10-20-10: Attachments Secured
10-20-11: Sign Types
10-20-12: Sign Standards
10-20-13: Table 1
10-20-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate commercial and noncommercial signs
and advertising displays designed to be visible outdoors in a manner that
without restricting the content thereof that:
   A.   Recognizes the mass communications needs of both businesses and other
parties.
   B.   Protects property values and neighborhood character.
   C.   Creates a more attractive business climate.
   D.   Promotes pedestrian and traffic safety by reducing sign distractions,
obstructions and other hazards.
   E.   Protects the City’s unique and rural character.
(1987 Code § 7.50.1)
10-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
SIGN: Any visual or graphic device designed through use of words, numbers,
characters or symbols to inform or attract attention and which is designed to
be visible from outside any building or structure in which, upon which, or
attached to which it may be located. Window displays of merchandise and signs
of less than one-half (1/2) square foot in area that are part of such displays
and are not affixed to windows shall not be considered signs for purposes of
this chapter.
SIGN AREA: The total exposed surface on each facing devoted to a sign’s
message, including all ornamentation, embellishment and symbols, but excluding
any supporting structure that does not form part of the sign proper or of the
display. The area of a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols against
a wall shall be the sum of the areas within rectangular envelopes completely
enclosing each separate letter or symbol or attached group thereof.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: A permanent off site advertising sign containing a message,
commercial or otherwise, unrelated to any use or activity on the subject
property on which the sign is located, excluding other off site permitted
signs.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign directing attention to a business, profession,
commodity, service, entertainment, person, cause, event or organization
conducted, sold, offered, operating or having premises upon the same lot.
SIGN, BUSINESS NEW: Any business not previously occupying the current space
that requires a certificate of occupancy prior to opening to the public. Change
of ownership and construction projects requiring a new occupancy certificate
are excluded (i.e., additions, alterations, etc.). New businesses are those
which have never been located within the City of McHenry corporate limits or
alternatively businesses which have previously been located within the City’s
corporate limits but have moved to a different address within the City.
SIGN, CANOPY: A sign, other than an under canopy sign, attached to or
constructed in or on a canopy.
SIGN, CHANGING ELECTRONIC MESSAGE: A sign with a message copy or other display
that is produced and periodically changed electronically or electrically that
is attached to another sign, or to the support structure thereof. The message
copy or display shall be limited to public service announcements, time and
temperature, and goods or services available on the premises, and shall consist
of words, letters, numbers and punctuation only. Illumination shall be of a
constant intensity, and shall not blink, flash or give the appearance of
movement.
SIGN, CITY SPONSORED EVENT: Signs advertising an event sponsored by the City,
such as band concerts, farmers’ market, Park Department programs, and the like.
SIGN CLEARANCE: The distance to grade from the lowest edge of a sign, excluding
any pole or support structure attached to the ground.
SIGN, CONSTRUCTION: A nonilluminated sign displayed prior to or during
construction and removed thereafter that identifies a building under
construction, together with such information as the owner, the manager, the
contractor and subcontractors, the architect and engineer, the source of
financing, the projected date of completion, the major tenants, and related
information.
SIGN, DEVELOPMENT ENTRANCE: A sign identifying the name of a development and/or
the names of tenants occupying spaces within a development.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign that serves solely to direct pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or parking within a premises or to provide related instructions or
facility information, but that which contains no advertising other than the
name and logo of the business on the premises.
SIGN, DISPLAY BOARD: A sign on which letters are changed manually and that is
attached to another sign, to the support structure thereof, or to a wall for
the purpose of displaying advertising or other notices.
SIGN, ELECTION/CAMPAIGN: A nonpermanent sign posted on private property to show
support of a political candidate or item.
SIGN FACING: The surface of a sign upon, against or through which the message
is displayed or illustrated.
SIGN, FEATHER BANNER: A lightweight portable advertising medium, mounted on a
pole that resembles a sail and not exceeding twelve feet (12') in height.
SIGN, FLASHING: A sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source
or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of
animation or an externally mounted intermittent light source. Changing
electronic message signs, as defined herein, are not considered flashing signs.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign supported by one or more poles, uprights, pylons or
braces on the ground and not attached to a building. A freestanding sign shall
have not more than two (2) sign facings, each of which shall be identical or
nearly identical. The angle for any “V” shaped freestanding signs shall not
exceed sixty degrees (60°).
SIGN, GARAGE SALE: A temporary sign announcing the sale of used goods on
private property.
SIGN, GOVERNMENT AND UTILITY: Informational signs or displays maintained by a
government body or public utility, including traffic or parking regulatory
devices, legal notices, warnings of hazards, and similar displays.
SIGN, GOVERNMENT MANDATED: Street address numerals and other signs or exterior
displays required to be maintained by government order or regulation; provided,
that the content and size thereof does not exceed that required by such order
or regulation.
SIGN HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the curb level, as defined
herein, of the closest public street to a sign to the highest point of the
sign, including all structural supports and embellishments. Where a sign is
equally close to more than one public street, the mean average of the curb
levels of each street shall be used to determine sign height.
SIGN, HELP WANTED: A temporary sign offering employment on the premises.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: A sign illuminated by a source of artificial light having
the principal purpose of furnishing illumination for the sign whether or not
said source is part of the structure of the sign.
SIGN, IN-LINE TENANT: A sign associated with a principal use located within a
shopping center as part of a single commercial group, whether or not located on
the same lot on a premises, and connected by party walls, partitions, canopies
or other structural members to other principal uses and which shares a common
parking area with other in-line tenants within the same shopping center.
SIGN, MEMORIAL: A sign, including, but not limited to, memorials, headstones,
tablets, building plaques or other similar type signage, which does not
advertise a business or use.
SIGN, MENU BOARD: A sign used to display a selection of goods or services
offered at a business establishment for the convenience of drive-up or walk-up
customers, such as at a drive-in restaurant.
SIGN, MOVING: A sign that uses movement, by either natural or mechanical means,
or change of lighting, either natural or artificial, to depict action to create
a special effect of scene; or signs that rotate or have parts that move or
rotate, excluding the scrolling of a static message onto or off a sign board in
one direction per message, time and temperature and clock hands.
SIGN, MULTI-USER OUTBUILDING: A sign erected on any structure permanently
affixed to the land and constructed or used for the shelter, enclosure or
protection of persons located within a shopping center, occupied by more than
one principal use and either located on a separate lot or located at the outer
edge of a shopping center and having its own dedicated parking area separated
from and in addition to the parking area dedicated to the in-line shopping
center tenants.
SIGN, NAMEPLATE: A nonilluminated sign that states only the names, addresses
and trades or professions of one or more businesses or occupants of the lot
where the sign is placed.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING: A sign that complied with the provisions of this Code when
first installed but is no longer in compliance due to the adoption of
subsequent Zoning Code or Municipal Code text amendments.
SIGN, NONPROFIT: Nonprofit organization displays which may include, but is not
limited to, the flag, pennant or insignia of any governmental unit or
religious, civic, educational or philanthropic organization, and temporary
signs, announcing special events or campaigns of such organizations.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign attached to the wall of a building having a face that
is not parallel to such wall or that extends more than twelve inches (12") from
the face of the wall or higher than the highest point of the roof or the top of
the parapet, whichever is higher.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A nonilluminated sign used to offer for sale, lease or rent
the property upon which or within which the sign is placed or to announce an
open house or that the property has been sold.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected or maintained upon or over a roof with its principal
support on the roof structure. A sign that is erected or maintained upon, but
projects no more than twelve inches (12") from, the face of that portion of a
mansard roof that is vertical or approximately vertical and that does not
extend above the highest point on the vertical portion of the roof, shall be
considered a wall sign and not a roof sign.
SIGN, SCOREBOARD: A structure designed to display information, including, but
not limited to, scores, team names, date and time, or similar sports
information which is incorporated into a stadium or athletic field.
SIGN, SEASONAL DECORATIONS: Decorations temporarily displayed in connection
with a local festivity approved by the City Council, or a State or national
holiday.
SIGN, SINGLE USER OUTBUILDING: A sign on any structure permanently affixed to
the land and constructed or used for the shelter, enclosure or protection of
persons located within a shopping center, occupied by one principal use and
either located on a separate lot or located at the outer edge of a shopping
center and having its own dedicated parking area separated from and in addition
to the common parking area dedicated to the in-line shopping center tenants.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign that can be placed on a lot in a nonpermanent, but
structurally safe manner, or that is securely attached to a building facade for
the purpose of advertising a grand opening, special sale, event, store closing,
subdivision or development, and the like, including, but not limited to,
banners, portable signs and sandwich boards.
SIGN, UNDER CANOPY: A sign placed under a building canopy indicating the name
of the business, service or tenant only.
SIGN, VEHICLE: Signs placed on, affixed to or within parked motor vehicles and/
or trailers that are parked on a public right-of-way, public property or
private property so as to be conspicuously visible from a public right-of-way
where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or direct persons to a
business or activity located on the same property, excluding signs relating to
the sale, lease or rental of the vehicle or which identify a firm operated
during the normal course of business.
SIGN, VIDEO SCREEN: A sign which produces movement, a movie, a video or some
display by electronic means on a screen face, electronic panel or monitor.
SIGN, WALL: A sign erected upon or parallel to an outside building wall which
does not extend more than twelve inches (12") from the face of the wall or
higher than the highest point of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever
is higher. A wall sign shall have one sign facing.
SIGN, WARNING: A sign posted on private property, including, but not limited
to, “no trespassing”, “no dumping” or “no hunting”, which may also warn people
of danger on the property.
SIGN, WINDOW, PERMANENT: A sign placed inside a window and designed to be
visible from outside a building with the purpose of identifying for a period of
thirty (30) days or more the proprietor or name of a business.
SIGN, WINDOW, TEMPORARY: One or more signs placed inside or upon a window and
designed to be visible from outside a building with the purpose of attracting
attention for a period of less than thirty (30) days.
(1987 Code § 7.50.5)
10-20-3: APPLICABILITY:
No sign, as defined herein, shall hereafter be located, erected, moved,
reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or structurally altered, except in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and after issuance of a sign
permit by the City, except as provided under sections
10-20-5, “Exempt Signs”, and
10-20-6, “Exempt Changes To Signs”, of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 7.50.2)
10-20-4: PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS:
   A.   Permits:
      1.   Contents Of Sign Permit Application: An application for a sign
permit shall be made upon forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. In
addition, landscape plans as outlined in title 11, chapter 13 of this Code,
shall also be provided. Landscaping and screening plans addressing the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance shall be filed for all freestanding and
monument signs.
(1987 Code § 7.50.3; amd. 2019 Code)
      2.   Issuance Of Sign Permits: The Zoning Administrator shall issue a
sign permit for any sign for which a complete and accurate sign permit
application has been filed when he or she has determined that the sign is in
compliance with this and other applicable City ordinances.
      3.   Permit Void Upon Nonuse: A sign permit shall become void if the sign
authorized thereby has not been completely installed within six (6) months of
the date the permit was issued.
      4.   Suspension, Revocation And Denial:
         a.   The Zoning Administrator shall give written notice to the
applicant of denial of a sign permit application, together with the reasons for
the denial.
         b.   The Zoning Administrator may suspend or revoke, in writing to the
permittee, any sign permit issued on the basis of misstatement of fact.
      5.   Removal Of Unsafe, Abandoned Or Unlawful Signs:
         a.   Any sign, as defined herein, that no longer identifies a
business, activity, event, service conducted or product, service or
entertainment sold on the premises where the sign is located, shall be
considered abandoned. An abandoned sign shall be removed in its entirety by the
property owner within ninety (90) consecutive days after such business,
activity, event or service ceases operation, or product, service or
entertainment is no longer sold on the premises. In lieu of removing an
abandoned sign in its entirety, a property owner must remove all identification
on the sign pertaining to the former business and shall install a blank,
“neutral color” panel “consistent with the existing sign structure” in the area
containing the sign’s message.
         b.   If, upon inspection, the Zoning Administrator finds that a sign
is unsafe, or in any way not in compliance with City ordinances, he or she
shall issue a written order to the property owner stating the nature of the
violation and requiring the repair, replacement or removal of the sign within
three (3) days of the date of the order.
         c.   If after three (3) days of issuance, an order has not been
complied with, or if a sign constitutes an immediate hazard to the public
safety, the matter shall be referred to and addressed in accordance with the
provisions of title 1, chapter 4, article B, “Administrative Adjudication”, of
this Code.
   B.   Relief: Petitions for relief from the sign regulations herein shall be
heard and decided by the City Council. Submission requirements shall be as
determined by the Council, and no public notice shall be required. There shall
be a one hundred seventy five dollar ($175.00) application fee. The Council
shall grant such relief only by a vote of a majority of its members and only if
it finds that such relief:
      1.   Will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to other property in the vicinity;
      2.   Will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent
property, increase the danger of fire, endanger public safety, or substantially
impair property values in the neighborhood;
      3.   Shall not give the property owner or business an unfair advantage
over a similar business; and
      4.   Will not cause a hazard to the public safety by being distracting
because of size or location, or being located within rights-of-way.
(1987 Code § 7.50.3)
10-20-5: EXEMPT SIGNS:
   A.   Exemptions: The types of signs listed below and any change thereto that
does not convert them into nonexempt signs, shall be exempt from:
      1.   The requirement for a sign permit; and
      2.   The sign standards provided in section
10-20-13, “Table 1”, of this chapter.
   B.   Regulations Applicable: All other provisions shall apply to the
following signs, except as otherwise provided herein:
      1.   City Sponsored Event Signs: Not to exceed three (3) square feet in
area. Such signs may be located in the public right-of-way.
      2.   Election Campaign Signs: One per street frontage per lot that is not
illuminated.
      3.   Garage Sale Signs: Not exceeding two (2) square feet in area
displayed for no more than four (4) consecutive days and no more than four (4)
days in any ninety (90) day period.
      4.   Government And Utility Signs: Such signs may be located in the
public right-of-way.
      5.   Government Mandated Signs: Such signs may be located in the public
right-of-way.
      6.   Help Wanted Signs: One per business, not to exceed five (5) square
feet and only in the window of an establishment.
      7.   Memorials: Memorials.
      8.   Nameplates: Not to exceed two (2) square feet in area.
      9.   Nonprofit Organization Displays: One per street frontage, not to
exceed thirty two (32) square feet in size and eight feet (8') in height, for a
maximum of fifteen (15) days before and three (3) days after the event.
      10.   Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs, as defined herein, that:
         a.   Residential:
            (1)   Advertise one to five (5) residential units or no more than
one vacant residential lot; and
            (2)   Do not exceed five (5) square feet in area; and
            (3)   Are displayed a minimum of five feet (5') from all lot lines;
and
            (4)   Are removed one week after the consummation of the sale or
rental of all property to which the sign pertains.
         b.   Nonresidential:
            (1)   Not more than one sign is posted per street frontage per lot;
and
            (2)   Do not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area; and
            (3)   Do not to have more than two (2) facings with the angle for
any “V” shaped sign not exceeding sixty degrees (60°); and
            (4)   Does not exceed six feet (6') in height; and
            (5)   Are displayed a minimum of five feet (5') from all lot lines;
and
            (6)   Are removed one week after the consummation of the sale or
rental of all property to which the sign pertains.
No other real estate signs are exempt.
      11.   Scoreboards: Scoreboards.
      12.   Seasonal Decorations:
         a.   Seasonal decorations shall be installed not more than forty five
(45) days before a holiday and shall be removed within forty five (45) days
after such holiday; and
         b.   Shall comply with City adopted Building and Electric Codes.
      13.   Under Canopy Signs: One per tenant, not to exceed four (4) square
feet, with a maximum width of seventy five percent (75%) of the canopy
projection, a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet (8'), and shall not
project more than one foot (1') below.
      14.   Warning Signs: A maximum of two (2) No Trespassing, No Dumping, No
Hunting signs, or the like, per lot, each no larger than two (2) square feet in
area.
      15.   Window Signs: Window signs, except interior neon window signs (see
section
10-20-13, “Table 1”, of this chapter). Shall not have an aggregate area greater
than fifty percent (50%) of the total display window area of a business.
      16.   Contractor Signs:
         a.   Not to exceed eighteen inches by twenty four inches (18" x 24")
(3 square feet in area); and
         b.   Displayed while work is actively being conducted on site; and
         c.   Located a minimum of five feet (5') from all property lines; and
         d.   No more than one sign permitted per street frontage per zoning
lot.
      17.   Sandwich Board Signs:
         a.   Maximum of one per business or per business frontage; and
         b.   Maximum size of twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x
36"); and
         c.   Sign must be removed at the end of the business day; and
         d.   Shall not impede pedestrian traffic or cause pedestrians to have
to walk in the street; and
         e.   Sign must be placed within ten feet (10') of the building.
(1987 Code § 7.50.2)
10-20-6: EXEMPT CHANGES TO SIGNS:
No sign permit shall be required for the following changes to exempt or
nonexempt signs, but such changes must conform to all applicable sign
regulations of this chapter:
   A.   A change in the copy on a display board sign.
   B.   Painting, cleaning, repairs, maintenance or face replacement of a sign
not involving structural change and made necessary by breakage or
deterioration, but not by a change in advertiser.
(1987 Code § 7.50.2)
10-20-7: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs and displays, as defined herein, are prohibited in all
zoning districts, subject only to the exceptions stated herein:
   A.   Flashing signs.
   B.   All moving signs. Certain moving signs may also constitute a public
nuisance. See sections
5-7-3 and 5-7-4 of this Code.
   C.   Projecting signs, except in the C-4 Downtown Commercial District.
   D.   Roof mounted signs.
   E.   Signs on otherwise vacant land, other than real estate signs,
construction signs or outdoor advertising signs, as defined and regulated
herein.
   F.   Vehicle signs.
   G.   Signs using visible neon tubing or light emitting diodes, except for
interior window signs (see section
10-20-13, “Table 1”, of this chapter).
   H.   Pennants, streamers, balloons, helium filled and inflatable objects,
search lights, beacon lights, except as otherwise permitted by or exempted from
these regulations, but not to include public notice signs required under this
chapter.
   I.   Any sign advertising a product, service, business and the like, that is
not located on the premises upon which the sign is located.
   J.   Video screen signs.
   K.   Flashing, blinking or strobe lights visibly located either inside or
outside the building and used to attract attention to a product, service or
business which may cause a distraction.
   L.   All other signs not expressly permitted by this chapter.
(1987 Code § 7.50.2)
10-20-8: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   Temporary Signs: All nonexempt temporary signs shall be either removed
or brought into full conformity with the requirements of this chapter within
forty five (45) days of the adoption hereof, or of any amendment hereto.
   B.   Other Signs:
      1.   All other nonexempt signs lawfully existing, or holding sign permits
issued, prior to the date of adoption of this chapter, but which are not in
conformance with these regulations, may be continued as nonconformities until
such time as at least one of the following thresholds are met:
         a.   A property on which a nonconforming sign is located is vacant for
a period of ninety (90) consecutive days (this does not apply to individual
units of multiple tenant buildings but rather to the entire property); or
         b.   A property has any change in use; or
         c.   A permit for the replacement, alteration, enlargement or
structural change of any kind (other than for change of face) is requested; or
         d.   The nonconforming sign is identified as “unsafe” by the Zoning
Administrator.
      2.   Further, no existing nonconforming sign may otherwise be replaced
with another nonconforming sign. Nonconforming signs shall be subject to all
the requirements governing the continuation of nonconforming structures as
provided in the regulations governing nonconformities in this chapter.
(1987 Code § 7.50.2)
10-20-9: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR REQUIRED:
The appearance and safety of a sign shall be maintained at all times. The sign
shall be repainted as necessary to prevent rust, corrosion, rotting or other
deterioration in the appearance or structural safety of the sign. The source of
illumination shall be kept in safe working order at all times.
(1987 Code § 7.50.2)
10-20-10: ATTACHMENTS SECURED:
All letters, figures and characters on a sign shall be safely and securely
attached to the sign structure.
(1987 Code § 7.50.2)
10-20-11: SIGN TYPES:
Adult-use cannabis business establishments. A signage plan shall be submitted
as part of the conditional use permit.
Neon signs. Neon signs are only permitted in Nonresidential Zoning Districts on
interior windows in accordance with the following provisions and section
10-20-13, “Table 1”, of this chapter.
   A.   Only one neon sign is permitted per window pane.
   B.   Visible neon tubing and use of light emitting diode (LED) technology
shall not be used to outline windows and doors, accentuate or trim
architectural features or outline borders of signs or buildings.
   C.   Neon signs shall not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of any window
pane.
New business grand opening signs.
   A.   Regulations: In addition to other signs and displays permitted herein,
the following shall be applicable solely for grand opening signs for new
businesses, as defined herein. This subsection does not apply to grand
reopenings. Any business, as defined herein, conducting a grand reopening must
comply with the temporary sign regulations in section
10-20-13, “Table 1”, of this chapter:
      1.   Time Limit To Obtain: Grand opening sign permits must be obtained
within one hundred eighty (180) days of receipt of a certificate of occupancy
or temporary certificate of occupancy;
      2.   Term: Grand opening signs are permitted one time for a maximum of
fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days;
      3.   Banner: One banner, maximum of thirty two (32) square feet, located
a minimum of five feet (5') from all property lines shall be permitted;
      4.   Feather Banners: Two (2) feather banners, in accordance with the
regulations in section
10-20-13, “Table 1”, of this chapter, are permitted;
      5.   Inflatable: One inflatable (e.g., balloon, dancing figure) is
permitted.
   B.   Permit Fee; Deposit: In accordance with subsection
10-1-4B1 of this title, nonresidential construction, a nonrefundable permit fee
of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in addition to a temporary/portable sign
permit deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is required for all grand
opening sign permits.
Service station/automobile repair shop signs and displays. In addition to other
signs and displays permitted herein, the following displays are permitted as
accessory to automobile service stations:
   A.   Product Displays And Temporary Signs:
      1.   Items for sale on the premises openly displayed within twenty feet
(20') of the principal building, but not within any required yard, as well as
under pump island canopies or between pumps within the area of the pump island
base.
      2.   Up to two (2) temporary signs within twenty feet (20') of the
principal building advertising products for sale on the premises with a
combined sign area not greater than thirty (30 square feet.
   B.   Pricing Signs: Freestanding signs providing only pricing information
that have a sign area not greater than twelve (12) square feet and that conform
to all other requirements for main freestanding signs in commercial areas in
section
10-20-13, “Table 1”, of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 7.50.2; amd. Ord. 19-1206, 10-7-2019)
10-20-12: SIGN STANDARDS:
All exempt and nonexempt signs shall conform to the following standards, except
as otherwise provided herein:
   A.   Location And Placement:
      1.   Within Public Right-Of-Way; Exception:
         a.   No sign or associated light fixture shall be located within,
project into, or overhang a public right-of-way, such as a sign upon a tree or
utility pole therein, except as otherwise permitted herein.
         b.   Temporary signs posted by not for profit, charitable or
philanthropic organizations located within the City, advertising a particular
event, subject to the following conditions. If all conditions listed herein are
met, City Council approval shall not be required. If any one of the conditions
listed herein cannot be met or some variance of any condition is being
requested, City Council approval is required:
            (1)   A sign permit is obtained; and
            (2)   The required thirty dollar ($30.00) temporary sign deposit is
made; and
            (3)   The size of each sign cannot exceed eighteen inches by twenty
four inches (18" x 24") (3 square feet); and
            (4)   May be displayed up to two (2) weeks prior to the event and
must be removed no later than two (2) days following the event; and
            (5)   A City issued permit sticker is displayed on each sign; and
            (6)   The overlap on the display of two (2) or more temporary
signage permits shall not exceed one week; and
            (7)   One sign may be posted at each the following locations:
Bull Valley Road and South Route 31 (1 corner only).
Chapel Hill and Route 120 (S/W corner only).
Crystal Lake and Bull Valley Road (1 corner only).
Crystal Lake Road and Elm Street (north side of Elm Street only).
Richmond Road and Blake Boulevard (1 corner only).
Richmond Road and Diamond Drive (1 corner only).
Richmond Road and Elm Street (south side of Elm Street only).
Richmond Road and McCullom Lake Road (1 corner only).
Ridge Road (west City limits) and Route 120 (in close proximity to City welcome
sign).
Ringwood Road and Elm Street (1 corner of intersection only).
      2.   Obstructions: No sign may obstruct a fire escape, door, window or
other entrance or exit, or any window surface required for ventilation by any
City Code.
      3.   Traffic Hazards: No sign may by reason of location, or location and
size, obstruct the vision of drivers or obstruct or detract from the visibility
or effectiveness of any traffic signal or control device.
      4.   Proximity To Electric Wires: No metal sign shall be located within a
vertical distance of eight feet (8'), or a horizontal distance of four feet
(4'), of electric wires or conductors, even if such wires or conductors are
insulated or otherwise protected.
      5.   Clearance For Metal Electrical Signs: A minimum sign clearance of
one and one-half feet (1-1/2') shall be maintained for all metal signs with
electrical wiring.
      6.   Vision Clearance: Any sign located within the vision clearance
triangle, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this Code, shall have a minimum sign clearance of eight feet (8'),
unless the sign height is two and one-half feet (2-1/2') or less.
   B.   Illumination:
      1.   Bare Bulb Or Flame Illumination: Illumination by bare bulbs or
flames is prohibited, except that bare bulbs are permitted on changing signs or
on theater marquees.
      2.   Projecting Light Fixtures: Gooseneck reflectors or other arms
projecting from the sign mounted with lights to illuminate the sign are
permitted on freestanding and wall signs.
      3.   Constant Illumination: Sign illumination shall be constant in
intensity and color.
      4.   Nonglaring: The light for any illuminated sign shall be shaded,
shielded or directed so as not to cause glare in surrounding properties or in
public streets.
      5.   Traffic Hazards: No direct or reflected light from a light source
for an illuminated sign shall create a traffic hazard for operators of motor
vehicles.
      6.   Neon: No sign shall use visible neon tubing, except for interior
window signs (see section
10-20-13, “Table 1”, of this chapter).
   C.   Sign Design:
      1.   Resemblance To Traffic Devices: No sign shall by reason of shape,
color, content or use of lighting be similar in appearance to any traffic
signal or traffic sign in a way that may interfere with traffic movement or
safety.
      2.   Obscenity: No sign or display shall contain words or pictures of
obscene, indecent or immoral character that offend the public morals and
decency of the City.
      3.   Changing Electronic Message And Display Board Signs: Changing
electronic message and display board signs, as defined herein, are permitted in
accordance with the following provisions, in addition to those set forth in
section
10-20-13, “Table 1”, of this chapter:
         a.   Changing electronic message and display board signs must be
freestanding. Changing electronic message wall signs are expressly prohibited;
         b.   All electronic messages displayed must be provided with automatic
dimming software or solar sensors to control brightness for nighttime viewing
and varying daytime lighting conditions;
         c.   All electronic or manually displayed messages on the sign shall
only direct attention to a business, product, service or entertainment
conducted, sold or offered on the premises on which the sign is located.
Community emergency alerts, such as inclement weather or amber alerts, are
exempt;
         d.   All electronic messages displayed must be programmed so the
electronic message change occurs instantaneously, without use of scrolling,
flashing, blinking, or other similar transitions. All electronic message signs
must contain static messages only, changed only through dissolve or fade
transitions, but which may otherwise not have movement or the appearance or
optical illusion of movement varying light intensity, including any part of the
board, design or pictorial segment.
      4.   Permit Number: The sign permit number shall be displayed in a
conspicuous place on every nonexempt sign.
   D.   Construction Standards:
      1.   Building And Electrical Codes Apply: All signs shall conform to the
Building Regulations Ordinances of the City, including the Electrical Code
adopted herein. Any required building or electrical permits shall be obtained
at the same time as the sign permit. Conductors for all illuminated signs shall
be enclosed in rigid conduit or other approved raceways and shall be controlled
with an external disconnect. All sign circuit conduit shall where possible be
concealed from public view.
      2.   Wind Pressure And Dead Load Requirements: All nonexempt signs shall
be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure of not less than
thirty (30) pounds per square foot of surface area and to receive dead loads as
required in the City Building Regulations Ordinances or other City ordinances.
      3.   Structural Safety: All nonexempt signs shall be designed and
constructed in a safe manner and shall be free of any exposed extra bracing,
angle iron, guy wires or cables.
      4.   Glass Requirements: Any glass used on a nonexempt sign shall be
heavy safety glass at least one-fourth inch (1/4") thick. All single pieces of
glass over three (3) square feet in area shall be wired glass.
      5.   Framework: All nonexempt signs shall be designed so that all
frameworks for the lateral support of the sign, other than supporting poles for
a freestanding sign, shall be contained within or behind the face of the sign,
or within the building to which it is attached, in such a manner as not to be
visible to public view.
   E.   Other Standards: All nonexempt signs shall conform to the applicable
standards in section
10-20-13, “Table 1”, of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 7.50.4)
10-20-13: TABLE 1:
   TABLE 1
   Sign Type Number Permitted Maximum Area  Maximum Height  Minimum Setback
                              (Square Feet) (Feet)          (Feet)
                            Number       Maximum Area Maximum Minimum
                 Sign Type  Permitted    (Square      Height  Setback
                                         Feet)        (Feet)  (Feet)
All uses:                                                  
                            1 per
                 Wall or FS entrance/    5            3       -
  Directional               exit
                            location
                 Wall or FS Other        10           3       -
                            locations
 Real estate    Wall or FS 1            32           8       5
 Construction   Wall or FS 1            32           8       5
Residential                                                
uses:
 Development    Wall or FS 1 per        32           6       5
  entrance                  entrance1
 Home           Wall       110          1            -       -
  occupation
Institutional
uses and                                                   
assembly uses:
 Business       Wall or FS 1            32           6       5
Commercial uses:                                           
                                         Wall - 1.5
                                         square feet
                 Wall       2            per foot of  -       -
                                         business
                                         frontage9
                                         Canopy - not
                 Canopy     -            to exceed 2/ -       -
                                         3 face of
  Business                               canopy
                                         0.5 square
                                         foot per
                 FS11       1            foot of lot  15      5
                                         frontage,
                                         200 square
                                         feet maximum
                            1 (C-
                 Projecting 4 District   5            -       -
                            only)
                 Wall                    100          -       -
                                                              See note 2
  Menu board                2 per drive-                      (shall be
                 FS         thru lane    100          8       located in
                                                              side or rear
                                                              yard only)
  Temporary3     Wall       1            32           -       -
                 FS                      32           88      5
                                         0.25 square
                                         foot per
 Neon or LED    Wall       17           foot of      -       -
                                         business
                                         frontage7,9
Shopping                                                   
centers:
                                         Developments
                                         with 100,000
                            14           square feet  15      7
                                         or less -
                                         100 square
  Development    FS                      feet maximum
  entrance                               Developments
                                         with more
                            14           than 100,000 25      7
                                         square feet
                                         - 250 square
                                         feet maximum
 Business:                                                
                                         1.5 square
                                         feet per
                 Wall       25           foot of      -       -
    In-line                              business
    tenant12/                            frontage9
    single user                          Not to
    outbuilding  Canopy     -            exceed 2/    -       -
                                         3 face of
                                         canopy
                 FS         1            32           6       7
                                         1.5 square
                                         feet per
                 Wall       15,6         foot of      -       -
                                         business
    Multi-user                           frontage9
    outbuilding                          Not to
                 Canopy     -            exceed 2/    -       -
                                         3 face of
                                         canopy
                 FS         1            32           6       7
                                         0.25 square
                                         foot per
  Neon or LED  Wall       17           foot of      -       -
                                         business
                                         frontage9
 Menu board:                                              
    In-line      Wall                    32           -       -
    tenants/                1 (drive-
    singl e-user FS         thru only)   32           8       See note 2
    outbuilding
    Temporary3   Wall       1            32           -       -
                 FS                      32           88      5
Office,                                                    
industrial:
 Development    FS         1 per street 100          6       5
  entrance                  entrance
                                         1.5 square
                                         feet per
                 Wall       1            foot of      -       -
                                         business
                                         frontage9
  Business                               0.5 square
                                         foot per
                 FS         1            foot of lot  6       5
                                         frontage
                                         100 square
                                         feet maximum
  Temporary3     Wall       1            32           -       -
                 FS                      32           88      5
                                         0.25 square
                                         foot per
 Neon or LED    Wall       17           foot of      -       -
                                         business
                                         frontage7,9
Business park:                                             
 Development    FS         1 per street 140          15      5
  entrance                  entrance
                                         1.5 square
                                         feet per
                 Wall       1            foot of      -       -
                                         business
                                         frontage
  Business                               0.5 square
                                         foot per
                 FS         1            foot of lot  6       5
                                         frontage
                                         100 square
                                         feet maximum
  Temporary3     Wall       1            32           -       -
                 FS                      32           88      5
                                         0.25 square
                                         foot per
 Neon or LED    Wall       17           foot of      -       -
                                         business
                                         frontage7,9
Health care:                                               
 Development    FS         1 per street 140          15      5
  entrance                  entrance
                                         1.5 square
                                         feet per
  Business       Wall       1            foot of      6       5
                                         business
                                         frontage9
                 FS         1            32           6       5
  Temporary3     Wall       1            32           -       -
                 FS                      32           88      5
                                         0.25 square
                                         foot per
 Neon or LED    Wall       17           foot of      -       -
                                         business
                                         frontage7,9
Bed and                                                    
breakfast:
  Business       Wall       1            4            -       -
                 FS                                   3       5
 
Notes:
      1.    Shall be nonilluminated and contain only the name of the
subdivision, development or apartment complex.
      2.    Shall be located in a side or year yard only.
      3.    Shall be allowed for a maximum of 4 occasions per year, with a
maximum display period of 30 days each occasion and a maximum cumulative total
of 60 days per calendar year. A minimum of 30 days must elapse between each
occasion, unless otherwise permitted herein.
      4.    Shopping centers with frontage on 2 streets may substitute 1 sign
per street frontage, with a maximum height of 8 feet, 100 square feet in area
and setback a minimum 7 feet from property line. For purposes of calculating
total square footage of shopping center developments stated herein, gross floor
area, as defined below, shall be utilized.
Floor Area, Gross: A measure of floor area, as defined herein, used for
purposes of calculating floor area ratio, conversions of existing structures,
and maximum size of business establishments. Gross floor area is floor area
excluding only:
         a.   Areas devoted to off street parking or off street loading,
including aisles, ramps, and maneuvering space.
         b.   Attic or half-story space having headroom of 7 feet or less.
         c.   Exterior balconies and open porches.
         d.   Space on the roof used for mechanical equipment.
         e.   Basements where half or more of the ceiling height is below
grade.
      5.    Tenants located in a corner unit shall be allowed 2 wall signs.
      6.    Tenants located in a multi-user outbuilding shall be allowed 1
additional wall sign. The additional wall sign shall be of the exact same
appearance as the tenant’s main business sign on the front facade, shall be
located on the rear (opposite of the front) facade of the tenant space, and
shall be 1/2 of the sign area of the main business sign on the front facade.
      7.    Only 1 neon sign is permitted per window pane.
      8.    Feather banners, as defined herein, shall be permitted with a
height not to exceed 12 feet measured from ground level.
      9.    Business frontage - The linear length of the front wall of a single
business, excluding walls that abut loading areas and service drives
exclusively.
      10.    Home occupation sign - Shall be affixed to door or window and only
permitted if required by Illinois State law and proof of such is required; see
section 11-8A-2B9 of this Code.
      11.    For the C-4 Zoning District only no minimum setback is required.
      12.    In-line tenants located within shopping centers are not permitted
to have a freestanding sign. In-line tenants, located within shopping centers,
shall be permitted 1 wall sign per 20 feet of business frontage with a minimum
of 1 wall sign (if a tenant has less than 20 feet of business frontage).
(1987 Code § 7.50.4) (amd. Ord. 23-53, 10-2-2023)
CHAPTER 21: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
Section
10-21-1: Definitions
10-21-2: Principles And Objectives
10-21-3: Site Development Permit Required
10-21-4: Exceptions To Permit Requirement
10-21-5: Application For Permit
10-21-6: Information To Accompany Application
10-21-7: Review And Approval
10-21-8: Bonds
10-21-9: Fees And Expenses Reimbursed To City By Permittee
10-21-10: Expiration Of Permit
10-21-11: Standards And Specifications Handbook Adopted
10-21-12: Operation Standards And Requirements
10-21-13: Site Design Requirements
10-21-14: Maintenance Of Control Measures
10-21-15: Inspections
10-21-16: Special Precautions
10-21-17: Amendment Of Plans
10-21-18: Exceptions From Requirements And Regulations
10-21-19: Stop Work Order; Revocation Of Permit
10-21-20: Permittee Responsibilities; City Immunity
10-21-21: Appeals
10-21-22: Violation And Penalty
10-21-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms used herein are defined as set
forth below:
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the City for the construction, erection or
alteration of a structure or building.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: Formally attesting that the specific inspections and
tests where required have been performed, and that such tests comply with the
applicable requirements of this chapter.
CLEARING: Any activity which removes vegetative ground cover.
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the
method of “average end areas”.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The officer of the City holding such title.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed, and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the
work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
GRADING: Excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the State of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of the foregoing.
REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction, or
killing by spraying, and hauling away and/or disposal of all vegetative
materials.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing
improvements.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the City for the construction or
alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion,
runoff and grading.
STREAM: Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine or natural or manmade
drainageway which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which
surface or groundwater flows, either perennially or intermittently.
STRIPPING: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover, including
tree removal, clearing and storage or removal of topsoil.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
WETLAND: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions.
(1987 Code § 18.50-1)
10-21-2: PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTIVES:
It is the objective of this chapter to control soil erosion and sedimentation
caused by development activities, including clearing, grading, stripping,
excavating and filling of land in the City. Measures taken to control soil
erosion and off site sediment runoff should be adequate to assure that sediment
is not transported from the site by a storm event of 10-year frequency or less.
The following principles shall apply to all development activities within the
City and to the preparation of the submissions required under this chapter:
   A.   Erosion Control: Development should be related to the topography and
soils of the site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of
steep slopes where high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided
wherever possible, and natural contours should be followed as closely as
possible.
   B.   Natural Vegetation And Sources: Natural vegetation should be retained
and protected wherever possible. Areas immediately adjacent to natural
watercourses, lakes, ponds and wetlands should be left undisturbed wherever
possible. Temporary crossings, when permitted, must include appropriate
stabilization measures.
   C.   Damage Prevention: Special precautions should be taken to prevent
damages resultant from any necessary development activity within or adjacent to
any stream, lake, pond or wetland. Preventive measures should reflect the
sensitivity of the areas to erosion and sedimentation.
   D.   Minimum Land Exposure: The smallest practical area of land should be
exposed for the shortest practical time during development.
   E.   Sediment, Runoff Control Measures: Sediment basins or traps, filter
barriers, diversions, and any other appropriate sediment or runoff control
measures should be installed prior to site clearing and grading and maintained
to remove sediment from runoff waters from land undergoing development.
   F.   Assessment Of Control Measures: The selection of erosion and
sedimentation control measures should be based on assessment of the probable
frequency of climatic and other events likely to contribute to erosion, and on
evaluation of the risks, costs and benefits involved.
   G.   Consideration Of Aesthetics And Maintenance: In the design of erosion
control facilities and practices, aesthetics and the requirements of continuing
maintenance should be considered.
   H.   Accommodation Of Increased Runoff: Provision should be made to
accommodate the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions
during and after development. Drainageways should be designed so that their
final gradients and the resultant velocities of discharges will not create
additional erosion.
   I.   Installation Of Vegetation, Structures: Permanent vegetation and
structures should be installed and functional as soon as practical during
development.
   J.   Protective Vegetative Cover: Those areas being converted from
agricultural purposes to other land uses should be vegetated with an
appropriate protective cover prior to development.
   K.   Waste Disposal: All waste generated as a result of site development
activity should be properly disposed of and should be prevented from being
carried off the site by either wind or water.
   L.   Prevention Of Sediment Onto Roadway: All construction sites should
provide measures to prevent sediment from being tracked onto roadways.
(1987 Code § 18.50-2)
10-21-3: SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall commence or
perform any clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or filling of land which
meets the following provisions without having first obtained a site development
permit from the Director of Public Works:
   A.   Land Disturbing Activity: Any land disturbing activity that will affect
an area in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet; or
   B.   Activity Affecting Waterways: Any land disturbing activity that will
affect an area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet if the activity is
within twenty five feet (25') of a lake, pond, stream or wetland; or
   C.   Excavation, Fill: Excavation or fill, or any combination thereof, that
will exceed one hundred (100) cubic yards.
(1987 Code § 18.50-3)
10-21-4: EXCEPTIONS TO PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
Although prior written notification of any site work shall be given to the
Director of Public Works by any person performing site work, a permit shall not
be required for any of the following:
   A.   Development Less Than One Acre: Development of a site of one acre or
less for residential use, or of one acre or less for commercial or industrial
use; provided, that the person responsible for any such development shall
implement necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures to satisfy the
principles set forth in this chapter;
   B.   Single-Family Residence: Excavation below final grade for the
foundation of a single-family residence and appurtenant structures on a site
one acre or less for which a building permit has been issued by the City;
provided, that the person responsible for any such development shall implement
necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures to satisfy the principles
set forth in this chapter;
   C.   Agricultural Use: Agricultural use of land;
   D.   Septic System For Existing: Installation, renovation or replacement of
a septic system to serve an existing dwelling or structure.
(1987 Code § 18.50-4)
10-21-5: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for a site development permit shall be made by the owner of the
property or their authorized agent to the Director of the Community Development
Department on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall bear
the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site and of any
consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the
applicant’s principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a
filing fee of thirty seven dollars fifty cents ($37.50). Each application shall
include certification that any land clearing, construction or development
involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved
upon issuance of the permit.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
10-21-6: INFORMATION TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION:
   A.   Information Required: Each application for a site development permit
shall be accompanied by the following information:
      1.   Insurance Certificate: A Certificate of Insurance in the amount of
one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) general liability naming the City of
McHenry as additionally insured.
      2.   Vicinity Map: A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy
location in the field of the site for which the permit is sought, and including
the boundary line and approximate acreage of the site, existing zoning, and a
legend and scale.
      3.   Development Plan: A development plan with a maximum size of twenty
four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36") of the site showing:
         a.   Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within
approximately one hundred feet (100') of the boundaries, drawn at no greater
than two foot (2') contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation
and drainage pattern of the area.
         b.   The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities,
streams, lakes, floodplains, wetlands and depressions, drainage facilities,
vegetative cover, paved areas, and other significant natural or manmade
features on the site and adjacent land within one hundred feet (100') of the
boundary.
         c.   A general description of the predominant soil types on the site,
their location, and their limitations for the proposed use.
         d.   Proposed use of the site, including present development and
planned utilization; areas of clearing, stripping, excavation, grading and
filling; proposed contours, finished grades, including conveniently accessible
bench marks on the site, and street profiles; provisions for storm drainage,
including storm sewers, swales, detention basins and any other measures to
control the rate of runoff, with a drainage area map indicating flow direction
and computations; kinds and locations of utilities; and areas and acreages
proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or
left undisturbed.
      4.   Erosion And Sedimentation Control Plan: An erosion and sedimentation
control plan showing all measures necessary to meet the objectives of this
chapter throughout all phases of construction and permanently after completion
of development of the site, including:
         a.   Location and description, including standard details, of all
sediment control measures and design specifics of sediment basins and traps,
including outlet details.
         b.   Location and description of all soil stabilization and erosion
control measures, including seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of
seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and
fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary
and permanent vegetative control measures and types of nonvegetative
stabilization measures.
         c.   Location and description of all runoff control measures,
including diversions and outlets.
         d.   Location and description of methods to prevent sediment off site,
including construction entrance details.
         e.   Description of dust and traffic control measures.
         f.   Location of stockpiles and description of stabilization methods.
         g.   Description of off site fill or borrow volumes, locations and
methods of stabilization.
         h.   Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including type
and frequency of maintenance, including easements, and estimates of the cost of
maintenance.
         i.   Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person(s) or
entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of erosion control
structures and measures during development and after development is completed.
      5.   Phasing: The proposed phasing of development of the site, including
stripping and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and
landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of
clearing, installation of temporary soil stabilization measures, clearing and
grading, installation of storm drainage, final grading, and the establishment
of permanent vegetative cover and removal of temporary measures. The applicant
shall notify the City of site development schedule changes after plan approval.
   B.   Preparation According To Standards And Requirements: These submissions
shall be prepared in accordance with the standards and requirements of this
chapter and the standards and requirements contained in Illinois Procedures and
Standards for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control prepared by the
Northeastern Illinois Erosion and Sedimentation Control Steering Committee and
adopted by the McHenry County Soil and Water Conservation District, and
Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control published by
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency which standards and requirements
are on file in the Office of the City Engineer and hereby incorporated into
this chapter by reference.
   C.   Waiver By Director: The Director of the Community Development
Department may waive specific requirements for the content of submissions upon
finding that the information submitted is sufficient to show that the work will
comply with the objectives and principles of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 18.50-6)
10-21-7: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
Each application for a site development permit shall be reviewed and acted upon
according to the following procedures:
   A.   Review; Referral To Additional Agencies: The Director of the Community
Development Department will review each application for a site development
permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this chapter. The
Director of the Community Development Department may also refer any application
to the City Engineer, the McHenry County Soil and Water Conservation District
and/or any other local government or public agency within whose jurisdiction
the site is located for review and comment. Within sixty (60) days after
receiving an application, the Director of Public Works shall, in writing:
      1.   Approve the permit application if it is found to be in conformance
with the provisions of this chapter, and issue the permit; or
      2.   Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions
as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this chapter, and
issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
      3.   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies and
the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
   B.   Additional Requirements: No site development permit shall be issued for
an intended development site unless:
      1.   The development, including, but not limited to, subdivisions and
integrated design districts, has been approved by the City where applicable; or
      2.   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the City; or
      3.   The proposed earth moving is coordinated with an overall development
program previously approved by the City for the area in which the site is
situated; and
      4.   All relevant Federal and State permits have been received for the
portion of the site subject to soil disturbance.
(1987 Code § 18.50-8)
10-21-8: BONDS:
The applicant shall file with the City a faithful performance bond or bonds,
letter of credit, or other improvement security in a form satisfactory to the
City Attorney and in an amount deemed sufficient by the City Engineer to cover
all costs of improvements, landscaping and maintenance of improvements, and
landscaping and soil erosion and sediment control measures for a period of one
year after the installation thereof, or for such other period that the City
Engineer may determine and specify, and engineering and inspection costs to
cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site.
(1987 Code § 18.50-7)
10-21-9: FEES AND EXPENSES REIMBURSED TO CITY BY PERMITTEE:
Permittees shall pay and reimburse the City for any and all Council and
administrative expenses and costs, and for any and all fees, salaries or
compensations incurred and charged to the City by retained personnel of the
City in connection with planning, reviewing, evaluating, advising, approving,
implementing or enforcing any site development application or permit by the
City.
   A.   Retained Personnel Defined: Retained personnel shall be defined as any
engineer, attorney, planner, economist or other technical, professional or
other expert paid and retained by said City to assist or advise said City,
directly and indirectly, in planning, reviewing, evaluating, advising,
approving, implementing or enforcing any site development application or permit
by said City.
   B.   Deposit Amounts Required: The permittee shall deposit with the City
into a specified account, the following amounts to be used toward defraying
expenses and fees of its retained personnel:
The sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per acre or fraction thereof, involved
in the site development, with a minimum deposit of two hundred dollars
($200.00) and a maximum deposit of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00).
   C.   Acre Defined: An acre for the purposes of subsection B of this section,
shall be defined as that measurement of land that is the dimension of an acre
notwithstanding any roads, buildings or other physical structures or obstacles
located on, within or adjacent to said measurement.
   D.   Stay Of Proceedings: All proceedings and work in connection with such
application shall be stayed until said sum so designated is deposited with the
City as aforesaid.
   E.   Statement: Any statement or bill submitted to the City by the retained
personnel shall segregate and identify the charges and fees incurred directly
or indirectly connected with said site development. A duplicate statement shall
be forwarded to said permittee at the time said charges and fees are withdrawn
from said specified amount.
   F.   Demand For Payment Of Fees: At any time the balance of the specified
amount reaches three hundred dollars ($300.00), the Finance Director may demand
from the permittee a sum of money, that, in addition to the balance in said
specified amount, shall equal the amount originally required hereunder or such
lesser fraction thereof that the City Council might, in such cases, determine.
   G.   Proceedings Stopped Until Demand Met: All proceedings and work, with
regard to such site development shall be stopped until said subsequent demands
for payment of fees shall be deposited in said specified account.
(1987 Code § 18.50-23)
   H.   Refusal Of Demand: Any demand or subsequent demand of the Finance
Director, not deposited by the permittee within six (6) months of the date of
said demand, shall terminate and render null and void the proposed site
development plan.
(1987 Code § 18.50-23; amd. 2019 Code)
   I.   Account Deposit: All retained personnel funds required to be deposited
by the permittee shall be deposited by the City into a specified account and
shall be held in the name of the City.
   J.   Continuances: The City Council may, for good cause shown by the
permittee in writing, grant continuances in writing to said permittee in
connection with said deposits.
   K.   Waiver: The City Council may, at their discretion and upon written
resolution, waive the requirements of this section.
   L.   Final Statement; Balance: Upon the presentment of the final statement
of the retained personnel and within sixty (60) days of the approval of the
work done pursuant to said permit, any balance remaining in the specified
account, excluding any interest, shall be returned and repaid to the permittee.
Any interest that may be earned in connection with said deposit shall be
retained by the City.
   M.   Exception When Deposits Made Under Subdivision: The aforesaid retained
personnel deposit shall not be required during the time that any retained
personnel funds are on deposit pursuant to the requirements of the Subdivision
Control and Development Ordinance of the City in connection with any
subdivision development.
(1987 Code § 18.50-23)
10-21-10: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Every site development permit shall expire and become null and void if the work
authorized by such permit has not been commenced within one hundred eighty
(180) days of the permit date, or is not completed by a date which shall be
specified in the permit; except that the Director of the Community Development
Department may, if the permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual
difficulties have prevented work being commenced or completed within the
specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written
application is made before the expiration date of the permit.
(1987 Code § 18.50-18)
10-21-11: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS HANDBOOK ADOPTED:
The standards and specifications contained in Standards and Specifications for
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control and Illinois Procedures and Standards
for Urban Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control, cited in section
10-21-6 of this chapter, are hereby incorporated into this chapter and made a
part hereof by reference for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods
of operation under site development and erosion and sedimentation control plans
approved under this chapter. In the event of conflict between provisions of
said manual and of this chapter, this chapter shall govern.
(1987 Code § 18.50-13)
10-21-12: OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
All clearing, grading, stripping, excavating and filling, which is subject to
the permit requirements of this chapter, shall be subject to the applicable
standards and requirements set forth herein.
(1987 Code § 18.50-10)
10-21-13: SITE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Sediment Control Measures: On site sediment control measures, as
specified by the following criteria, shall be constructed and functional prior
to initiating clearing, grading, stripping, excavating or fill activities on
the site:
      1.   For disturbed areas draining less than one acre, filter barriers
(including filter fences, straw bales or equivalent control measures) shall be
constructed to control all off site runoff as specified in the referenced
handbooks. Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of twenty five feet
(25'), may be used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is
expected.
      2.   For disturbed areas draining more than one but less than five (5)
acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at
the downslope point of the disturbed area.
      3.   For disturbed areas draining more than five (5) acres, a sediment
basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope point
of the disturbed area.
      4.   Sediment basin and sediment trap designs shall provide for both
detention storage and sediment storage and shall be composed of equal volumes
of “wet” detention storage and “dry” detention storage and each shall be sized
for the 2-year, 24-hour runoff from the site under maximum runoff conditions
during construction. The release rate of the basin shall be that rate required
to achieve minimum detention times of at least ten (10) hours. The elevation of
the outlet structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention
storage.
      5.   The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated sediment
load generated from the site over the duration of the construction period with
a minimum storage equivalent to the volume of sediment generated in one year.
For construction periods exceeding one year, the 1-year sediment load and a
sediment removal schedule may be substituted.
   B.   Stormwater: Stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches, swales
and diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes, shall be designed
and constructed to withstand the expected flow velocity from the 10-year
frequency storm without erosion. All constructed or modified channels shall be
stabilized within forty eight (48) hours, consistent with the following
standards:
      1.   For grades up to four percent (4%), seeding in combination with
mulch, erosion blanket, or an equivalent control measure shall be applied. Sod
or erosion blanket or mat shall be applied to the bottom of the channel.
      2.   For grades of four percent (4%) to eight percent (8%), permanent
ditch checks and sod, or an equivalent control measure, shall be applied in the
channel.
      3.   For grades greater than eight percent (8%), rock, riprap or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied, or the grade shall be effectively
reduced using drop structures.
   C.   Stabilization Of Disturbed Areas: Disturbed areas shall be stabilized
with temporary or permanent measures within seven (7) calendar days following
the end of active disturbance, or redisturbance, consistent with the following
criteria:
      1.   Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization measures shall
include seeding, mulching, sodding and/or nonvegetative measures.
      2.   Areas having slopes greater than twelve percent (12%) shall be
stabilized with sod, mat or blanket in combination with seeding, or equivalent.
   D.   Land Disturbance Activities: Land disturbance activities in stream
channels shall be avoided, where possible. If disturbance activities are
unavoidable, the following requirements shall be met:
      1.   Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to the
maximum extent practicable. Where construction crossings are necessary,
temporary crossings shall be constructed of nonerosive material, such as riprap
or gravel.
      2.   The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be kept to
a minimum. The stream channel, including bed and banks, shall be restabilized
within forty eight (48) hours after channel disturbance is completed,
interrupted or stopped.
      3.   Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall be
constructed and fully stabilized before flow is diverted.
   E.   Storm Sewer Protection: Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be
protected by sediment traps or filter barriers meeting accepted design
standards and specifications.
   F.   Soil Storage Piles: Soil storage piles containing more than ten (10)
cubic yards of material shall not be located with a downslope drainage length
of less than twenty five feet (25') to a roadway or drainage channel. Filter
barriers, including straw bales, filter fence, or equivalent, shall be
installed immediately on the downslope side of the piles.
   G.   Dewatering Devices: If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations
shall be protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through
appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent.
   H.   Roadway Protection: Each site shall have a graveled (or equivalent)
entrance road, access drive and parking area of sufficient length and width to
prevent sediment from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any
sediment reaching a public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or
street cleaning (not flushing) before the end of each workday and transported
to a controlled sediment disposal area.
   I.   Maintenance Of Erosion And Sediment Control: All temporary and
permanent erosion and sediment control practices must be maintained and
repaired as needed to assure effective performance of their intended function.
   J.   Disposal Of Temporary Erosion And Sediment Control: All temporary
erosion and sediment control measures shall be disposed of within thirty (30)
days after final site stabilization is achieved with permanent soil
stabilization measures. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soils resulting
from the disposition of temporary measures should be permanently stabilized to
prevent further erosion and sedimentation.
(1987 Code § 18.50-12)
10-21-14: MAINTENANCE OF CONTROL MEASURES:
All soil erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the
requirements of this chapter shall be maintained periodically by the applicant
or subsequent landowner during the period of land disturbance and development
of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure adequate performance.
Construction sites greater than five (5) acres must also comply with the
maintenance provisions of the required National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit.
(1987 Code § 18.50-14)
10-21-15: INSPECTIONS:
The Director of the Community Development Department shall make inspections, or
shall cause them to be made, and shall either approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with
the site development or erosion and sedimentation control plan as approved.
Plans for grading, stripping, excavating and filling work bearing the signature
of the Director of the Community Development Department shall be maintained at
the site during progress of the work. The permittee shall give notice and
request inspection at the completion of each of the work stages in the plan,
including: installation of sediment and runoff control measures prior to other
earth disturbance or grading; after stripping and clearing: after rough
grading; after final grading; after seeding and landscaping; after final
stabilization and landscaping; prior to removal of sediment controls.
(1987 Code § 18.50-15)
10-21-16: SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS:
   A.   When Required: If at any stage of the grading of any development site
the Director of the Community Development Department determines by inspection
that the nature of the site is such that further work authorized by an existing
permit is likely to imperil any property, public way, stream, lake, wetland,
watercourse or drainage structure, the Director of the Community Development
Department may require, as a condition of allowing the work to be done, that
such reasonable special precautions be taken as is considered advisable to
avoid the likelihood of such peril. “Special precautions” may include, but
shall not be limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction of additional
drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction or cribbing, installation of
plant materials for erosion control, and the recommendations of the City
Engineer.
   B.   Temporary Structures For Protection: Where it appears that storm damage
may result because the grading on any development site is not complete, work
may be stopped and the permittee required to install temporary structures or
take such other measures as may be required to protect adjoining property or
the public safety. On large developments or where unusual site conditions
prevail, the Director of the Community Development Department may specify the
time of starting grading and time of completion, or may require that the
operations be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of
protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
(1987 Code § 18.50-16)
10-21-17: AMENDMENT OF PLANS:
Major amendments of the site development or erosion and sedimentation control
plans shall be submitted to the Director of the Community Development
Department and shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same
manner as the original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be
authorized in writing by the Director of the Community Development Department.
(1987 Code § 18.50-17)
10-21-18: EXCEPTIONS FROM REQUIREMENTS AND REGULATIONS:
The City Council may, in accordance with the following procedures, authorize
exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this
chapter:
   A.   Application For Exception; Findings: Application for any exception
shall be made by a verified petition of the applicant for a site development
permit, stating fully the grounds of the petition and the facts relied upon by
the applicant. Such petition shall be filed with the site development permit
application. No petition shall be granted unless the City Council expressly
finds:
      1.   The land is of such shape or size or is affected by such physical
conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record that it is
impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter; and
      2.   The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the applicant; and
      3.   The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public
welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject property.
(1987 Code § 18.50-19)
   B.   Review; Recommendation: Each application for an exception shall be
referred to the Director of Public Works for review. The Director of Public
Works shall transmit their recommendations to the City Council, which shall
review such recommendations prior to granting or denying the exception.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   C.   Public Hearing; Decision: The City Council shall hold a public hearing
on each application for exception. After public hearing, the City Council may
approve the site development permit application with the exceptions and
conditions it deems necessary or it may disapprove such site development permit
application and exception application or it may take such other action as
appropriate.
(1987 Code § 18.50-19)
10-21-19: STOP WORK ORDER; REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
In the event any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this
chapter violates the terms of the permit, or carries on site development in
such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare or safety
of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the development site, or
so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
property or improvements in the neighborhood, the Director of Public Works may
suspend or revoke the site development permit.
(1987 Code § 18.50-20)
   A.   Written Order; Effective: Suspension of a permit shall be by a written
stop work order issued by the Director of the Community Development Department
and delivered to the permittee or their agent or the person performing the
work. The stop work order shall be effective immediately, shall state the
specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under which work may
be resumed. A stop work order shall remain in effect until the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the City Council at which the conditions of subsection B
of this section can be met.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   B.   Hearing For Permanent Suspension, Revocation: No site development
permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a hearing is held by the
City Council. Written notice of such hearing shall be served on the permittee,
either personally or by registered or certified mail, and shall state:
      1.   The grounds or reasons for suspension or revocation;
      2.   The date, time and place of such hearing.
(1987 Code § 18.50-20)
   C.   Service; Hearing: Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least
five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the
permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and
present evidence on their behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the City
Council shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
10-21-20: PERMITTEE RESPONSIBILITIES; CITY IMMUNITY:
The permittee is not relieved of responsibility for damage to persons or
property otherwise imposed by law, and the City, its officers, agents, servants
and employees shall not be liable for such damage, by:
   A.   The issuance of a permit under this chapter;
   B.   Compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of that permit or with
conditions attached to it by the Director of the Community Development
Department;
   C.   Failure to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions;
   D.   Failure to recommend denial of or to deny a permit; or
   E.   Exemptions from the permit requirements of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 18.50-11)
10-21-21: APPEALS:
The applicant, or any person or agency which received notice of the filing of
the application, may appeal the decision of the Director of the Community
Development Department to the City Council. Such appeals shall be filed with
the City Clerk in writing within ten (10) days after the applicant has received
the decision of the Director and the appeal shall specify the decision from
which the appeal is taken and the basis and reasons for the appeal. Factors to
be considered on appeal shall include, but need not be limited to:
   A.   Surface Water: The effects of the proposed development activities on
the surface water flow to tributary and downstream lands and any comprehensive
watershed management plans;
   B.   Retention Facilities: The use of any retention facilities; possible
saturation of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic;
   C.   Erosion, Silting: Runoff surface waters that produce erosion and
silting of drainageways;
   D.   Inability To Landscape: Nature and type of soil or rock which when
disturbed by the proposed development activities may create earth movement and
produce slopes that cannot be landscaped;
   E.   Scarring: Excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape
through grading or removal of vegetation.
(1987 Code § 18.50-9)
10-21-22: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
No person, firm, corporation or entity shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair
or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be done,
contrary to or in violation of any terms of this chapter. Any person violating
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate
offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, firm, corporation
or entity shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. In
addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, firm,
corporation or entity convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be required to restore the site to the condition existing prior
to commission of the violation, or to bear the expense of such restoration.
(1987 Code § 18.50-21)
CHAPTER 22: HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Section
10-22-1: Purpose And Intent
10-22-2: Interpretation
10-22-3: Definitions
10-22-4: Landmark Commission
10-22-5: Designation Of Landmarks And Preservation Districts
10-22-6: Alteration, Construction, Demolition And Maintenance
10-22-7: Administration And Enforcement
10-22-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Identify, designate, protect, preserve and encourage the restoration,
rehabilitation and adaptation for continued use of those sites and structures
which represent or reflect the prehistoric, historic, cultural, artistic,
social, economic, ethnic or political heritage of the City, or which may be
representative of an architectural or engineering type inherently valuable for
the study of style, period, craftsmanship, method of construction identified to
an individual builder or architect, or use of indigenous materials.
   B.   Safeguard the City’s historic, aesthetic and cultural heritage, as
embodied and reflected in structures, landscape features, and areas as seen in
such examples as houses, commercial buildings, schools, public buildings,
mills, creameries, farms, Downtown Business Districts, cemeteries, bridges,
boat houses, iron fences and open spaces.
   C.   Stabilize and improve the economic vitality and value of designated
landmarks and preservation districts in particular and of the City in general.
   D.   Educate the public, government officials and commercial and industrial
interests of historic preservation, which needs to be fostered continually
through a Preservation Ordinance.
   E.   Work with City staff, appointed boards and commissions, Aldermen and
Landmark Commission to establish and maintain a historic preservation program.
   F.   Coordinate the City Preservation Ordinance with the County Preservation
Ordinance.
   G.   Foster civic pride in the technological accomplishments, beauty and
nobility of the past.
   H.   Protect and enhance the City’s attraction to tourists and visitors, and
to support and provide stimulus to business and industry from a historic
preservation perspective.
   I.   Preserve and promote the use of preservation districts, landmarks and
landscapes for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the City.
(Ord. 09-977, 1-5-2009)
10-22-2: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   Other Laws: No provision herein shall supersede the powers of other
legislative or regulatory bodies or relieve any property owner from complying
with the requirements of any other statute, code or ordinance of the City, and
any permit or license required thereunder shall be required in addition to any
Certificate of Appropriateness or Certificate of Economic Hardship which may be
required.
   B.   Governed By Zoning Ordinance: The use of property and structures that
have been designated under this chapter shall be governed by the City Zoning
Ordinance.
   C.   Severability: If any particular section of this chapter is declared
unconstitutional or void, only that particular section shall be affected, and
all other sections of this chapter shall remain in full force.
   D.   Unsafe, Dangerous Structures: None of the provisions of this chapter
shall be construed to prevent any measures of construction, alteration or
demolition necessary to correct or abate the unsafe or dangerous condition of
any structure or part thereof, where such condition has been declared unsafe or
dangerous by the City, the McHenry County Health Department, or the Fire
Protection District; provided, however, that only such work as is reasonably
necessary to correct the unsafe or dangerous condition may be performed.
(Ord. 09-977, 1-5-2009)
10-22-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALTERATION: Any act or process that changes one or more historic, architectural
or physical features of an area, site, landscape or structure, including, but
not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction or removal of any
structure; the expansion or significant modification of agricultural
activities; surface mining and the clearing, grading or other modification of
an area, site or landscape that changes its current natural condition.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE: Importance as an area, site or landscape that has
yielded or is likely to yield information concerning past patterns of human
settlement, or artifacts or information concerning previous cultures in
Illinois or previous periods of the present culture. Areas, sites or landscapes
of archaeological significance may include, but are not limited to, aboriginal
mounds, forts, earthworks, burial grounds, historic or prehistoric ruins,
locations of villages, mine excavations or tailings.
ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE: Embodying the distinctive characteristics of a
type, period, style or method of construction or use of indigenous materials,
or representing the work of a builder, designer, architect or craftsman who has
contributed to the development of the City, County, State or the Nation.
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS: A certificate issued by the City authorizing an
alteration, construction, demolition or removal affecting a nominated or
designated landmark or property within a nominated or designated preservation
district.
CERTIFICATE OF ECONOMIC HARDSHIP: A certificate issued by the City authorizing
an alteration, construction, demolition or removal affecting a nominated or
designated landmark or property within a nominated or designated preservation
district, even though a Certificate of Appropriateness has been denied or may
be denied.
COMMISSION: The City of McHenry Landmark Commission.
CONSTRUCTION: An addition to a structure, or the erection of a new structure.
DEMOLITION: Any act or process which destroys a structure in part or in whole.
DEMOLITION BY NEGLECT: Neglect in the maintenance of any structure resulting in
the deterioration of that structure to the extent that it creates a hazardous
or unsafe condition.
DESIGN CRITERIA: Standards of appropriate activity that will preserve the
historic, architectural, scenic or aesthetic character of a landmark or
preservation district.
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL SIGNIFICANCE: The architectural character and general
composition of the exterior of a structure, including, but not limited to, the
kind, color and texture of the building material and the type, design and
character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and appurtenant
elements.
HISTORIC SIGNIFICANCE: Character, interest or value as part of the development,
heritage or culture as the location of an important local, County, State or
national event, or through identification with a person or persons who made
important contributions to the development of the City, County, State or the
Nation.
LANDMARK: A property or structure designated as a landmark by ordinance of the
City, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, which is worthy of
rehabilitation, restoration or preservation because of its historic, scenic or
architectural significance.
LANDSCAPE: A natural feature or group of natural features, including, but not
limited to, valleys, rivers, lakes, swamps, forests, woods, hills, combination
of natural features, structures, objects, cultivated fields, or orchards in a
predominantly rural setting.
OBJECT: Any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, any items of
personal property, wagons, boats and locally manufactured products that may be
easily moved or removed.
OWNER OF RECORD: The person, corporation or other legal entity in whose name
the property appears on the records of the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds, or
those who paid Property Taxes for the most recent year according to the records
of the McHenry County Collector.
PRESERVATION DISTRICT: An area designated as a preservation district by
ordinance of the City, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, and which may
contain one or more landmarks within definable geographic boundaries, and which
may have within its boundaries other areas, sites, landscapes or structures
which, while not of such historic or architectural or scenic significance to be
designated as landmarks, nevertheless, contribute to the overall visual
characteristics of the landmarks located within the district.
REMOVAL: Any relocation of a structure or object within the site or to another
site.
REPAIR: Any change to a structure that is not construction, alteration,
demolition or removal and is necessary for continuing normal maintenance and
upkeep.
SCENIC SIGNIFICANCE: Importance as a result of appearance or character that
remains relatively unchanged from and embodies the essential appearance related
to a culture from an earlier historic or prehistoric period, as a result of a
unique location, appearance or familiar vista or visual feature, or as a
geological or natural feature associated with the development heritage or
culture of the City, County, State or the Nation.
SITE: The traditional, documented or legendary location of an event,
occurrence, action or structure significant in the life or lives of a person,
persons, group or tribe, including, but not limited to, cemeteries, burial
grounds, campsites, settlements, estates, gardens, groves, river crossings,
routes, trails, caves, quarries, mines or significant plant life.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent
or temporary location on or in the ground, including, but not limited to,
houses, barns, smokehouses, signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts,
bridges, fences, pergolas, gazebos, boat houses, radio and television antennae,
solar collectors, microwave antennae (including supporting towers), roads,
ruins or remnants (including foundations), swimming pools or walkways.
SURVEY: The systematic gathering of information on the architectural, historic,
scenic, and archaeological significance of sites, structures, areas or
landscapes through visual assessment in the field and historical research for
the purpose of identifying landmarks or districts worthy of preservation.
(Ord. 09-977, 1-5-2009)
10-22-4: LANDMARK COMMISSION:
   A.   Organization:
   1.   Appointment: The Mayor shall, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, appoint members to the City Landmark Commission.
   2.   Composition: The Landmark Commission shall consist of nine (9) members.
      a.   Terms: The regular term shall be one (1) year for members.
      b.   Officers: The Mayor shall annually appoint one member to serve as
Chairperson. The commission shall elect all other officers by majority vote.
      c.   Vacancies: Vacancies shall be filled by the Mayor with the advice
and consent of the City Council. Any commission member may be removed by the
City Council for cause.
      d.   Meetings: All meetings of the commission shall be held at the call
of the Chairperson and at such other times as the commission and/or City
Council may determine. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the
public. The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings. The minutes shall
show the vote, or absence or abstention, of each member upon every official
action, and shall be a public record open for inspection and maintained by the
City Clerk. All meetings shall comply with the Open Meetings Act.
      e.   Quorum: Any five (5) members of the commission shall constitute a
quorum for the purposes of transacting any business at any meeting of said
commission.
   B.   Powers And Authorities:
      1.   Ongoing Survey: To conduct an ongoing survey of the City to identify
structures, areas, sites and landscapes that are of historic, archeological,
architectural or scenic significance, and are therefor potential landmarks or
preservation districts.
      2.   Hearings, Recommendations: To hold public hearings and recommend to
the City Council designation of landmarks or preservation districts.
      3.   Compile Information: To compile information concerning and prepare
descriptions of landmarks or preservation districts identified and recommended
for designation and the characteristics that meet the criteria for designation.
      4.   Maps: To prepare, keep current and publish a map or maps showing the
location and exact boundaries of proposed and designated landmarks and
preservation districts, and the locations and boundaries of designated County,
State or Federal landmarks or preservation districts.
      5.   Register: To keep a register of all designated landmarks and
preservation districts.
      6.   Markers, Plaques: To establish an appropriate system of markers or
plaques for all designated landmarks and preservation districts, and for
streets, roads, trails and highways leading from one landmark or preservation
district to another, and to recommend that the City confer recognition upon the
owners of landmarks or property within preservation districts by means of
certificates, plaques or markers.
      7.   Recommend Nominations: To recommend to City Council the nomination
of landmarks and preservation districts to any State or Federal Registers of
Historic Places.
      8.   Advise, Assist Owners: To advise and assist owners of landmarks and
property within preservation districts on physical and financial aspects of
preservation, renovation, rehabilitation and reuse, and on procedures for
inclusion on any State or Federal Register of Historic Places.
      9.   Inform, Educate Public: To inform and educate the citizens of the
City concerning the historic, archeological, architectural or scenic heritage
of the City by publishing appropriate maps, newsletters, brochures and
pamphlets, and by holding programs and seminars.
      10.   Develop Criteria, Guidelines: To develop specific criteria and
guidelines for the proper alteration, construction, demolition or removal of
landmarks, or of property within preservation districts.
      11.   Public Hearings, Review Applications: To hold public hearings and
to review applications for construction, alteration, removal or demolition
affecting nominated or designated landmarks or property within preservation
districts, and issue or deny or recommend approval or denial of a Certificate
of Appropriateness, or of a Certificate of Economic Hardship that would allow
the performance of work for which a Certificate of Appropriateness has been
denied for such actions.
      12.   Gifts, Grants: To accept and administer on behalf of the City, upon
designation by the City Council, such gifts, grants and money as may be
appropriate for the purposes of this chapter.
      13.   Seek Assistance: To seek help from citizen, neighborhood or area
advisory committees, as required from time to time.
      14.   Testify As Necessary: To testify before all appointed boards and
commissions on any matter affecting nominated or designated landmarks or
preservation districts.
      15.   Review Laws: To periodically review the Zoning Ordinance and
Building Codes and recommend to the City Council any amendments appropriate for
the protection and continued use of landmarks or property within preservation
districts.
      16.   Federal, State Projects: To advise or testify on behalf of the City
for Federal and State projects requiring cultural impact surveys.
      17.   Other Action, Activity: To undertake any other action or activity
necessary or appropriate to the implementation of the purposes of this chapter.
      18.   Annual Report: To submit an annual report of its activities to the
City Council.
   C.   Surveys And Research:
      1.   The commission shall undertake an ongoing survey and research effort
to identify districts, sites, structures and objects that have historical,
cultural, community, architectural, archaeological or aesthetic significance,
interest or value. As part of the survey, the commission shall review and
evaluate any prior surveys and studies by any unit of government or private
organizations and compile appropriate descriptions, facts and photographs.
      2.   The commission shall systematically identify potential landmarks and
preservation districts associated with a particular person, event or historical
period, or of a particular architectural style or school or building material,
or of a particular architect, engineer, builder or craftsman, and adopt
procedures to assure systematic survey and nomination of all potential
landmarks and preservation districts within the City.
   D.   Preservation Plan:
      1.   Preparation Required: The commission shall, through the aforesaid
surveys and research, become thoroughly familiarized with districts, sites,
structures and objects within the City that may be eligible for designation as
historic landmarks or preservation districts, and prepare a Historic Landmark
and District Preservation Plan.
      2.   Presentation To City Council: The Historic Landmark and District
Preservation Plan shall be presented to the City Council for consideration and
recommendation for inclusion in the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 09-977, 1-5-2009; amd. Ord. 21-35, 7-19-2021; Ord. 25-5, 1-21-2025)
10-22-5: DESIGNATION OF LANDMARKS AND PRESERVATION DISTRICTS:
   A.   Nomination:
      1.   Scope: The commission or any person may nominate landmarks or
preservation districts for designation by the City Council, provided however,
only the Mayor and City Council shall be permitted to nominate a landmark or
preservation district if the owner of a single proposed landmark, or twenty
five percent (25%) or more of the owners in a proposed preservation district,
object to the nomination.
      2.   Forms, Information Required: Nomination forms shall be filed with
the City Clerk, and shall include the following:
         a.   The name and address of the owner of record of the nominated
landmark or of all properties in a nominated preservation district;
         b.   The legal description and common street address(es) of the
nominated landmark or preservation district;
         c.   A map delineating the boundaries and location of the nominated
landmark or preservation district;
         d.   A statement indicating whether the owner of record of a single
nominated landmark or each of the owners of record within a nominated
preservation district consents to the landmark designation; all reasonable
efforts shall be made to secure the written consent of the owner(s) before
filing the nomination;
         e.   A written statement, with photographs, describing the property
and setting forth the reasons in support of the nomination;
         f.   In nominating an area for designation as a preservation district,
a list enumerating all properties and improvements in the area previously
nominated or designated as a landmark by the City, or listed on any State or
Federal Registers of Historic Places.
   B.   Criteria For Designation: The commission may recommend to the City
Council the designation of landmarks and preservation districts, upon written
proof of notification of the owner of record of a single nominated landmark or
each of the owners of record within a nominated preservation district, after a
thorough investigation results in a determination that a property, structure or
district so recommended is at least fifty (50) years old and meets one or more
of the following criteria:
      1.   It has character, interest or value which is part of the
development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, County, State or
the Nation;
      2.   Its location is the site of a significant local, County, State or
national event;
      3.   It is identified with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the development of the City, County, State or the Nation;
      4.   It embodies distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style
valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction or use of
indigenous materials;
      5.   It is identified with the work of a master builder, designer,
architect or landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the
development of the City, County, State or the Nation;
      6.   It embodies elements of design, detailing, materials or
craftsmanship that render it architecturally significant;
      7.   It embodies design elements that make it structurally or
architecturally innovative;
      8.   It has a unique location or singular physical characteristic that
make it an established or familiar visual feature;
      9.   It has character which is a particularly fine or unique example of a
utilitarian structure, including, but not limited to, farmhouses, gas stations
or other commercial structures with a high level of integrity or architectural
significance;
      10.   It establishes a sense of time and place unique to the City;
      11.   It is suitable for preservation or restoration because of its
integrity of location, design, materials and workmanship;
      12.   It is included in the National Register of Historic Places or the
Illinois Register of Historic Places;
      13.   It has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important to
prehistory or other areas of archaeological significance;
      14.   It is an exceptional example of a historic or vernacular style or
one of few remaining in the City.
   C.   Initial Report: Within thirty (30) days from receipt of a complete
nomination, the commission shall cause to be written an initial report stating
whether the nominated landmark or preservation district meets the criteria for
designation herein. The report shall be available to the public in the Office
of the City Clerk, and shall contain the following information:
      1.   An explanation of the significance or lack of significance of the
nominated landmark or preservation district as it relates to the criteria for
designation;
      2.   A description of the integrity or lack of integrity of the nominated
landmark or preservation district;
      3.   The relationship of the nominated landmark or preservation district
to the ongoing effort of the commission to identify and nominate all potential
areas and structures that meet the criteria for designation;
      4.   In the case of a nominated landmark or preservation district found
to meet the criteria for designation, the report shall contain:
         a.   A description of the significant exterior architectural features
of the nominated landmark that should be protected;
         b.   A description of the types of construction, alterations, or
demolitions that should be reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to this
chapter.
   D.   Public Hearing On Nomination:
      1.   Within thirty (30) days from completion of the initial report and
recommendation, the commission shall schedule a public hearing on the
nomination.
      2.   Oral or written testimony shall be taken at the public hearing. The
commission may solicit expert testimony or present its own evidence regarding
the historic, archaeological or scenic significance of a proposed landmark or
of any property within a proposed preservation district relative to compliance
with the criteria for designation. The owner of any nominated landmark or of
any property within a nominated preservation district shall be allowed
reasonable opportunity to present evidence and to cross examine expert
witnesses. The hearing shall be closed upon completion of testimony.
   E.   Notice For Public Hearing On Nomination:
      1.   Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing,
the street address and legal description of the nominated landmark or the
boundaries of a nominated preservation district, and a copy of the completed
nomination form shall be sent by certified mail to the owner of record of a
single nominated landmark or each of the owners of record within a nominated
preservation district not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15)
days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing.
      2.   Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing,
and the street address and legal description of the nominated landmark, or the
boundaries of a nominated preservation district shall be sent by regular mail
to the owners of record of each parcel of real estate abutting or across a
street or alley from the nominated landmark or preservation district not more
than thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled date of
the hearing.
      3.   Notice of the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing,
and the street address and legal description of the nominated landmark or the
boundaries of a nominated preservation district shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the City not more than thirty (30) nor less
than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled date of the hearing.
   F.   Recommendation Of Commission: Within thirty (30) days following the
close of the public hearing, the commission shall make its determination and
recommendation upon the evidence whether the proposed landmark or preservation
district meets the criteria for designation. The recommendation to the City
Council shall be passed by a formal vote of the commission. This recommendation
shall be accompanied by a report stating the findings of the commission
concerning the historic, archaeological or scenic significance of the proposed
landmark or preservation district.
   G.   Designation: The City Council shall consider the nomination upon
receipt of the report and recommendation of the commission. The City Council
may schedule a public hearing concerning the nomination and shall provide
notice in the same manner as provided in subsection E of this section. The City
Council, after reviewing the report and recommendation, shall take one of the
following steps within sixty (60) days from receipt of the recommendation of
the commission:
      1.   Designate the landmark or preservation district by ordinance;
      2.   Refer the report and recommendation back to the commission with
suggestions for revisions, stating its reasons for such action; or
      3.   Deny the landmark designation. If the City Council denies the
landmark designation, no nomination for landmark designation of the same site,
structure or district shall be made within ninety (90) days of the date of the
final denial.
   H.   Notice Of Designation: Notice of the action of the City Council shall
be sent by regular mail to the owner of record of the landmark or all owners of
record of property within the preservation district, and to the owners of
record of each parcel of real estate abutting or across a street or alley from
the designated landmark or preservation district. The City will also notify the
McHenry County Recorder of Deeds by forwarding a copy of the designation
ordinance to be recorded.
   I.   Publication Of Map: A map showing the location of all designated
landmarks and preservation districts shall be published and amended upon each
designation. Copies of the maps shall be available to the public at the Office
of the City Clerk.
   J.   Marking By Attachment Of Plaque: Each designated landmark or
preservation district may be marked, with the owner’s consent, by an
appropriate plaque carrying a brief description and account of the historical
significance of the property.
   K.   Amendment Or Rescission Of Designation: The City Council, with or
without a recommendation from the commission, may amend or rescind designation
by the same procedure and according to the same standards and considerations
set forth for designation.
(Ord. 09-977, 1-5-2009)
10-22-6: ALTERATION, CONSTRUCTION, DEMOLITION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Scope: No exterior construction, alteration, demolition or removal is
permitted on property and structures nominated or designated under this chapter
as landmarks or preservation districts, except as shall be approved by a
Certificate of Appropriateness or Certificate of Economic Hardship.
   B.   Certificate Of Appropriateness:
      1.   Application:
         a.   Every application submitted to the City for a building permit
affecting property or structures nominated or designated under this chapter as
landmarks or preservation districts shall be forwarded to the commission
following the receipt of said application.
         b.   Application for review of construction, alteration, demolition or
removals not requiring a building permit, but for which a Certificate of
Appropriateness is required, shall be made on a form available at the City, and
shall be forwarded to the commission following the receipt of said application.
      2.   Required Information: The following information shall be required
for all applications for a Certificates of Appropriateness:
         a.   Street address;
         b.   Legal description;
         c.   Brief description of the present improvements situated on the
property;
         d.   A detailed description of the construction, alteration,
demolition or removal proposed, together with any architectural drawings or
sketches, or a sufficient description to enable anyone to determine the final
appearance of the real estate, including landscaping;
         e.   Owner’s name;
         f.   An application fee established by the City Council to cover the
cost of the review process.
      3.   Consideration By Commission: The commission shall consider the
completed application at its next regular meeting. The commission shall act
promptly and in a reasonable manner in its judgment of plans for construction,
alteration, removal or demolition of structures in preservation districts that
have little historic value and that are not shown on priority lists, except
where such construction, alteration or demolition would seriously impair the
historic or architectural value of surrounding structures or the surrounding
area.
      4.   Design Criteria: The commission shall consider the following factors
in reviewing applications for Certificates of Appropriateness:
         a.   Height: Compatible with the style and character of the landmark
and with the surrounding structures within a preservation district;
         b.   Proportions Of Windows And Doors: Compatible with the
architectural style and character of the landmark and with the surrounding
structures within a preservation district;
         c.   Relationship Of Building Masses And Spaces: Compatible within a
preservation district to open space between it and adjoining structures;
         d.   Roof Shape: Compatible with the architectural style and character
of the landmark and surrounding structures in a preservation district;
         e.   Landscaping: Compatible with the architectural style and
character of the landmark and with the surrounding structures within a
preservation district;
         f.   Scale: Compatible with architectural style and character of the
landmark and with the surrounding structures within a preservation district;
         g.   Directional Expression: Compatible with the dominant horizontal
or vertical expression of surrounding structures and facades;
         h.   Architectural Details: Treated to make a landmark compatible with
its original architectural style or character.
      5.   Standards For Review: The commission, in considering the
appropriateness of any alteration, demolition, construction, or removal shall
be guided by the following general standards in addition to any design
guidelines in the ordinance designating the landmark or preservation district:
         a.   Every reasonable effort shall be made to provide a compatible use
for a property that requires minimal alteration of the structure, or site and
its environment, or to use a property for its originally intended purpose;
         b.   The distinguishing original qualities or character of a structure
or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. The removal or alteration
of any historic material or distinctive architectural feature should be avoided
when possible;
         c.   All structures and sites shall be recognized as products of their
time. Alterations which have no historical basis and which seek to create an
earlier appearance shall be discouraged;
         d.   Changes that may have taken place in the course of time are
evidence of the history and development of a structure or site and its
environment. These changes may have acquired significance in their own right,
and this significance shall be recognized and respected;
         e.   Distinctive stylistic features or examples of skilled
craftsmanship that characterize a structure or site shall be treated with
sensitivity;
         f.   Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather than
replaced wherever possible. If replacement is necessary, the new material
should match the material being replaced in composition, design, color, texture
and other visual qualities. Repair or replacement of missing architectural
features should be based on accurate duplication of features, substantiated by
historic, physical or pictorial evidence, rather than on conjectural designs or
the availability of different architectural elements from other structures;
         g.   The surface cleaning of structures shall be undertaken with the
gentlest means possible. Sandblasting and other cleaning methods that will
damage the historic building materials shall not be undertaken;
         h.   Every reasonable effort shall be made to protect and preserve
archaeological resources affected by or adjacent to any project;
         i.   Contemporary design for alterations and additions to existing
properties shall not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not
destroy significant historical, architectural or cultural material, and such
design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material and character of the
property, neighborhood or environment;
         j.   Wherever possible, new additions or alterations to structures
shall be done so that the essential form and integrity of the structure would
be unimpaired if such additions or alterations were to be removed in the
future.
      6.   Determination By Commission: The commission shall provide City
Council with a recommendation of the approval or denial of the Certificate of
Appropriateness supported by written findings.
      7.   Denial Of Certificate Of Appropriateness: A recommendation of denial
of a Certificate of Appropriateness shall be accompanied by a statement of the
reasons for the denial. The commission shall make recommendations to the City
concerning changes, if any, in the proposed action that would cause the
commission to reconsider its denial. The applicant may submit an amended
application or reapply for a building permit that takes into consideration the
recommendations of the commission.
      8.   Failure Of Commission To Review Application In Timely Manner:
Failure of the commission to make a recommendation to City Council regarding
the final determination on an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness
within ninety (90) days from receipt of a completed application shall
constitute approval and no other evidence shall be needed.
      9.   Demolitions: Upon receipt of an application for a Certificate of
Appropriateness for demolition, the commission shall make a recommendation to
City Council regarding its determination, supported by written findings,
whether one or more of the following criteria are met:
         a.   The structure is of such interest or quality that it would
reasonably meet national, State or local criteria for designation as a historic
or architectural landmark on its own credentials;
         b.   The structure is of such unusual or uncommon design, texture or
materials that it could not be reproduced, or be reproduced only with great
difficulty and expense;
         c.   Retention of the structure would aid substantially in preserving
and protecting another structure that meets the above criteria.
      10.   Compliance: A Certificate of Appropriateness will become void if
there is any change in the scope of work of the approved application subsequent
to the issuance of the certificate; if twelve (12) months have elapsed after
the issuance of the certificate and no building permit has been issued; or if
twenty four (24) months have lapsed after issuance of the last building permit
and the project has not been completed.
      11.   Appeals: Any appeal of a denial of Certificate of Appropriateness
shall be made to the City Council. The City Council, after reviewing the
recommendation and written findings of the commission, shall affirm the
recommendation or approve the Certificate of Appropriateness within sixty (60)
days from receipt of the appeal.
   C.   Certificate Of Economic Hardship:
      1.   Determination For Issuance: The City shall issue a Certificate of
Economic Hardship only after a determination that the failure to issue a
Certificate of Appropriateness has denied, or will deny the owner of a landmark
or of a property within a preservation district all reasonable use of, or
return on, the property.
      2.   Information Required: The City shall require the following
information, evidence, or expert testimony to make a determination on an
application for a Certificate of Economic Hardship:
         a.   An estimate of the cost of the proposed construction, alteration,
demolition or removal, and an estimate of any additional cost that would be
incurred to comply with the recommendations of the City for changes necessary
for the issuance of a Certificate of Appropriateness;
         b.   A report from an engineer or architect licensed in the State with
experience in rehabilitation as to the structural soundness of any structures
on the property for rehabilitation;
         c.   The estimated market value of the property in its current
condition; after completion of the proposed construction, alteration,
demolition or removal; after any changes recommended by the City; and, in the
case of a proposed demolition, after renovation of the property for continued
use;
         d.   An estimate of any decrease in the fair market value of the
property as a result of denial of the Certificate of Appropriateness and any
decrease in the pretax return to the owner or other investors in the property
as a result of the denial of the Certificate of Appropriateness;
         e.   In the case of a proposed demolition, an estimate from a licensed
architect, developer, real estate consultant, appraiser or other real estate
professional experienced in rehabilitation as to the economic feasibility of
rehabilitation or reuse of the existing structure on the property;
         f.   The amount paid for the property, the date of purchase and the
party from whom purchased, including a description of the relationship, if any,
between the owner or applicant and the person from whom the property was
purchased, and any terms of financing between the seller and buyer, and any
consideration by the owner as to profitable adaptive uses for the property;
         g.   If the property is income producing, the annual gross income from
the property for the previous two (2) years; itemized operating and maintenance
expenses for the previous two (2) years; and depreciation deduction and annual
cash flow before and after debt service, if any, during the same period;
         h.   Remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by
the property and annual debt service, if any, for the previous two (2) years,
and all appraisals obtained within the previous two (2) years by the owner or
applicant in connection with the purchase, financing or ownership of the
property;
         i.   Any listing of the property for sale or rent, price asked and
offers received, if any, within the previous two (2) years;
         j.   The assessed value of the property according to the two (2) most
recent quadrennial assessments;
         k.   The Real Estate Taxes paid or owed for the previous two (2)
years;
         l.   Form of ownership or operation of the property, whether sole
proprietorship, for profit or not for profit corporation, limited partnership,
joint venture or other;
         m.   Any other information, including the Income Tax bracket of the
owner, applicant or principal investors in the property considered necessary by
the City to make a determination as to whether the property does yield or may
yield a reasonable return to owners.
      3.   Determination Of Economic Hardship:
         a.   Within one hundred twenty (120) days from receipt of a completed
application for a Certificate of Economic Hardship, the City shall provide
notice of the approval or denial of the Certificate of Economic Hardship
supported by written findings.
         b.   In cases of denial of a Certificate of Economic Hardship, the
City may offer the owner of the property reasonable financing, tax or other
incentives sufficient to allow a reasonable use of, or return on, the property;
or that the City offer to purchase the property at a reasonable price or
institute eminent domain proceedings.
      4.   Appeal: Any appeal of a denial of a Certificate of Economic Hardship
shall be made to the City Council. The City Council, after reviewing the
determination and written findings of the commission, shall affirm the
determination or approve the Certificate of Economic Hardship within sixty (60)
days from receipt of the appeal.
(Ord. 09-977, 1-5-2009)
10-22-7: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement: The City may petition the Circuit Court of McHenry County
to restrain and/or enjoin any construction, removal, alteration or demolition
in violation of this chapter and may request the removal in whole or part of
any exterior architectural feature existing in violation of this chapter, which
may be necessary or desirable to redress any alteration or demolition in said
violation.
   B.   Penalty: Any person found to be in violation of any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion thereof
during which such violation is committed, continued or permitted, and each
offense may be punishable by a fine according to the Fines and Penalties found
in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and the City's reasonable attorney
fees.
      1.   Any person, firm or corporation who alters, repairs, relocates or
demolishes by neglect any landmark or any structure within a preservation
district without complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
required to restore the structure and its site to its appearance prior to the
violation. This civil remedy shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any
penalty contained in this section.
      2.   In the case of an unauthorized demolition of a landmark or a
property within a preservation district, the City may choose not to issue a
building permit for the subject property for a period of five (5) years after
the date of the demolition.
   C.   Equitable Relief: In addition to other remedies by law, the City may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, abate or
correct a violation of this ordinance including, but not limited to, requiring
the restoration of property and improvements to its appearance prior to the
violation.
(Ord. 09-977, 1-5-2009; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
TITLE 11: LAND USE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: ADMINISTRATION
Section
11-1-1: Permits And Certificates
11-1-2: Planning And Zoning Commission
11-1-3: Zoning Administrator And City Clerk
11-1-4: Appeals
11-1-5: Violation, Penalty And Enforcement
11-1-1: PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES:
   A.   Building Permit: It shall be unlawful to commence the construction,
alteration, repair, removal or demolition of any structure in the City without
obtaining a building permit from the City. The Building Officer shall issue no
building permit unless he or she has determined that the plans for the property
for which the permit is sought comply with all applicable provisions of this
title and with other applicable codes and ordinances of the City.
   B.   Certificate Of Occupancy:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to occupy or use any structure, land, water or
premises in the City, or change the occupancy or use thereof, in whole or in
part, without obtaining a Certificate of Occupancy from the City.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator shall issue no Certificate of Occupancy for
a new or remodeled premises unless he or she has inspected the premises after
completion of all construction and certified that the premises is in conformity
with the plans on which the building permit was based. He or she shall likewise
issue no Certificate of Occupancy for a change of occupancy without certifying
that the proposed occupancy will be in conformance with all applicable
regulations herein.
      3.   The following shall be exempt from the requirement for a Certificate
of Occupancy:
         a.   Land used for agricultural cultivation.
         b.   Residential buildings in which there is a change of occupancy
that does not involve a change to a different permitted or conditional use.
      4.   A temporary Certificate of Occupancy for a period not to exceed six
(6) months may be issued, consistent with the safety of the occupants, for
occupancy or partial occupancy pending completion of construction or
alterations.
      5.   The Zoning Administrator shall either issue or deny a Certificate of
Occupancy within twenty (20) days of application therefor. The Administrator
shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for any denial. (Ord. 86-
382, 12-22-1986)
11-1-2: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION:
   A.   Duties Of Commission: The duties of the Planning and Zoning Commission
are:
      1.   Prepare and recommend to the City Council a comprehensive plan for
the present and future development or redevelopment of the City. After its
adoption by the City Council, this plan shall be known as the City of McHenry
Comprehensive Plan (“Comprehensive Plan”). Thereafter, from time to time, the
commission may recommend changes in the Comprehensive Plan. This Comprehensive
Plan may include reasonable requirements with reference to the streets, alleys,
public grounds and other improvements in unsubdivided land situated within the
corporate limits or in contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (1-
1/2) miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any municipality.
These requirements shall be effective whenever this unsubdivided land is
subdivided after the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan. Following the adoption
of the Comprehensive Plan, no map or plat of any subdivision presented for
record affecting land within the corporate limits of the City or in contiguous
territory outside of and not more than one and one- half (11/2) miles from
those limits and not included in any other municipality, shall be entitled to
record or shall be valid unless the subdivision thereon shall provide for
streets, alleys, public grounds and other public improvements in conformity
with the Comprehensive Plan.
      2.   From time to time, prepare and recommend changes in the
Comprehensive Plan, or plans for specific improvements in the pursuance of the
Comprehensive Plan to the City Council.
      3.   Provide assistance to the City officials charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the Comprehensive Plan and to
further the making of these projects, and generally promote the Comprehensive
Plan.
      4.   Exercise such other powers, germane to the powers granted by this
Code as may be conferred by the City and are granted a City under the Illinois
Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-12-4 to 5/11-12-12.
      5.   Hear appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination
of the Zoning Administrator, relating to this title, by any person, firm or
corporation aggrieved thereby, or by any officer, department, council or
commission of the City.
      6.   Recommend to the City Council, after holding a public hearing, on
applications for variations from the strict enforcement of any provisions of
this title, in accordance with the rules and standards set forth therein.
      7.   Recommend to the City Council, after holding a public hearing, on
applications for conditional uses listed in each of the several zoning
districts.
      8.   Recommend to the City Council, after holding a public hearing, on
applications for planned developments referred to it by the City Council and to
hear and decide other matters referred to it or upon which it is required to
pass under the provisions of this title.
      9.   Recommend to the City Council, after holding a public hearing, on
petitions for amendment of the provisions of this title and the boundary lines
of zoning districts established therein.
      10.   To transmit to the City Council, with every recommendation,
findings of fact and to refer to any exhibits containing plans and
specifications relating to its recommendation, which plans and specifications
shall remain a part of the permanent records of the commission. The findings of
facts shall specify the reason or reasons for its recommendation. The terms of
the relief recommended shall be specifically set forth in a conclusion or
statement separate from the findings of fact of the commission.
      11.   Appoint one member to serve as Chairperson and another member to
serve as Vice Chairperson, who shall serve as acting Chairperson in the
Chairperson’s absence.
      12.   Keep written minutes of its proceedings, which shall be a public
record.
      13.   File immediately in the Office of the City Clerk every rule, order,
requirement, decision or determination of the commission after any meeting or
hearing, which shall be a public record.
      14.   Nothing contained herein shall be construed to authorize the
commission to change any of the provisions of this title or district boundary
lines established hereby. The concurring vote of four (4) members shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the
Zoning Administrator, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon
which the commission is authorized to act.
      15.   File an annual report with the Mayor and City Council setting forth
its transactions and recommendations.
      16.   Adopt bylaws and any other procedural rules consistent with this
and other City ordinances and State Statutes.
      17.   Cooperate with County and regional Planning Commissions and other
groups to promote coordinated planning.
      18.   Recommend to the City Council the employment of such professional
planning, legal, engineering or administrative assistance as is necessary to
fulfill its responsibilities.
      19.   Carry out any other function concerning land subdivision or other
matters that may be conferred upon it by the Subdivision Control Ordinance,
Zoning Ordinance, this Code, or any other City ordinance, and the Illinois
Municipal Code, and discharge any other duties referred or assigned to it by
the City Council.
   B.   Special Zoning Commission: The commission shall serve as a special
zoning commission whenever a text amendment is proposed to this title.
   C.   Meetings: All meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson and at such other times as the commission and/or City Council
may determine. The presence of four (4) members shall be necessary for a
quorum. All meetings shall be open to the public. The Chairperson, or Vice
Chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. The
commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings, keep record of its
examinations and other official actions, prepare findings of fact and record
the individual votes upon every question. Expenses incurred by the commission
in the performance of official duties are to be itemized and shall be borne by
the City.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. 2019 Code)
   D.   Copies Of Planning And Zoning Commission Minutes: A draft copy of the
unapproved Planning and Zoning Commission minutes shall be mailed without
charge to those persons who have registered their names as attendees at any
Planning and Zoning Commission hearing/meeting and who have indicated on the
attendance sheet of that Planning and Zoning Commission hearing/meeting that
such person wants a copy of such minutes. The failure to receive mail delivery
of such minutes shall not constitute a basis for objecting to the proceedings
or to delay any scheduled proceedings relating to the subject matter of such
meetings. Such Planning and Zoning Commission minutes shall also be furnished
without charge to any person residing within the planning jurisdiction of the
City who presents themselves at the Municipal Center and requests copies
thereof.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
11-1-3: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR AND CITY CLERK:
   A.   Zoning Administrator: The Zoning Administrator shall be charged with
the enforcement of this title. In discharging this responsibility, he or she
shall:
      1.   Issue Certificates of Occupancy, conditional use permits, temporary
use permits, sign permits and other permits or certificates provided for
herein.
      2.   Conduct inspections of structures and uses to determine compliance
with this title.
      3.   Notify in writing any party believed to be responsible for violating
a provision of this title and order action to correct the violation.
      4.   Prepare and cause to be published on or before March 31 of each year
a Zoning District Map as amended through the preceding December 31.
      5.   Attend all meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      6.   Provide clerical or technical assistance to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
      7.   Request the assistance and cooperation of other City officials,
departments, boards or commissions, or other agencies as necessary, in the
discharge of his or her duties.
      8.   Procure such engineering, planning or legal assistance from
technical experts outside the City government as may be necessary to discharge
his or her duties and as is authorized by the City Council.
   B.   City Clerk: The City Clerk shall have the responsibility to:
      1.   Receive and forward to the Planning and Zoning Commission all
applications and notices required by this title.
      2.   Maintain records of applications filed, public hearings held,
permits and certificates issued, inspections made, reports rendered, and
notices or orders issued under the provisions of this title.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-1-4: APPEALS:
   A.   Applicability: Any party aggrieved by an administrative order,
requirement, decision, or determination made under this title by the Zoning
Administrator, Building Officer, or other authorized administrative official,
board, commission or department of the City, other than the City Council, may
appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   B.   Notice Of Appeal: A Notice of Appeal shall be filed with the Zoning
Administrator within forty five (45) days of the order or decision being
appealed. The notice shall contain:
      1.   The name, address and telephone number of the party filing the
appeal.
      2.   The location of the property affected by the decision being
appealed.
      3.   Identification of the section in this title governing the decision
being appealed.
      4.   A statement of the grounds on which the appeal is based.
      5.   The reason given by the administrative official or body for the
decision.
      6.   A brief summary of the factual evidence upon which the appeal is
based.
      7.   A plot plan and verbal description of the use affected by the
decision being appealed.
   C.   Stay Of Proceedings: The filing of a Notice of Appeal shall stay all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to the Planning and Zoning Commission that in his
judgment a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
no proceedings shall be stayed without issuance of a restraining order by the
Planning and Zoning Commission or a court of record.
   D.   Hearing And Action:
      1.   Upon receipt, the Zoning Administrator shall forthwith transmit the
Notice of Appeal and the complete record of the decision to the Planning and
Zoning Commission. The commission shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing on
the appeal and give a minimum of ten (10) days’ notice to the party filing the
notice.
      2.   After the hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall take
final action on the appeal, whereby it may affirm, reverse or modify the action
being appealed, subject only to judicial review in accordance with applicable
State Statutes. To this end, the commission shall have all the powers of the
party from which the appeal was taken and may direct the issuance of a permit.
A majority vote of all its members shall be required for the commission to take
any action.
   E.   Approval Criteria For Appeals: The commission shall reverse the order
appealed only if it finds that the action or decision appealed:
      1.   Was arbitrary or capricious; or
      2.   Was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact; or
      3.   Constituted an abuse of discretion; or
      4.   Was based on erroneous interpretation of this title or zoning law.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-1-5: VIOLATION, PENALTY AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Enforcement: The Zoning Administrator is hereby designated and
authorized to enforce this title.
   B.   Violation; Penalty: Any party that violates any provision of this title
shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor
more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that a
violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
CHAPTER 2: PLANNING AND ZONING GENERALLY
Section
11-2-1: Title
11-2-2: Purpose
11-2-3: Applicability
11-2-4: Comprehensive Plan
11-2-5: Zoning Filing And Hearing Fees
11-2-6: Retained Personnel Deposit
11-2-7: Allowable Uses
11-2-8: Minimum Requirements
11-2-9: More Restrictive Regulation Or Covenant Applies
11-2-10: Unlawful Existing Uses Not Made Lawful
11-2-11: Zoning Ordinance Continued In Effect
11-2-12: Subdivision Control And Development Ordinance Continued In Effect
11-2-13: Zoning For Newly Annexed Territory
11-2-14: Repeal
11-2-15: Separability
11-2-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the CITY OF MCHENRY ZONING
ORDINANCE. 
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-2-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Specified: This title is adopted for the purpose of improving and
protecting the public health, safety and welfare of residents of the City. To
this end, this title seeks to:
      1.   Further the implementation of the objectives of the adopted
Comprehensive Plan for the City in such a manner as any changed conditions
since the adoption of the plan may require;
      2.   Zone all land in the City with a view to conserving property values
and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City;
      3.   Protect all areas of the City from harmful encroachment by
incompatible uses;
      4.   Establish adequate standards for the provision of light, air and
open spaces;
      5.   Prevent the overcrowding of land and undue concentration of
population, thereby preventing the development of blight and deterioration;
      6.   Lessen congestion in the public streets;
      7.   Facilitate provision of adequate public services and facilities,
such as transportation, water, sewerage and parks;
      8.   Provide for adequate drainage, control of erosion, reduction of
flood damage and destruction of sensitive or valuable environmental resources;
      9.   Foster a desirable pattern of relationships among residential,
commercial, industrial and other uses for the mutual benefit of all types of
development;
      10.   Isolate and control the location of unavoidable nuisance producing
uses;
      11.   Ensure and facilitate the preservation of sites, areas and
structures of historical, architectural and aesthetic importance.
   B.   Further Objectives: To accomplish the above objectives, this title
further seeks to:
      1.   Fix reasonable standards to which buildings, structures and other
uses of land shall conform;
      2.   Prevent new construction or alteration or expansion of existing
construction that does not comply with the restrictions herein;
      3.   Provide for the elimination in appropriate situations of existing
uses that are incompatible with the character of the districts in which they
are located;
      4.   Define the powers and duties of the officers and bodies charged with
the enforcement of this title;
      5.   Prescribe penalties for any violation of the provisions hereof.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-2-3: APPLICABILITY:
No building, structure, land or premises shall hereafter be constructed,
altered, converted, enlarged, moved, used or occupied, except in conformity
with the provisions herein.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-2-4: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN:
   A.   The City has adopted an official comprehensive plan and official map
for the present and future development of the City. This plan and the maps
contained therein are applicable to land situated within the corporate limits,
and contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (1-1/2) miles beyond
the corporate limits and not included in another municipality.
   B.   To implement this plan, the City has adopted various codes and
ordinances, including this title and the Subdivision Control and Development
Ordinance, which establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and
requirements governing the location and construction of public facilities and
improvements.
(1987 Code § 17-3)
11-2-5: ZONING FILING AND HEARING FEES:
   A.   All applications for zoning relief, except as otherwise provided, shall
be accompanied by a filing fee in the amount of nine hundred fifty dollars
($950.00). Where the zoning application requests a minor variation only (as
defined in this title) and the applicant elects to have the Planning and Zoning
Commission hear the application on the same date the Planning and Zoning
Commission has scheduled another application for hearing, the initial filing
fee shall be one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00); in the event that the
applicant for a minor variation elects a hearing date on which no other
application is scheduled for hearing, the initial filing fee shall be four
hundred twenty five dollars ($425.00). (1987 Code §17-6; amd. 2019 Code; Ord.
21-3, 1-18-2021)
11-2-6: RETAINED PERSONNEL DEPOSIT:
   A.   Zoning Relief: The Zoning Administrator may require a retained
personnel fee to be used toward deferring the expenses and fees of its retained
personnel as described in section
11-4-4 of this title, and the expense of providing copies of unapproved
Planning and Zoning Commission minutes, reports, and recommendations as
provided in subsection
11-1-2D of this title. At any time that the balance of the initial retained
personnel deposit is reduced to the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00), the
zoning applicant shall make such other and further deposit, upon the request of
the City, as may be necessary to restore the retained Personnel Fund to cover
the expense incurred. (1987 Code §17-5)
   B.   Other: The retained personnel deposit for the establishment of an
Integrated Design District (IDD) for property located within the corporate
limits of the City, for property located within the mile and one-half
jurisdiction outside the corporate limits of the City and property in the
process of being annexed to the City, shall be as set forth in title 14,
chapter 1 of this Code.
   C.   Stay Of Proceedings: All proceedings in connection with zoning
applications shall be stayed until the zoning applicant has complied with the
retained personnel requirements of this section. (1987 Code § 17-5) (amd. 2019
Code; Ord. 21-3, 1-18-2021)
11-2-7: ALLOWABLE USES:
Only the following uses of land, buildings or structures are allowed in the
City:
   A.   Uses lawfully established on the effective date hereof.
   B.   Uses which:
      1.   Had a building permit lawfully issued prior to the effective date
hereof; and
      2.   Began construction within six (6) months of such date, which
construction was diligently prosecuted to completion; and
      3.   Are constructed and occupied in conformance with the plans that were
the basis for the issuance of the permit.
   C.   Permitted uses in the applicable zoning districts, subject to the
conditions and requirements herein.
   D.   Conditional uses in the applicable zoning districts, subject to the
approval of a conditional use permit and other conditions and requirements
herein.
   E.   Temporary uses subject to the provisions herein.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-2-8: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions in this title shall, in their interpretation and application, be
held to be minimum requirements.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-2-9: MORE RESTRICTIVE REGULATION OR COVENANT APPLIES:
In any case in which any portion of this or any other City ordinance, or any
other law, regulation or annexation agreement, or any kind of private
agreement, covenant or easement applying within the City, establishes a
requirement that is either more or less restrictive than a particular
requirement established herein, the regulation that is the more restrictive or
that imposes the higher standard or requirement shall govern.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-2-10: UNLAWFUL EXISTING USES NOT MADE LAWFUL:
No building, structure or use not lawfully existing at the time of adoption
hereof shall be made lawful solely by the adoption thereof. Such structure or
use shall remain unlawful hereunder to the extent that it is in conflict with
the requirements of this title.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-2-11: ZONING ORDINANCE CONTINUED IN EFFECT:
The Zoning Ordinance of the City shall continue to be that ordinance adopted on
December 22, 1986, as amended or revised by subsequent ordinances. Nothing
contained in this title, or in the ordinance adopting this title, shall be
construed to amend, alter or otherwise affect the provisions of the said Zoning
Ordinance.
(1987 Code § 17-1)
11-2-12: SUBDIVISION CONTROL AND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE CONTINUED IN EFFECT:
The Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance of the City shall continue to
be that ordinance passed and approved on January 19, 2004, as the same may be
amended, altered or changed by subsequent ordinances. Nothing contained in this
title, or in the ordinance adopting this title, shall be construed to repeal,
amend, alter or otherwise affect said Subdivision Control and Development
Ordinance.
(1987 Code § 17-2; amd. 2019 Code)
11-2-13: ZONING FOR NEWLY ANNEXED TERRITORY:
Except as may be provided for by a Preannexation Agreement or by a subsequent
amendment to this title, any parcel of land hereafter annexed to the City shall
be classified in the most restrictive Single- Family Residential District that
will permit the parcel, or the smallest subdivided lot therein, to conform to
the minimum lot area required in that district.
(1987 Code § 17-4)
11-2-14: REPEAL:
Upon adoption of this title, the ordinance known as the Zoning Ordinance of the
City adopted February 4, 1985, is hereby repealed. No other ordinance,
regulation, annexation agreement or private agreement, covenant or easement is
intended to be repealed or abrogated by this ordinance.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-2-15: SEPARABILITY:
   A.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid any
provision of this title, such judgment shall not affect any other provision
hereof not specifically included in said judgment.
   B.   Further, if such court shall adjudge invalid the application of any
provision hereof to a particular property, such judgment shall not affect the
application of said provision to any other property not specifically included
in said judgment.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
CHAPTER 3: DEFINITIONS
Publisher's Note: This Chapter has been AMENDED by new legislation (Ord. 25-21,
adopted 4-7-25). The text of the amendment will be incorporated below when the
ordinance is codified.
Section
11-3-1: Definitions
11-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this title, certain terms are defined as indicated in this
section. These definitions and all other provisions of this title are subject
to the following rules of interpretation:
   A.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future
tense the present.
   B.   The singular number includes the plural number and vice versa.
   C.   The word “shall” is mandatory.
   D.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   E.   All measured quantities shall be to the nearest integral unit of
measure, and if a fraction is one-half (1/2) or greater, the next highest
integral unit shall be used.
   F.   Any term not herein defined shall be as defined elsewhere in this Code
or, if not defined elsewhere in this Code, as defined in Webster’s New World
Dictionary of the American Language - Second College Edition.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: See definition of BUILDING, ACCESSORY.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: See definition of STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY.
ACCESSORY USE: See definition of USE, ACCESSORY.
ADULT BUSINESS: Those businesses as defined in section 4-3A-1 of this Code.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: An adult-use cannabis cultivation
center, craft grower, processing organization, infuser organization, dispensing
organization or transporting organization. These facilities require approval of
a conditional use permit in the respective districts in which they are
requested.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
cultivate, dry, cure and package cannabis and perform other necessary
activities to make cannabis available for sale at a dispensing organization or
use at a processing organization, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act,
(P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation to acquire cannabis from licensed
cannabis business establishments for the purpose of selling or dispensing
cannabis, cannabis-infused products, cannabis seeds, paraphernalia or related
supplies to purchasers or to qualified registered medical cannabis patients and
caregivers, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may
be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION OR INFUSER: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to directly incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis-infused product, per the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-
time, and regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR: A facility operated by
an organization or business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture to either extract constituent chemicals or compounds to produce
cannabis concentrate or incorporate cannabis or cannabis concentrate into a
product formulation to produce a cannabis product, per the Cannabis Regulation
and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and
regulations promulgated thereunder.
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER: An organization or
business that is licensed by the Illinois Department of Agriculture to
transport cannabis on behalf of a cannabis business establishment or a
community college licensed under the Community College Cannabis Vocational
Training Pilot Program, per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
0027), as it may be amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated
thereunder.
AGRICULTURE: The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage, apiculture,
horticulture, floriculture, vitaculture, animal and poultry husbandry, and the
necessary accessory uses for packing, treating and storing the produce, but not
including the commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine or other animals;
provided, that the operation of accessory uses shall be secondary to that of
normal agricultural activities.
AIRPORT: Any public or private land area or other facility designed for the
landing and take off of aircraft, including all taxiways, hangars, airport
buildings and other related structures and open spaces.
ALLEY: A public or private right-of-way not constituting a street used
primarily for secondary vehicular access to property abutting on a street.
ALTERATION, STRUCTURAL: See definition of structural alteration.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A building or portion thereof designed or used for the care,
observation and medical treatment of animals commonly used as household pets.
ANTENNA HEIGHT: The height of an antenna measured from the ground level at the
lowest grade level within three feet (3') of any part of the antenna.
APARTMENT HOTEL: See definition of HOTEL, APARTMENT.
ASSEMBLY USES: A building, structure, place or parts thereof for groups of
people to gather for an event or regularly scheduled program that is
educational, cultural, spiritual, social or recreational in nature. The only
exceptions to this definition include: building, tenant space, room or space
used for public assembly purposes, as defined herein, with an occupant load of
twenty five (25) persons or less and spaces less than seven hundred fifty (750)
square feet in floor area.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCES: Residential dwellings, typically with less than one
hundred (100) apartment units and many resemble large single-family homes and
house thirty (30) to sixty (60) residents, differing from congregate senior
housing in one significant way - they include twenty four (24) hour protective
oversight and assistance for individuals with functional limitations. Most
offer private rooms with kitchenettes and common living and dining areas.
Services vary, but often include: assistance with activities of daily living;
administration of medicine; first aid and medical care for minor ailments; and
round the clock protective oversight.
AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP: A business establishment where collision service, such as
body, frame or fender straightening or repair, painting of more than ten
percent (10%) of the surface, or upholstering for motor vehicles, trailers or
boats is conducted wholly within one or more enclosed buildings.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A permanent commercial facility where motor vehicles are
washed by hand, by mechanical devices or both, excluding temporary car washes
organized for civic or charitable purposes.
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SHOP: A premises primarily used for the commercial repair,
rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, or parts
thereof, wholly within enclosed buildings, including repairs that normally
require vehicles being repaired to be stored on the premises overnight.
Automobile repair shops include transmission shops, muffler shops, brake shops,
rustproofing shops, auto glass shops, and the like.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A facility or premises primarily used for retail
sale of fuels or oils for automobiles, trucks, or boats and which may include
as a secondary activity retail sale of tires, batteries and similar accessories
and the making of repairs to vehicles, or parts thereof, that do not normally
require storing such vehicles on the premises overnight.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: See definition of WRECKING YARD.
AWNING: A rooflike cover projecting on a temporary or noncontinuous basis from
the wall of a building.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: A single-family residential structure which
contains no more than five (5) rooms for rent for a period not to exceed four
(4) consecutive nights per guest, which also serves at least one meal solely to
overnight guests in a homelike environment.
BEDROOM: Any private room in a dwelling unit suitable for regular use for
sleeping purposes having a closet. Bedrooms include rooms designated on
development floor plans as dens, studies or libraries, but exclude living
rooms, family rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, bathrooms, laundry rooms and mud
rooms. Any room designated as other than a bedroom having a closet, but which
in the judgment of the City Administrator would normally be usable for sleeping
purposes, shall be considered a bedroom.
BERM: An uncompacted soil raised above the surrounding finished grade with side
slopes no steeper than four to one (4:1).
BLOCK: A tract of land, whether legally so described or subdivided, bounded by
streets or by a combination of one or more streets and public parks,
cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, bulkhead lines or shorelines of waterways,
or corporate boundary lines.
BOARDING HOUSE: See definition of ROOMING HOUSE.
BUILDABLE AREA: The area of the lot remaining after the minimum open space and
setback requirements of this title have been complied with (see diagram in
chapter 20, “Appendices”, of this title).
BUILDING: Any structure permanently affixed to the land and constructed or used
for the shelter, enclosure or protection of persons, animals or property.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A building that is an accessory use.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space or from other buildings or structures by a permanent roof
and by exterior walls having only windows and normal entrance or exit doors, or
by party walls.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A principal building surrounded by open space.
BUILDING FRONTAGE: The linear length of the front wall of a building, excluding
walls that abut loading areas and service drives exclusively.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the mean average ground
level at the front building line of a principal or accessory building to the
highest point of the underside of the ceiling beams in the case of a flat roof,
to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean level of the underside of
rafters between the eaves and the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
Chimneys, spires, towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections,
other than signs, shall not be included in calculating building height.
BUILDING LINE: The line parallel or nearly parallel to a lot line that
separates all parts of a building from the open space adjacent thereto on the
same lot.
BUILDING PERIMETER LANDSCAPING: An area designated around the building for
curbing and landscape improvements.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot on which it is located.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL: A building designed for residential occupancy.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: A building that is established for a period of less than
one year and is removed within that time period.
BUSINESS PARK: A special or exclusive type of planned business area designed
and equipped to accommodate a community of manufacturing, showroom,
warehousing, research or similar industrial uses, together with substantial
office development related thereto.
CALIPER: The diameter of a tree trunk six inches (6") above the existing grade
or proposed planted grade and in conformance with provisions of the Code of
Standards or latest version published by the American Association of
Nurserymen, Inc.
CANOPY: A rooflike structure that projects permanently and continuously from
the exterior wall of a building or from a freestanding support.
CAR WASH: See definition of AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY.
CLINIC: A place for the care, diagnosis and treatment of persons needing
medical, dental or surgical attention, but where inpatient care is not
provided.
CLUB, HEALTH: Any establishment providing physical culture or health services,
including health clubs, racquetball or tennis clubs, reducing salons, tanning
salons or massage salons.
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bonafide
members paying dues which owns or leases premises, the use of which is
restricted to members and their guests.
CLUSTER: Plant material installed as a group, as within two feet (2') of each
other.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A development design technique that concentrates buildings
in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for
recreation, common open space and the preservation of environmentally sensitive
areas (diagram in chapter 20, “Appendices”, of this title).
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: See definition of VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: See definition of OPEN SPACE, COMMON.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE: A group residence consisting of a group home or
specialized residential care home serving persons with disabilities that is
licensed, certified, or accredited by the appropriate state or federal
agencies. Such residence shall serve as a single housekeeping unit for the
housing of unrelated people with functional disabilities who share
responsibilities, meals, social activities, and other aspects of residential
living. COMMUNITY RESIDENCE does not include RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY and does
not include a residence that serves persons as an alternative to incarceration
for a criminal offense.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The composite of the functional and geographic elements of
the official plan of the City and environs or any segment thereof, in the form
of plans, maps, charts, text of reports, implementing ordinances and including
the Official Map.
CONDITIONAL PUBLIC USE: See definition of USE, CONDITIONAL PUBLIC.
CONDITIONAL USE: See definition of USE, CONDITIONAL.
CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT: See definition of PERMIT, CONDITIONAL USE.
CONSERVATION AREA: Environmentally sensitive and valuable lands and other areas
of significant biological productivity or uniqueness, protected from any
activity that would significantly alter their ecological integrity, balance or
character.
CONSERVATION EASEMENT: An easement granting a right or interest in real
property that is appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominantly in
their natural, scenic, open or wooded condition; retaining such areas as
suitable habitat for fish, plants or wildlife, or maintaining existing land
uses.
CORNER LOT: See definition of LOT, CORNER.
CORNER SIDE LOT LINE: See definition of LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE.
CORNER SIDE YARD: See definition of YARD, CORNER SIDE.
COURT: Any open space other than a yard bounded on two (2) or more sides by the
walls of one or more buildings.
COURT, INNER: A court bounded on more than three (3) sides by the walls of one
or more buildings.
COURT, OUTER: A court that is not an inner court.
CREMATORIUM: See definition of MORTUARY.
CURB LEVEL: The height of the established street curb abutting a street line
measured at the midpoint of such line. Where no curb has been established, the
curb level shall be considered to be the established level of the surface of
the street abutting the street line measured along the street centerline
opposite the midpoint of the street line. On lots abutting more than one street
line, the average of the measurements at the midpoints of all street lines
shall determine the curb level.
CURIE: A unit of radioactivity equal to 3.7 multiplied by 10 to the tenth power
disintegrations per second.
CURRENT PLAT OF SURVEY: See definition of PLAT OF SURVEY, CURRENT.
DAYCARE CENTER, CHILD: A facility that receives more than eight (8) children
during any twenty four (24) hour period for daytime care and that provides
personal care, protection, supervision, training and other programs. Child
daycare centers exclude:
   A.   Kindergartens and other programs run by public or private schools or
churches.
   B.   Centers conducted on Federal, State or local government premises.
   C.   Facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or other
facilities where children are cared for while their parents or custodians are
in the vicinity and readily available.
   D.   Special activities conducted periodically by civic, charitable and
government organizations.
DECIBEL: A unit of measurement of the intensity or loudness of sound.
DECIDUOUS: Plants which do not retain leaves or needles during the winter
season of the year.
DECK: A platform:
   A.   Open to the sky and attached to the wall of a building with direct
access to or from said building; or
   B.   With a roof or open to the sky, serving as a floor located above grade
and not attached to a building.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
   GROSS DENSITY: The number of units per acre of the total land to be
developed.
   NET DENSITY: The number of units per acre of land devoted to residential
use.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction of a new building or structure having a total
floor area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet, other than one single-
family dwelling unit; expansion by more than twenty five percent (25%) of an
existing structure to which these regulations would apply if the structure were
being constructed new; or activity that results in either more than three
thousand (3,000) square feet of additional impervious area or more than one
acre of hydrologically disturbed area; any of which may not be included within
the definition of subdivision, as defined in this section (see also section
12-2-2 of this Code).
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT OR DBH: The measurement used to determine the caliper of
the tree. It is measured at six inches (6") above the ground.
DOG KENNEL: See definition of KENNEL.
DOG RUN, ENCLOSED: An outdoor area enclosed on all sides by a fence for the
exclusive purpose of continuous or occasional confinement of one or more
animals commonly kept as household pets.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT: See definition of LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.
DRIP LINE: The perimeter formed by the points furthest away from the trunk of a
tree where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the
ground.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment at which patrons may be served without
leaving their motor vehicle. Any restaurant, bank, dry cleaning establishment
or other business having drive-up or curb service facilities shall be
considered a drive-in establishment.
DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT: See definition of RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence,
excluding boarding or lodging houses, nursing homes, motels, hotels, tourist
homes, cabins, tents and recreational vehicles.
DWELLING, EFFICIENCY: See definition of EFFICIENCY UNIT.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building consisting of three (3) or more dwelling
units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A residential building consisting of a single dwelling
unit.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A single-family dwelling attached to one or
more other single-family dwellings by one or more common vertical walls with
each dwelling located on a separate lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A single-family dwelling separated from other
dwelling units by open space.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: A dwelling unit that is attached to one or more other
dwelling units on the same lot and that has an individual private ground level
entrance to the outside and no portion of which is located above any other unit
or portion thereof.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building consisting of two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: Space within a building designed or used exclusively as living
quarters for one family, its household employees, and not more than two (2)
boarders or roomers, and which includes cooking, bathing and toilet facilities.
EASEMENT: A strip of privately owned land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for any
other similar use.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION: See definition of INSTITUTIONAL USES.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of just one principal room,
together with bathroom, kitchen, hallways, closets and/or dining alcove, and
which does not include a bedroom, as defined in this section.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE/E-CIGARETTE: A battery-operated device designed to
resemble a traditional cigarette used to inhale nicotine vapor; a device that
aerosolizes nicotine for inhalation but does not burn tobacco.
ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR: This may include, but is not limited to, the following
activities: bands, music, karaoke and other similar activities that are
accessory to the principal use on the subject property and any such indoor
entertainment proposed shall comply with all applicable City of McHenry rules,
ordinances and regulations. This definition does not include, permit, encompass
or allow any activity regulated and/or addressed in title 4, chapter 3, “Adult
Businesses And Uses”, of this Code. Additionally, it does not include, permit,
encompass or allow amusement facilities already regulated in this title and/or
this Code, or regulated by another governmental entity including: movie
theaters, bowling alleys, pool halls, arcades, performance venues, video gaming
and indoor sporting exhibitions where such activities are the principal uses on
the subject property and/or regulated by other governmental entities.
ERECT: To build, construct, locate, hang, attach, manually place, suspend or
affix, including the initial painting of all signs.
EVERGREEN: Plants that maintain leaves and needles year round.
FACADE: The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall
viewed by persons not within the building.
FAMILY: Any number of persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, or up to
three (3) persons not so related, living together in one dwelling unit as a
single household, together with up to two (2) household employees, but
excluding more than two (2) roomers, boarders or permanent paying or nonpaying
guests.
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION OR FAA: Responsible for the safety of civil
aviation, which also includes regulating structure which may intrude into
airspace.
FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION OR FCC: A Federal administrative agency
authorized to regulate and oversee telecommunications carriers, services and
providers on a national level.
FENCE HEIGHT: The height of a fence, hedge or wall measured from the ground
level at the lowest grade level within three feet (3') of either side thereof.
FENCE, OPEN: A fence, including entrance and exit gates, designed and
constructed so that the surface area of any segment of such fence contains at
least seventy percent (70%) open spaces and thirty percent (30%) or less solid
materials.
FENCE, ORNAMENTAL: An open fence, other than a chainlink fence, that is erected
for decorative purposes only and is not intended to be used, either by itself
or together with wire or other material, as an enclosure, barrier or means of
protection or confinement.
FENCE, SOLID: A fence that is not an open fence.
FINDINGS OF FACT: The written conclusions transmitted by the Planning and
Zoning Commission to the City Council after careful consideration and
deliberation of all evidence presented by all parties involved, including
written and oral testimony of witnesses, and its relative significance to the
matter at hand.
FIREPROOF CONTAINER: An enclosure designed to prevent the release of
radioactive materials that is made of steel or concrete, or similar materials,
but not of lead or other low melting metals or alloys unless completely encased
in steel or concrete.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of a floodplain that excludes the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN: The land consisting of the floodway and the flood fringe that is
subject to inundation by a 100-year flood.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain, including the channel, that is
reasonably required to discharge the bulk of the waters from a 100-year flood.
FLOOR AREA:
   A.   The sum of the gross horizontal area of space contained on all floors
measured in square feet from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of each
building, or from the centerline of party walls separating two (2) buildings.
   B.   Floor area includes space in accessory buildings; all cellar, basement
and attic space; and space for stairs, elevators, maintenance areas and
equipment areas, except as provided in the definitions herein of floor area,
gross and floor area, net. For structures devoted to bulk storage of materials,
every ten feet (10') of building height shall be considered as one floor for
purposes of calculating floor area.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS: A measure of floor area, as defined in this section, used
for purposes of calculating floor area ratio, conversions of existing
structures, and maximum size of business establishments. Gross floor area is
floor area excluding only:
   A.   Areas devoted to off street parking or off street loading, including
aisles, ramps and maneuvering space.
   B.   Attic or half-story space having headroom of seven feet (7') or less.
   C.   Exterior balconies and open porches.
   D.   Space on the roof used for mechanical equipment.
   E.   Basements where half or more of the ceiling height is below grade.
FLOOR AREA, NET: A measure of floor area, as defined in this section, used for
purposes of calculating off street parking and off street loading requirements.
NET FLOOR AREA is floor area excluding only:
   A.   Areas devoted to off street parking or off street loading, including
aisles, ramps and maneuvering space.
   B.   Areas devoted primarily to storage and not located within selling or
working spaces, except for facilities such as warehouses where the principal
use is storage.
   C.   Basement or cellar areas not devoted to retailing activities, offices
or production or processing of goods.
   D.   Elevator shafts and stairwells.
   E.   Maintenance shafts and rooms.
   F.   Washrooms.
   G.   Display windows.
   H.   Fitting rooms.
For ease in administration, net floor area may also be calculated as eighty
five percent (85%) of gross floor area.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The total floor area, as defined in this section, of all
buildings on a lot divided by the area of the lot.
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of light intensity stated in lumens per square foot and
measurable with an illuminance meter or light meter.
FREQUENCY: The number of oscillations per second in a sound wave, a measure of
the pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONT LOT LINE: See definition of LOT LINE, FRONT.
FRONT SETBACK: See definition of YARD, FRONT.
FRONT WALL: See definition of WALL, FRONT.
FRONTAGE: The length of any street line.
FRONTAGE, BUILDING: See definition of BUILDING FRONTAGE.
FULL CUTOFF: A light fixture which cuts off all upward transmission of light
and emits no luminous flux above the horizontal plane.
FUNERAL HOME: See definition of MORTUARY.
GAME ROOM: Any premises where there are available to the public more than four
(4) coin operated amusement devices, excluding vending machines that do not
incorporate gaming or amusement features and excluding coin operated musical
devices.
GARAGE: A structure or part thereof used or designed to be used primarily for
the enclosed parking or storage of motor vehicles, boats or trailers, but
excluding exhibition areas, showrooms or other facilities for display of such
vehicles in shows or exhibits, or in connection with their being offered for
sale, rent or lease.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: Any building or premises, other than a wrecking yard, as
defined in this section, where more than one motor vehicle is stored for
compensation.
GARAGE, STORAGE: A building or premises used only for the housing of motor
vehicles pursuant to previous arrangements and not by transients, and where no
equipment or parts are sold and vehicles are not rebuilt, serviced, repaired,
hired or sold, except that fuel, grease or oil may be dispensed within the
building to vehicles stored therein.
GLARE: The sensation produced by lighting that causes an annoyance, discomfort
or loss in visual performance in an observer with a direct line of sight to a
light source and often results in visual impairment.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of a building, or directly beneath a sign, more than five feet
(5') from a street line. For structures closer than five feet (5') to a street
line, the grade is the sidewalk elevation at the center of the building. Where
there is no sidewalk, the grade shall be established by the City Engineer.
GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE: A strategically planned or managed network of natural
lands, working landscapes, and other open spaces that conserve ecosystem values
and functions along with products, technologies, and practices that use natural
systems – or engineered systems that mimic natural processes – to enhance
overall environmental quality and provide utility services.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA): The total floor area in a commercial building or
shopping center that is designed for the occupancy and exclusive use of
tenants, measured from outside wall faces and from the centerline of joint
partitions. GLA includes sales areas and integral stock areas, but excludes
public or common areas such as public toilets, corridors, stairwells,
elevators, machine and equipment rooms, lobbies and open and enclosed mall
areas.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area covered by a building measured from the
exterior faces of exterior walls, but excluding open porches, patios or
terraces, garages or carports.
GROUP HOME: A halfway house or similar nonhospital residential facility housing
more than three (3) persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the
owner who need psychological rehabilitation and who are provided twenty four
(24) hour professional supervision while on the premises.
HALF STORY: See definition of STORY, HALF.
HEDGE: Planted vegetation, including trees, shrubs or other natural vegetation,
that is planted in close proximity or clustered together and that has a surface
area that obstructs the view.
HEIGHT, BUILDING: See definition of BUILDING HEIGHT.
HEIGHT, FENCE: See definition of FENCE HEIGHT.
HOME OCCUPATION: A gainful pursuit conducted by one or more members of a family
within their place of residence and that is subject to the provisions herein
concerning home occupations.
HOSPITAL: An establishment that provides accommodations, facilities and
services over a continuous period of twenty four (24) hours or more for
observation, diagnosis and care of two (2) or more individuals not related by
blood, marriage or adoption to the operator, who are suffering from illness,
injury, deformity or abnormality, or from any condition requiring obstetrical,
medical or surgical services.
HOTEL: A building containing lodging rooms, a general kitchen and dining room,
a common entrance lobby, halls and stairways; and where each lodging room does
not have a doorway opening directly to the outdoors except for emergencies; and
where more than fifty percent (50%) of the lodging rooms are for rent to
transient guests for a continuous period of less than thirty (30) days.
HOTEL, APARTMENT: An establishment having the character of a hotel but in which
at least fifty percent (50%) of the accommodations are for occupancy by guests
staying thirty (30) consecutive days or more.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any material that substantially reduces or prevents the
infiltration of stormwater into previously undeveloped land (see diagram in
chapter 20, “Appendices”, of this title).
INDEPENDENT LIVING RESIDENCES: Senior dwelling units designed for persons aged
fifty five (55) years and older. These properties may or may not offer meal
service to residents and typically offer a limited array of supportive care
services and/or service coordination.
INDUSTRIAL, HEAVY: A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of
materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials or a use
engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive
materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve
hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
INDUSTRIAL, LIGHT: A use engaged in the manufacture, predominantly from
previously prepared materials of finished products or parts, including
processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage,
sales and distribution of such products.
INDUSTRIAL PARK: A special or exclusive type of planned industrial area
designed and equipped to accommodate a community of industries.
INSTITUTIONAL USES: A building, structure, place or parts thereof housing more
than twenty five (25) persons, on a twenty four (24) hour basis, who because of
age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised environment that
provides personal care services. The only exceptions to this definition
include: building, tenant space, room or space used for institutional purposes,
as defined herein, with an occupant load of twenty five (25) persons or less
and spaces less than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet in floor area.
INTEGRATED DESIGN DISTRICT: A zoning district which provides for relief from
rigid zoning and subdivision standards in order to incorporate innovative
design techniques which protect and enhance the City’s natural and manmade
resources.
INTERIOR LOT: See definition of LOT, INTERIOR.
JUNKYARD: An open area where waste or used or secondhand materials are bought,
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including
scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. Uses
carried on entirely within enclosed buildings and establishments engaged only
in the processing of scrap metal to be sold for the manufacture of steel are
not considered junkyards.
KENNEL: Any lot or premises on which four (4) or more animals commonly used as
household pets that are more than four (4) months of age are bred, groomed,
boarded, trained, placed or sold for commercial or humane purposes and which
offers provisions for minor medical treatment, including animal shelters.
LANDSCAPING: Any of the following, combination thereof, material such as, but
not limited to: grass, ground cover, shrubs, vines, hedges or trees; and
nonliving durable material, such as: rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences, but
excluding pavement.
LANDSCAPING INSTALLATION HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured from the ground
level at the lowest grade level within three feet (3') of either side thereof
to the tallest point of any landscaping, as defined in this section.
LIGHT STANDARD: The pole upon which a luminaire is mounted.
LIGHT TRESPASS: Light projected or emitted by a lighting installation onto a
property from a fixture not located on that property.
LINE, STREET: The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and the
right-of-way of a contiguous existing or dedicated street or planned street
included in the Major Street Plan of the City.
LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET: A completely off street space or berth located on
the same lot, except as otherwise permitted herein, for the loading or
unloading of freight carriers, having adequate ingress and egress to a public
street or alley.
LODGING ROOM: A room rented as sleeping or living quarters, but without cooking
facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In the case of a suite
of rooms, each room shall be counted as one lodging room.
LOT: A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended
as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership, or possession, or for building development.
LOT AREA: The area of a lot within its front, rear and side lot lines.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, or a
lot located at the point where the alignment of a single street curves or
changes; provided, that an interior angle of not more than one hundred thirty
five degrees (135°) is created by the right-of-way lines of the abutting street
or streets or, in the case of a curving right-of-way, by straight lines
projected tangent to the curve from the points of intersection between the
curve and the lot lines.
LOT DEPTH: The mean average of the lengths of the side lot lines on either side
of a lot.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A through lot abutting only two (2) streets.
LOT, FLAG: Lots or parcels that the City has approved with less frontage on a
public street than is normally required (see diagram in chapter 20,
“Appendices”, of this title).
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE: A property boundary line of any lot, except that where any portion of
a lot extends into an abutting street or alley, the lot line shall be deemed to
be established at the existing street or alley right- of-way line.
LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE: Any street line that is not a front lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT:
   A.   The only street line bordering a lot; or
   B.   Otherwise, if the lot is a through lot, every street line; or
   C.   Otherwise, if the lot is a corner lot:
      1.   The shortest street line.
      2.   Otherwise, if more than one street line is the shortest:
         a.   The lot line designated as the front lot line on a plat of
dedication or plat of subdivision.
         b.   Otherwise, the lot line designated as the front lot line by the
City Council.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR SIDE: Any side lot line that is not a corner side lot line.
LOT LINE, REAR: That lot line which is most distant from and is, or is
approximately, parallel to the front lot line. If the rear lot line is less
than ten feet (10') in length, or if the lot forms a point at the rear, the
rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line ten feet (10') in length within the
lot, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A lot that is part of a subdivision, the plat of which was
recorded in the Office of the County Recorder of Deeds, or a parcel of land the
deed to which was recorded in the Office of said Recorder, prior to the
adoption of this title.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot that is a reversed frontage lot.
LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE: A lot with a front lot line at right angles or
approximately right angles to the general pattern of front lot lines in the
block.
LOT, THROUGH: An interior lot with frontage on more than one street.
LOT WIDTH: The width of a lot at the setback line established by the applicable
required front yard requirement of this title.
LUMINAIRE: The complete lighting unit, including the lamp, the fixture, and
other parts.
MARINA: A facility for storing, servicing, fueling, berthing and securing and
launching of watercraft that may include the sale of fuel and incidental
supplies for the boat owners, crews and guests.
MARQUEE: See definition of CANOPY.
MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT: All piping, ducts, vents, control devices and other
components of systems which are permanently installed and integrated to provide
control of environmental conditions for buildings.
MEDICAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER: A facility operated by an organization or
business that is registered by the Department of Agriculture to perform
necessary activities to provide only registered medical cannabis dispensing
organizations with usable medical cannabis in accordance with the Compassionate
Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, enacted by the State of Illinois
effective January 1, 2014, as may be amended from time to time.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered
cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients in
accordance with the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act,
enacted by the State of Illinois effective January 1, 2014, as may be amended
from time to time.
MENTAL HEALTH CENTER: Any institution providing inpatient or outpatient care or
therapy for the mentally ill, developmentally disabled, alcoholics, abusers of
controlled substances or others needing psychological therapy, but which does
not serve as a residence for such individuals.
MINI-WAREHOUSE: A building or group of buildings in a controlled access area
that contain varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled
access stalls or lockers for the storage of customer’s nonhazardous goods or
wares.
MINOR VARIANCE: See definition of VARIANCE, MINOR.
MOBILE HOME: A detached single-family dwelling unit designed and used
exclusively for residential occupancy with plumbing and electrical connections
for attachment to outside systems, but designed to be transported after
fabrication on its own wheels or on flatbed trailers and to be ready for
occupancy at its site, except for minor and incidental unpacking, assembly and
connection operations.
MOBILE HOME PARK: Any lot or tract of land other than a mobile home subdivision
or mobile home sales or storage lot upon which three (3) or more mobile homes
used for habitation are located.
MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION: A subdivision designed and intended for residential
use exclusively by mobile homes on permanent foundations with wheels, tongue,
lug bolts and hitch permanently removed and wherein each lot occupied by a
mobile home is owned by the owner of the mobile home situated thereupon.
MORTUARY: An undertaking establishment or funeral parlor which may include a
single residence as an accessory use.
MOTEL: A building containing lodging rooms each of which has an individual
adjoining bathroom that is designed primarily for transient automobile
travelers with a parking space on the lot for each lodging unit and where more
than fifty percent (50%) of the lodging rooms are for rent for a continuous
period of less than thirty (30) days.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or premises, the principal use of which is
the receipt of freight for forwarding or trans-shipment or the dispatching of
freight by motor vehicle.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled wheeled vehicle designed primarily for
transportation of persons or goods along public streets.
MOUNTING HEIGHT: The vertical distance between the lowest part of the luminaire
and the ground surface directly below the luminaire.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING: See definition of DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY.
NET FLOOR AREA: See definition of FLOOR AREA, NET.
NET LOT AREA: See definition of LOT AREA.
NIGHTCLUB: An establishment serving food and/or liquor and providing music and
space for dancing by patrons only. A nightclub shall not include an adult
business, as defined in this section.
NONCONFORMING USES: Any activity or function carried out on a premises (as
either a principal or accessory use) that is not allowed by the permitted and
conditional uses of the zoning district in which the premises is situated,
irrespective of the use for which the premises was designed.
NONCONFORMITY: Any characteristic of a use, building, structure or lot that was
lawful prior to the effective date of this title or of any amendment thereto,
but which does not conform to all of the requirements of the zoning district in
which the property is situated.
NONCONFORMITY STANDARDS: Any nonconformity other than a nonconforming use,
including nonconformities involving:
   A.   Yards;
   B.   Building height;
   C.   Lot area;
   D.   Lot width;
   E.   Floor area ratio;
   F.   Off street parking and loading;
   G.   Signs; or
   H.   Landscaping and screening.
NURSING HOME: An establishment providing full time convalescent or chronic care
or both for three (3) or more individuals not related by blood, adoption or
marriage to the operator and which does not provide care for surgical or
medical cases commonly treated in hospitals.
OBSTRUCTION: Any building, structure or object, or part thereof, located in the
way of any yard or open space required by this title, excluding trees and
shrubs.
OCTAVE BAND: All the frequencies between a given frequency and double that
frequency.
OCTAVE BAND FILTER: An electrical frequency analyzer designed according to
standards formulated by the American Standards Association and used in
conjunction with a sound-level meter to take measurements in specific octave
intervals.
ODOR THRESHOLD VALUE: The minimum concentration of odorous material in air that
can be detected by the normal human nose as determined by the American Society
for Testing and Materials Method D1391-57, Standard Method for Measurement of
Odor in Atmospheres (Dilution Method), or its equivalent.
OFF STREET LOADING SPACE: See definition of LOADING SPACE, OFF STREET.
OFF STREET PARKING SPACE: See definition of PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET.
OPEN FENCE: See definition of FENCE, OPEN.
OPEN SALES LOT: Open land that is used or occupied for the purpose of buying
and selling merchandise, passenger cars, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles,
boats, nursery plants or supplies, or monuments, or for the storing of same
prior to sale thereupon, and that is provided with a permanent, durable, and
dustless surface and is drained to dispose of all surface water.
OPEN SPACE: Uncovered area open to the sky on the same lot with a building.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON: Net site area in a Planned Unit Development that is not
covered by buildings or pavement that is permanently set aside for the common
use and enjoyment of the residents or businesses within a development or for
the community at large and the preservation and perpetual maintenance of which
is assured by dedication to the City or other satisfactory legal arrangement.
COMMON OPEN SPACE may include parks, playgrounds, and totlots; parkway medians;
landscaped green space; natural lakes, ponds, and streams; and seventy five
percent (75%) of dry and fifty percent (50%) of wet stormwater retention or
detention basins. COMMON OPEN SPACE shall not include street rights-of-way or
off street parking or loading areas.
ORNAMENTAL: Plants that add aesthetically to the site.
ORNAMENTAL FENCE: See definition of FENCE, ORNAMENTAL.
OUTDOOR LIGHTING: Any artificial open-air lighting device, fixture, lamp or
other similar device, permanently installed or portable, which is intended to
provide illumination for either visibility or decorative effects.
PARAPET: That portion of a wall that extends above the roof.
PARKING SPACE DEPTH: The longer of the two (2) dimensions of a rectangular
parking space. In the case of a space that is not rectangular, the depth shall
be the length of the largest imaginary rectangle that can fit within the space.
PARKING SPACE, OFF STREET: An area outside of any public street or alley right-
of-way that is adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors
on both sides, together with maneuvering room and properly related access to a
public street or alley.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material, other than steam or water vapor, suspended in or
discharged into the atmosphere in finely divided form as a liquid or solid at
atmospheric pressure and temperature.
PARTY WALL: A wall starting from the foundation and extending continuously
through all stories to or above the roof that separates one building from
another and that is in joint use by each building.
PATIO: An unenclosed, hard surfaced area at the finished grade and located
directly adjacent or attached to a building.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criterion to control noise, odor, smoke, toxic or
noxious matter, vibration, fire and explosive hazards, glare, heat, or other
effects generated by or inherent in uses of land or buildings.
PERMEABLE SURFACE: Any material that allows the infiltration of stormwater into
previously undeveloped land.
PERMIT, CONDITIONAL USE: A permit required for the use of land, water or
building as a conditional use received only after approval by the City Council
of an application for a conditional use.
PERMITTED PUBLIC USE: See definition of USE, PERMITTED PUBLIC.
PERMITTED USE: See definition of USE, PERMITTED.
PHILANTHROPIC AND CHARITABLE INSTITUTION: See definition of INSTITUTIONAL USES.
PHOTOMETRIC GRID: An outdoor lighting plan depicting illumination levels from
all exterior light sources on a site.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A distinct category of conditional use permit
intended to allow flexibility in the application of the standards of this
title. Planned Unit Developments are intended for significant development
proposals that provide amenities to the community which are not required from
conventional development applications.
PLAT OF SURVEY, CURRENT: A plat prepared by a licensed surveyor containing the
legal description of the premises thereon and showing:
   A.   The boundary lines of the property.
   B.   The locations of all improvements and monuments thereupon.
   C.   All encroachments.
   D.   The boundaries of all existing streets, easements, rights-of-way, and
areas dedicated to public use within two hundred feet (200') of the property as
all of the foregoing exist as of the date of filing.
PORCH: A platform having a roof that is attached to the wall of a building with
direct access to or from said building, but is not enclosed with windows or
screens.
PREMISES: Any improved or unimproved property.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING: See definition of BUILDING, PRINCIPAL.
PRINCIPAL USE: See definition of USE, PRINCIPAL.
RADIATION HAZARDS: The harmful effects of all radiation capable of producing
ions in their passage through matter, including electromagnetic radiation such
as X-rays and gamma rays and particulate radiation such as electrons or beta
particles, protons, neutrons and alpha particles.
REAR LOT LINE: See definition of LOT LINE, REAR.
REAR YARD: See definition of YARD, REAR.
RECREATIONAL INSTITUTION: See definition of INSTITUTIONAL USES.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle or boat designed or used primarily for
recreational purposes and not used as a commercial vehicle, including, but not
limited to, the following: boats/watercraft, motorized or nonmotorized, camper
trailer, all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), motorized trailer, off-road vehicle,
racing car or cycle, recreational vehicle trailer, truck camper or snowmobile.
REFUSE: All waste products resulting from human activity except sewage.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: See definition of INSTITUTIONAL USES.
REM: A quantity of ionizing radiation that, when imparted to a biological
system, has the same effect as an absorbed dose of one roentgen of X-rays per
gram of living matter.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or buildings housing facilities for scientific
research, investigation, testing or experimentation, but not primarily housing
facilities for the manufacture, sale or storage of products.
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING: See definition of BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL.
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY: A group care facility licensed for 24-hour medical
or non-medical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or
assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living, or for the
protection of the individual. A RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY includes assisted
living facilities, nursing homes, hospice, continuum of care facilities, memory
care and independent living. A RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY does not include
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE.
REST HOME: See definition of NURSING HOME.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: A restaurant that is a drive-in establishment, as defined
in this section.
REVERSED CORNER LOT: See definition of LOT, REVERSED CORNER.
REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT: See definition of LOT, REVERSED FRONTAGE.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land used for passage of motor vehicles, railroads or
pedestrians, or for the location of utility or communications lines. An access
easement shall not be considered a right-of- way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC: A right-of-way, as defined in this section, dedicated to
or owned by a public body and available for use by the general public. In the
case of public streets, the right-of-way normally includes the curbs, lawn
strips, and lighting and drainage facilities.
RINGELMANN CHART: A chart described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Circular 6888
or its successor upon which are illustrated graduated shades of grey for use in
estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke or its equivalent.
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area of the Ringelmann Chart that
coincides most nearly with the light obscuring capacity of the emission or
smoke observed.
ROOMING HOUSE: A building or part thereof that is not a hotel or motel and that
provides lodging rooms for compensation to three (3) or more persons who are
not members of the keeper’s family.
SCREENING: A structure erected or vegetation planted to wholly or partially
conceal the area behind it.
SELL: To solicit or receive an order for, to keep or expose for sale and to
keep with intent to sell.
SETBACK: See definitions of YARD.
SETBACK, FRONT: See definition of YARD, FRONT.
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of three (3) or more retail or service commercial uses
characterized by any one or more of the following:
   A.   Uses are designed as a single commercial group, whether or not located
on the same lot.
   B.   Contiguous uses occupy premises that are under common ownership or
management.
   C.   Uses are connected by party walls, partitions, canopies or other
structural members to form one continuous structure.
   D.   Uses are located in separate buildings but are interconnected by
walkways or accessways designed to facilitate customer interchange between the
uses.
   E.   Uses share a common parking area.
   F.   Uses otherwise present the appearance of a single continuous commercial
development.
SIDE LOT LINE: See definition of LOT LINE, SIDE.
SIDE YARD: See definition of yard, side.
SIGNS: See section
10-20-2  of this Code.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING: See definition of DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY
ATTACHED.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING: See definition of DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY
DETACHED.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING: See definition of DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY.
SITE AREA, NET: The acreage of land excluding the rights-of-way of streets
within and bordering a development.
SMOKE UNITS, NUMBER OF: The number obtained by multiplying the smoke density in
Ringelmann numbers by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this
calculation, a Ringelmann density reading is made at least once every minute
during the period of observation, each reading is multiplied by the time in
minutes during which the emission is observed, and the various products are
summed to give the total number of smoke units during the period of
observation.
SOLID FENCE: See definition of FENCE, SOLID.
SOUND LEVEL METER: An instrument standardized by the American Standards
Association for measurement of the intensity of sound.
SPACE, NONVEHICULAR: That portion of the uncovered space on a site that is not
normally used for the circulation or parking of motor vehicles and that has
been improved for aesthetic appeal and to serve as pedestrian and recreation
areas.
SPACE, RECREATION: That portion of the nonvehicular space on a site that is
suitable for common recreational use by virtue of it being at least five
thousand (5,000) square feet in area (except where total recreation space
required is less), it having no dimension less than fifty feet (50'), and it
being improved with facilities for recreational pursuits.
SPACE, UNCOVERED: That portion of the total horizontal net site area that is
not covered by buildings, including one-half (1/2) of covered spaces that are
no less than fifty percent (50%) open, such as carports or park shelters.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the top surface of any floor
and the top surface of the floor next above, or, if there is no floor above,
the ceiling next above.
STORY, HALF: A space under a sloping roof where the line of intersection of
roof decking and wall is not more than three feet (3') above the top floor
level and in which space not more than sixty percent (60%) of the floor area is
completed for principal or accessory use.
STREET: A public or private right-of-way, as defined herein, that affords a
primary means of motor vehicle access to abutting property and/or provides for
the movement of traffic.
STREET LINE: See definition of LINE, STREET.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, in the
supporting members of a building or structure, such as bearing walls, columns,
beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.
STRUCTURE: Anything erected the use of which requires more or less permanent
location on the ground or attachment to something having such a location. An
outdoor advertising sign or business sign or other advertising device, if
detached or projecting, shall be considered a separate structure. Structures
shall also include buildings, mobile homes, walls, and fences.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY: A structure that is an accessory use.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY: A structure that is established for a period of less than
one year and is removed within that period.
STUDIO APARTMENT: See definition of EFFICIENCY UNIT.
SUBDIVISION: Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be
divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, condominiums,
tracts or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, condominiums, tracts or
interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease or development, whether
immediate or future, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other
plans, terms and conditions. Subdivision includes the division or development
of Residential or Nonresidential zoned land, whether by deed, metes and bounds
description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat or other recorded instrument.
SUBDIVISION includes resubdivision and condominium creation or conversion.
SUBDIVISION includes any division of land that attempts to avoid the
requirements of these regulations (also see the Subdivision Control and
Development Ordinance).
TEMPORARY BUILDING: See definition of BUILDING, TEMPORARY.
TEMPORARY LIGHTING: Lighting installed with temporary wiring and operated for
not more than ninety (90) days in any calendar year at any one consecutive time
interval.
TEMPORARY STRUCTURE: See definition of STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY.
TEMPORARY USE: See definition of USE, TEMPORARY.
THROUGH LOT: See definition of LOT, THROUGH.
TOWNHOUSE: See definition of DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE.
TOXIC MATERIAL: Any liquid, solid, or gaseous substance which if discharged
into the environment could, alone or with other substances likely to be present
in the environment, cause or threaten to cause bodily injury, illness or death
to members of the general public through ingestion, inhalation or absorption
through any body surface. Substances that are corrosives, irritants, strong
sensitizers, or radioactive substances shall be considered toxic substances.
TRAILER: A portable structure supported by one or more wheels without its own
motive power which is towed or hauled and designed or used for carrying or
transporting motorcycles, recreational vehicles, as defined herein, or other
cargo, and that is eligible to be licensed or registered and insured for
highway use. This definition does not include flatbed trucks, dump trucks or
stake-bed trucks.
TRAILER PARK: Any site or tract of land under single ownership or control other
than a construction site, trailer service or repair facility, trailer
manufacturing plant, trailer sales or storage lot, or wrecking yard on which
three (3) or more trailers or recreational vehicles are located in the open.
TURF: Lawns, sod and grass areas designed to be maintained by regular watering,
mowing and raking.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING: See definition of DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.
UNCOVERED SPACE: See definition of SPACE, UNCOVERED.
UNIT: See definition of DWELLING UNIT.
UNIT GROUPING: A single detached building consisting of multiple-dwelling
units.
USE: The purpose or activity for which land or structures thereon are designed,
arranged or intended, or for which they are occupied or maintained.
USE, ACCESSORY: A subordinate land use located on the same lot or parcel as a
principal use (except for such off street parking or off street loading
facilities as may be permitted to be located on a separate lot) and serving a
purpose customarily incidental to that of the principal use.
USE, CONDITIONAL: A special use as provided by State Statute that because of
its special character cannot be allowable generally in a particular zoning
district but which may be allowed under special conditions and which is
therefor subject to the prior approval of a conditional use permit.
USE, CONDITIONAL PUBLIC:
   A.   The use of property other than as permitted public uses, as defined
herein, by a public utility, railroad or governmental body for the provision of
public utilities or services, including sewerage, water supply, electricity,
gas, public safety, government administration, transportation, and
communications.
   B.   Conditional public uses shall include power plants or substations;
water or sewage treatment plants, reservoirs or pumping stations; railroad and
utility buildings; police and fire stations, and public transportation
facilities, garages, terminals, all other public uses determined by the Zoning
Administrator to be similar to other conditional uses within the underlying
zoning district.
USE, PERMITTED: A use allowable generally within a zoning district without a
conditional use permit.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of a parcel as distinct from an accessory use.
USE, TEMPORARY: A principal or accessory use that is established for a period
of less than one year and is discontinued within that time period.
USES, PERMITTED PUBLIC: Poles, towers, tunnels, conduits, wires, cables,
vaults, laterals, pipes, drains, mains, valves, hydrants, and similar
distribution equipment for public services or utilities; fire alarms and police
call boxes; traffic signals; and pay telephones; all other uses determined by
the Zoning Administrator to be similar to other permitted uses within the
underlying zoning district.
VAPE STORE: Retail establishment which specializes (25 percent or more of its
shelf space inventory) in the sale of electronic and/or e-cigarette items,
products and/or paraphernalia.
VAPING: Inhaling vapor which is produced by either a vaporizer or electronic
cigarette.
VAPING PRODUCT: Any item and/or paraphernalia used for vaping and/or utilized
for electronic and/or e-cigarettes.
VARIANCE: A modification of the provisions of this title in accordance with the
provisions herein concerning variances in cases where strict enforcement would
cause undue hardship as a result of special circumstances affecting an
individual property that do not generally affect other properties in the same
zoning district. This modification may relate to the use of the land.
VARIANCE, MINOR: A variance granted to the fee owner, contract purchaser or
option holder of a single-family detached or attached dwelling or single-family
detached or attached building lot for that dwelling or lot.
VEHICLE, COMMERCIAL: A motorized vehicle other than a passenger car, passenger
van or recreational vehicle, as defined herein, used by a household for
noncommercial personal or family transportation, van pooling or ride sharing.
VISION CLEARANCE TRIANGLE: A triangular area located at the at-grade
intersection of streets, railroads, driveways, or any combination thereof,
formed by the right-of-way lines (or the edge of the driveway or aisle in the
case of a driveway) between their intersection and points thirty feet (30')
from their intersection along each line (or 10 feet in the case of a driveway),
and by a straight line connecting these two (2) points.
WCF ABANDONMENT: The nonuse or complete neglect of a WCF or the site upon which
it is located. This excludes if the tower is temporarily not used due to loss
of tenant or sale of property. Temporary nonuse is limited to a ninety (90) day
period before the WCF is considered abandoned.
WCF HEIGHT: The height of all proposed WCF improvements on a site shall be
determined by measuring from the bottom of the WCF to the tallest point,
including all antennas.
WCF OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: A wireless communication facility or
WCF is defined as any antenna, pole, tower, cable, pedestal, boxes, equipment,
devices and appurtenances which are required to make the WCF fully operational
(see examples located in section
11-6-15 of this title).
WALL, FRONT: The wall of a building nearest the front lot line that is parallel
to or most nearly parallel to said line.
WRECKING YARD: Any premises where there are stored in the open two (2) or more
motor vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, and construction and farm
implements, or trailers, boats or mobile homes, which are not in usable
condition and have not been restored to usable condition within thirty (30)
days of their arrival, or where parts thereof are stored in the open.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A yard extending between a corner side lot line and a line
drawn parallel thereto at a distance therefrom equal to that established by the
required corner side yard requirements of this title and also extending the
full depth of the lot but excluding any area included in a required front yard.
YARD, FRONT: A yard extending the full width of a lot between the front lot
line, as defined herein, and a line drawn parallel thereto at a distance
therefrom equal to that established by the required front yard requirements of
this title.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A yard extending between an interior side lot line and a
line drawn parallel thereto at a distance therefrom equal to that established
by the required interior side yard requirements of this title and also
extending the full depth of the lot but excluding any area included in a front
or rear yard.
YARD, REAR: A yard extending the full width of a lot between the rear lot line
and a line drawn parallel thereto at a distance therefrom equal to that
established by the required rear yard requirements of this title but excluding
any area included in a corner side yard.
ZERO LOT LINE: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or
more of the building’s sides rests directly on a lot line (see diagram in
chapter 20, “Appendices”, of this title).
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 90-516; Ord. 94-614; Ord. 98-703; Ord. 04-
847; Ord. 06-884; Ord. 06-903; Ord. 07-947; Ord. 08-960; Ord. 10-1021; Ord. 12-
1058; Ord. 12-1059; Ord. 14-1094; Ord. 14-1683; Ord. 15-1113; Ord. 19-1206, 10-
7-2019; Ord. 19-1209, 10-7-2019; 2019 Code; Ord. 20-20, 5-4- 2020; Ord. 22-26,
4-5-2022; Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022; Ord. 23-8, 2-6-2023)
CHAPTER 4: FILING PROCEDURES
Section
11-4-1: Applicability
11-4-2: Application Filing
11-4-3: Approval Process
11-4-4: Filing Fees And Retained Personnel Fees
11-4-5: Disclosure Of Interest
11-4-6: Public Notice
11-4-7
: Tables
11-4-1: APPLICABILITY:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the requirements of this chapter shall
apply to all applications submitted under the provisions of this title, except
appeals, including applications for:
   A.   Conditional uses;
   B.   Temporary uses;
   C.   Integrated Design District preliminary plans;
   D.   Integrated Design District final plans;
   E.   Variances and use variances;
   F.   Sign permits;
   G.   Zoning amendments;
   H.   Planned Unit Development preliminary plans; and
   I.   Planned Unit Development final plans.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
11-4-2: APPLICATION FILING:
Except in the case of a zoning action proposed by the City Council or a board
or commission of the City, any party requesting any City action to which this
section applies shall file an application on a form provided therefor by the
City Clerk. Every such application shall include as a minimum the applicable
items provided in section
11-4-7, table 1 of this chapter.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-4-3: APPROVAL PROCESS:
   A.   Excepted Applications:
      1.   The approval process herein shall apply to all applications except:
         a.   Appeals;
         b.   Sign permits; and
         c.   Temporary uses.
      2.   The approval process for the excepted applications shall be as
provided in the applicable sections of this title.
   B.   Staff Review: The Zoning Administrator may, together with other
departments, consultants and officials of the City, prepare a written review of
the application. Such review shall be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning
Commission no later than seven (7) days before the scheduled public hearing
date.
   C.   Public Hearing Process (Filings Requiring Hearings Only): For any
action that requires a public hearing, the provisions herein shall be complied
with. Applications that require a public hearing are:
      1.   Amendments (rezonings).
      2.   Variances.
      3.   Conditional uses, including Integrated Design District preliminary
plans and final plans, and Planned Unit Development preliminary and final
plans.
   D.   Public Notice: The applicant shall comply with the requirements for
public notice as provided in section
11-4-6 of this chapter for any zoning action that requires a public hearing.
   E.   Notification To Petitioner By Objectors: Any attorney employed by any
objector to any petition requiring a public hearing shall notify the petitioner
that he or she has been so retained and will file an objection at the hearing.
Such notice shall be delivered no later than four (4) days before the scheduled
date of the hearing. If such notice has not been given, and the petitioner so
requests, the Planning and Zoning Commission may reschedule the hearing.
   F.   Public Hearing:
      1.   Upon receipt of a complete and accurate application for a zoning
action requiring a public hearing, the City Clerk shall establish a date for a
public hearing and transmit the application to the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on
the application. No public hearing shall be held in the absence of a quorum,
which shall consist of four (4) members of the commission.
      2.   As provided in State Statute, applicants for variances and
conditional uses shall have the right to have subpoenas issued by the City for
persons or documents, to present witnesses, and to cross examine all witnesses
testifying at the public hearing.
      3.   The Chairperson or acting Chairperson may compel the attendance of
witnesses. All testimony by witnesses shall be given under oath administered by
the Chairperson or acting Chairperson.
   G.   Planning And Zoning Commission Action:
      1.   Within sixty (60) days after the close of the public hearing, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the City Council written
findings of fact pertaining to the approval criteria provided herein for the
applicable zoning action, together with a recommendation for action, passed by
a majority vote of its members, and any conditions or restrictions to which the
commission recommends the action be made subject. The report shall include the
roll call vote of the board on the recommendation.
      2.   The Planning and Zoning Commission may not defer voting on any
petition for more than one meeting unless the petitioner approves any further
postponement.
      3.   In the case of an application for a variance or an Integrated Design
District, the commission’s recommendation may include any modification of
normal requirements that is authorized by this title.
   H.   Mailing Of Planning And Zoning Commission Report: The Zoning
Administrator shall mail a copy of the report of the Planning and Zoning
Commission to the petitioner and to representatives of any objectors not less
than five (5) days prior to the City Council meeting at which the report is to
be acted upon.
   I.   City Council Action:
      1.   The City Council shall not act upon any application requiring a
public hearing until either it has received a report thereupon from the
Planning and Zoning Commission or until sixty (60) days have elapsed from the
close of the public hearing thereupon.
      2.   The Council shall not approve any application unless it finds that
the zoning action applied for meets applicable criteria for approval provided
herein. In the case of a variance, a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all Aldermen
shall be required to approve any application not approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, as provided by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
      3.   In the case of a conditional use permit, Integrated Design District,
Planned Unit Development, or variance, the Council may make its approval
subject to any conditions or restrictions it finds necessary to assure
compatibility with the vicinity of the subject property. The Council may also
set time limits within which such conditions or restrictions must be complied
with.
   J.   Resubmission: Except as otherwise provided herein, no application that
has been denied by the City Council shall be resubmitted within one year of the
date of denial except on the grounds of new factual evidence or a change in
conditions found to be valid by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 96-647; Ord. 97-684; Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
11-4-4: FILING FEES AND RETAINED PERSONNEL FEES:
   A.   Required; Exceptions: All applications shall be accompanied by a filing
fee. A deposit toward the costs of any retained personnel necessary for the
processing of the application, such as consulting engineering services,
consulting planning services, legal services or court reporter services shall
also be paid, except for applications for:
      1.   Minor variances;
      2.   Temporary uses;
      3.   Appeals;
      4.   Sign permits.
   B.   Deposit Credit: The deposit shall be credited against the expense to
the City of such personnel, which shall be fully charged to the applicant. Any
portion of the deposit not needed to pay such expense shall be refunded without
interest to the applicant within thirty (30) days of final action on the
application.
   C.   Schedule Of Fees And Deposits: The amounts of such filing fees and
deposits shall be as determined from time to time by the City Council. A
schedule of current fees and deposit requirements shall be made available in
the Offices of the City Clerk and the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-4-5: DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST:
   A.   Applicant: The party signing the application shall be considered the
applicant.
   B.   Applicant To Be Fee Owner: An applicant must be the fee owner or
trustee of record, trust beneficiary, lessee, contract purchaser, or option
holder of the subject property, or his or her agent or nominee.
   C.   If Applicant Is Not Fee Owner:
      1.   If the applicant is not the fee owner of record of the subject
property, the application shall disclose the legal capacity of the applicant
and the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners.
      2.   In addition, an affidavit of the fee owner or owners shall be filed
with the application stating that the applicant has authority from the owner to
make the application.
   D.   Applicant Or Fee Owner Is Corporation Or Partnership: If the applicant,
fee owner, contract purchaser, option holder or any beneficiary of a land trust
is a corporation, the application shall disclose the names and addresses of the
corporation’s officers, directors and registered agents, or the partnership’s
general partners and those shareholders or limited partners owning in excess of
five percent (5%) of the outstanding stock or interest in the corporation or
interest shared by the limited partners.
   E.   Applicant Or Owner Is Land Trust: If the applicant or fee owner is a
land trust or other trust or trustee thereof, the full name, address, telephone
number and extent of interest of each beneficiary must be disclosed in the
application.
   F.   Disclosure Of Ownership Required: Disclosure of present ownership
interests shall be accompanied by a statement by the applicant of proposed
ownership of all land.
   G.   Change In Ownership: In the event of a change in ownership between the
time the application is filed and the time of the public hearing, such change
shall be disclosed by affidavit no later than the time of the hearing.
   H.   Sign Permit; Temporary Use Permit: For any application for a sign
permit, the application shall disclose the ownership of the sign and the
ownership or management of the premises on which it is to be displayed. For an
application for either a sign permit or a temporary use permit, the application
shall include the written permission of the owner or manager of the premises on
which the sign or temporary use is to be located. A manager providing such
permission shall furnish satisfactory evidence of his or her authority to act
on behalf of the owner.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-4-6: PUBLIC NOTICE:
   A.   Actions Requiring Hearing: Except as otherwise provided herein, an
applicant for any action that requires a public hearing must provide public
notice of such hearing. Zoning actions that require a public hearing are:
      1.   Amendments (rezonings);
      2.   Variances;
      3.   Conditional uses, including Integrated Design District preliminary
plans and final plans.
   B.   Notice Requirements: The required notice shall consist of the following
actions:
      1.   Sign Display:
         a.   Except in the case of applications for minor variances, the
applicant shall post a sign in the required front yard of the affected
property, facing and visible from a public street and no further than thirty
feet (30') from the right-of-way line.
         b.   The sign shall conform to such requirements as to copy, size of
lettering, and other items as may be established by the City Council.
         c.   The sign shall be erected no less than fifteen (15) days prior to
the date of the scheduled public hearing and remain continuously in place until
the public hearing is concluded, but no more than ten (10) days thereafter.
         d.   No posting of a sign shall be required if the applicant is the
City, the zoning action pertains to property not owned by the City, and the
property owner does not consent to the erection of a sign giving notice of the
action.
      2.   Written Notification:
         a.   The applicant shall also provide written notice of the public
hearing to the owners of record of each parcel of real estate abutting or
across a street or alley from any boundary of the property affected by the
application.
         b.   The owners of record for this purpose shall be considered those
appearing on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds or those who paid
Property Taxes for the most recent year according to the records of the County
Collector.
         c.   The written notice shall be delivered in person or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, or made via First Class mail, not more than
thirty (30) nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled date of the
public hearing.
         d.   The written notice shall be substantially in the form of notice
provided by the City Clerk. It shall contain:
            (1)   The name and address of the owner and the applicant, if
different from the owner;
            (2)   The street address and a simple description of the location
of the subject property that will enable the ordinary reader to accurately
locate it;
            (3)   The zoning action requested; and
            (4)   The date, time and location of the public hearing thereupon.
      3.   Newspaper Publication:
         a.   The applicant shall publish a notice of the public hearing. This
requirement shall apply to all applications, including those for minor
variances.
         b.   The notice shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City at least fifteen (15) days but no more than thirty (30)
days before the scheduled date of the hearing. The published notice shall
contain the same information as is required for written notification herein.
         c.   If a board or commission of the City or the City Council proposes
an amendment, the City shall be responsible for meeting this requirement.
      4.   Evidence Of Compliance: No later than the time of the public
hearing, the applicant shall file with the City Clerk or the Planning and
Zoning Commission:
         a.   An affidavit stating that he or she has complied with all notice
requirements herein;
         b.   A copy of the written notice sent;
         c.   A list of names and addresses of all owners of record of property
abutting the subject parcel;
         d.   Signatures, on postal return receipts or in another form, of
those receiving the written notice; and
         e.   A publisher’s certificate of publication of the required notice.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 96-647; Ord. 97-683; Ord. 12-1059; Ord. 22-
26, 4-5-2022)
11-4-7: TABLES:
   TABLE 1
   REQUIRED CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FILINGS
 
Key to table:
 X = Required for all applications
 - = Not required for any applications
 R = May be required if considered necessary for review of the application by
      the commission or Zoning Administrator
      Required for industrial uses only. See performance standards section of
 I = this title
       
 
 Map Amendment  Conditional Use Permit Variations Sign Permit Minor Variances
 (Rezone)
                Map Amendment  Conditional Variations Sign Permit Minor
                (Rezone)       Use Permit                         Variances
A. Name,
address and
phone number of
the applicant   X              X           X          X           X
and name of the
development, if
any
B. Legal
descriptions of
the subject
property as a   X              X           X          X           X
whole and/or
each phase
thereof
C. Names,
addresses and
phone numbers
of any
developer, site X              X           X          -           -
planner or
engineer
involved in
project plans
D. Location of
the subject
property to be  X              X           X          X           X
affected by the
action
requested
E. Description
of action       X              X           X          X           X
requested
F. A
nonrefundable   X              X           X          X           X
filing fee
G. A retained
personnel fee   X              X           X          -           -
deposit
H. Descriptions
of the present
and proposed    X              X           X          X           X
uses of the
property
I. Complete
disclosure of   X              X           X          X           -
interest as
provided herein
J. Typewritten
list of all
owners of
record of
property
abutting the    X              X           X          -           X
subject
property per
subsection
11-4-6B4c of
this chapter
K. The zoning
district
classifications
of the subject
property and    X              X           X          X           -
all abutting
properties per
subsection
11-4-6B4c of
this chapter
L. Current plat
of survey, as
defined herein, X              X           X          _           R
of the subject
property
M. Name of
party to        -              -           -          X           -
produce and
erect sign
N. Site plan
showing
position of
sign in
relation to
nearby
structures,
rights-of-way   -              -           -          X           -
and street
grade;
locations and
sign areas of
all existing
signs on
premises
O. Plans and
specs showing
methods of
construction
and support,    -              -           -          X           -
electrical
components and
dimensions of
sign
P. Elevation
sketch showing
all exposed
sign surfaces
and all
messages or
representations -              -           -          X           -
thereupon,
accurately
represented as
to shape, size,
color and
proportion
Q. Affidavit of
party erecting
sign that sign
conforms to all
engineering     -              -           -          X           -
requirements
for safety
provided in all
City ordinances
R. Site plan
meeting the
requirements of X              X           X          -           -
table 2 of this
section
S. Performance
standards       X              I           -          -           -
certification
and data
T. Statement of
reasons why
applicant
believes action
requested       X              X           X          -           -
conforms to
applicable
approval
criteria
U.
Architectural
renderings
showing
substantial
design intent   R              R           R          -           -
for proposed
structures, but
not necessarily
final design
detail
V. A
professional
analysis of
estimated
traffic
generated by
the completed
development per
day and during
A.M. and P.M.
peak hours, the R              R           R          -           -
impact on
existing
traffic loads
in the
vicinity, and
street
construction or
traffic control
measures needed
to accommodate
the new traffic
W. Evidence of
capacity of all
affected public
school
districts to    R              R           R          -           -
handle the
enrollment
likely to be
generated by
the development
X. Any other
information the
commission
requires to
determine       X              X           X          X           X
whether the
application
conforms to the
requirements of
this title
 
Note: Contents of applications for appeals shall be as provided under the
appeals in the administration section of this title.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 89-507; Ord. 93-593; Ord. 96-614; Ord. 96-
647; Ord. 97-683)
   TABLE 2
   REQUIRED CONTENTS OF SITE PLAN
 
Key to table:
 X = Required for all site plans
 - = Not required for any site plans
 R = Required upon request of Planning and Zoning Commission or Zoning
      Administrator
 
25 copies of Uses With               Variances    Uses With
site plan    Parking1  Map Amendment Except Minor Landscape Conditional Uses
showing:                             Variances    Strip2
25 copies of site Uses With               Variances    Uses With Conditional
plan showing:     Parking1  Map Amendment Except Minor Landscape Uses
                                          Variances    Strip2
A. Scale: Number
of feet to 1 inch
or such other
scale as the
Zoning            100       100           100          100       100
Administrator or
Planning and
Zoning Commission
shall require
B. Numeric And
Graphic Scales:
Numeric and
graphic scales,   X         X             X            X         X
north arrow and
date of
preparation
C. Boundaries:
Boundaries of the
development and   X         X             X            X         X
of each phase
thereof
D. Lots: Lot
lines and         X         X             X            X         X
dimensions and
areas of lots
E. Easement:
Easements and     X         X             X            X         X
encroachments
F. Data: Data
indicating the
following for                                                 
each development
phase:
  1. Number of
  dwelling units
 broken down by  -         R             X            -         X
  number of
  bedrooms
 2. Number of    -         R             X            -         X
  lots
 3. Gross and    -         R             X            -         X
  net site area
  4. Land area
  devoted to
  streets, off
  street parking,
  off street
  loading,
 uncovered       -         R             X            -         X
  space,
  nonvehicular
  space,
  recreation
  space and each
  housing and
  land use type
G. Drainage:
Existing and      X         -             -            -         -
proposed drainage
patterns
H. Structures:
Location, type,
shape,
dimensions, floor
space,
orientation,
height in feet,
finished grade
elevations at all
entrances and
corners, and
number of stories X         R             X            -         X
of all existing
and proposed
structures,
including
buildings, signs,
fences, walls,
screening,
bridges,
culverts,
exterior lighting
fixtures and
entrance features
I. Parking,
Loading And
Service:
Location, shape,
dimensions, and
area of off
street parking
and loading
spaces and areas, X         R             X            -         X
outside storage,
and refuse
disposal and
service areas,
including aisles,
curbing. Surface
type, driveways
and curb cuts
J. Circulation:
Existing and
proposed number,
location,
alignment.
Dimensions,
design and
construction
standards of all
public and
private
thoroughfares,    -         R             -            -         X
sidewalks,
pedestrian and
bicycle paths,
railroad rights-
of- way, curb
cuts and
driveways, and
distance of
property lines to
nearest existing
intersections
K. Subsurface
Conditions: Data
on subsurface     R         R             -            X         -
soil, rock and
groundwater
conditions
L. Proposed
Landscaping:
  1. Location,
  quantity,
  diameter,
  installation
  height,
  maturity
  height, botanic
 name and common
  name, of all
  proposed living
  and nonliving
  landscaping
  materials and
  existing
  materials to be
  preserved
  2. Types and
 boundaries of
  proposed ground
  cover
  3. Location and -         -             -            X         -
  contours at 1
 foot intervals
  of all proposed
  berming
  4. Dimension s
  and appearances
  of all sides of
  proposed
  fences, walls,
 ornamental
  lighting and
  other
  landscaping and
  screening
  treatments
  5. Measures to
  be taken to
  protect new and
 preserved
  existing trees
  during
  construction
 
Notes:
      1.    Uses providing more than 4 parking spaces for application specified
in off street parking and loading, chapter 12 of this title.
      2.    All uses required to provide any screening or planting strip in
landscaping and screening, chapter 13 of this title.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 88-454; Ord. 96-647)
   TABLE 3
   APPROVAL PROCEDURE STEPS
 
                Rezoning And   Variance Conditional Use Variance Temporary Use
                Text Amendment          Use                      Or Signs
A. Hearing
before Planning X              X        X           X            -
and Zoning
Commission
B. Planning and
Zoning          X              X        X           X            -
Commission
action
C. City Council X              X        X           X            -
action
D. Permit
issuance by     X              X        X           X            X
Zoning
Administrator
 
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
CHAPTER 5: AMENDMENTS AND REZONING
Section
11-5-1: Purpose
11-5-2: Approval Process
11-5-3: Protest
11-5-4: Amendment After Adoption
11-5-5: Approval Criteria For Zoning Amendments
11-5-1: PURPOSE:
To adapt to changing development conditions and provide for the phased
implementation of the City Comprehensive Plan, the City Council may from time
to time amend the provisions of the text of this title, or the Zoning District
Map, as provided by Illinois Compiled Statutes.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-5-2: APPROVAL PROCESS:
Amendments shall be approved only in conformance with the approval process
provided in chapter 4, “Filing Procedures”, of this title, and the approval
criteria in section
11-5-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-5-3: PROTEST:
   A.   Filing Requirements: A written protest may be filed with the City Clerk
against a proposed amendment that is signed by the owner or owners of at least
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage of:
      1.   The property to be affected by the proposed amendment; or
      2.   The property immediately adjacent thereto or across an alley
therefrom; or
      3.   The property having frontage directly opposite the frontage to be
affected by the proposed amendment.
   B.   Required Vote For Approval: If such a protest is filed, the proposed
amendment shall not be approved except by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the
Council members currently holding office.
   C.   Copy Served Upon Applicant: The protestor shall serve a copy of the
protest upon the applicant and upon his or her attorney, if any, by certified
mail.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-5-4: AMENDMENT AFTER ADOPTION:
As provided by Illinois Statute, no amendment to this title shall be approved
within six (6) months of its adoption, except by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the
City Council.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-5-5: APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR ZONING AMENDMENTS:
In recommending approval or conditional approval of an amendment, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the City Council written findings of
fact that all of the conditions below apply to the application. In granting
approval or conditional approval, the City Council shall similarly find that
all of the following conditions apply:
   A.   Compatible With Use Or Zoning Of Environs: The proposed use(s) or the
uses permitted under the proposed zoning classification are compatible with
existing uses or existing zoning of property in the environs.
   B.   Supported By Trend Of Development: The trend of development in the
general area since the original zoning of the affected property was established
supports the proposed use or zoning classification.
   C.   Consistent With Comprehensive Plan Objectives: The proposed use or
zoning classification is in harmony with the objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan of the City as viewed in light of any changed conditions since the
adoption of the plan.
   D.   Furthers Public Interest: The proposed use or zoning classification
promotes the public interest and not solely the interest of the applicant.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
CHAPTER 6: DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section
11-6-1: Establishment Of Districts
11-6-2: Zoning District Map
11-6-3: Interpretation Of District Boundaries
11-6-4: Zoning Of Annexed Land
11-6-5: Regulation Of Developments In Special Flood Hazard Areas
11-6-6: Air Rights
11-6-7: One Principal Building Per Lot
11-6-8: Operations Within Enclosed Buildings
11-6-9: Spacing Of Service Stations
11-6-10: Adult Businesses
11-6-11: Temporary Uses
11-6-12: Exceptions To Arterial Lot Dimensions
11-6-13: Identical And Similar Use Description Listings In Different Use Groups
11-6-14: Outdoor Lighting Regulations
11-6-15: Wireless Communication Facilities
11-6-16: Displaying Vehicles At Automobile Dealerships
11-6-17: Medical Cannabis
11-6-18: Adult-Use Cannabis Business
11-6-19: Vape Stores
11-6-20: Outdoor Storage
11-6-21: Apiculture/Beekeeping
11-6-22: Drive-In Establishments (Drive-through)
11-6-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
To accomplish the purposes of this title, the City is hereby divided and
classified into the following zoning districts:
A-1 Agriculture District
Residential Districts:
 E     Estate District
 RS-1  Low Density Single-Family Residential District
 RS-1a Medium Low Density Single-Family Residential District
 RS-2  Medium Density Single-Family Residential District
 RS-3  Medium High Density Single-Family Residential District
 RS-4  High Density Single-Family Residential District
 RA-1  Attached Residential District
 RM-1  Low Density Multi-Family Residential District
 RM-2  High Density Multi-Family Residential District
Commercial Districts:
 C-1   Convenience Commercial District
 C-2   Neighborhood Commercial District
 C-3   Community Commercial District
 C-4   Downtown Commercial District
 C-5   Highway Commercial District
Office, Industrial, Business Park, Agriculture and Mining Overlay, and Health
Care Districts:
 O-1   Local Office District
 O-2   Office Park District
 I-1   Industrial District
 BP    Business Park District
 A-M   Agriculture and Mining Overlay District
 HC    Health Care District
 MU    Mixed Use District
IDD Integrated Design District
 
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 88-435; Ord. 91-553; Ord. 96-647; Ord. 97-
672; Ord. 02-792; Ord. 04-846; Ord. 18-1918, 12-17-2018; Ord. 18-1919, 12-17-
2018)
11-6-2: ZONING DISTRICT MAP:
   A.   The zoning district classification of all land in the City shall be
shown on the map designated as the City of McHenry Zoning District Map, dated
and signed by the City Clerk upon adoption. No land shall at any time be
classified in more than one zoning district, except that land may be classified
in any district designated as an overlay district and in a district that is not
an overlay district.
   B.   The Zoning District Map, everything shown thereon, and all amendments
thereto, shall be as much a part of this title as if fully described herein and
shall be filed as part of this title by the City Clerk. Said map shall be
available for public inspection in the Office of the City Clerk. Any amendments
to this map shall be similarly dated, filed and made available for public
reference and shall be incorporated into the Zoning District Map by the Zoning
Administrator on or before March 31 of each year and published as provided by
statute.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-6-3: INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES:
   A.   District boundary lines shall, unless otherwise indicated, be on the
boundary lines of the City, of sections or divisions of sections, or tract or
lot lines; on the centerlines of streets, railroads, alleys, easements, rivers
and other water bodies; or on the extension of such lines.
   B.   District boundary lines approximately following such lines shall be
interpreted as located on those lines. Distances not specifically indicated on
the map shall be established using the scale of the map.
   C.   Where a district boundary divides a lot in single ownership, the
district governing any portion of the lot may, at the owner’s discretion,
extend to the entire lot if such extension is not more than twenty five feet
(25') beyond the district boundary on the map.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-6-4: ZONING OF ANNEXED LAND:
Except as may be provided for by Annexation Agreement or by a subsequent
amendment to this title, any lot or parcel of land hereafter annexed to the
City shall be automatically classified E, RS-1, RS-1a, RS-2, RS-3 or RS-
4 Zoning District classification, whichever is most restrictive; provided,
however, that the area of the annexed parcel or lot is in conformance with the
minimum lot area requirement of that district.
(Ord. 93-593)
11-6-5: REGULATION OF DEVELOPMENT IN SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
The use of land located within floodplains is regulated by the City special
flood hazard areas regulations, title 13 of this Code, in addition to the
requirements herein.
(Ord. 92-570; amd. Ord. 92-579; Ord. 02-792)
11-6-6: AIR RIGHTS:
The development of air rights shall be a conditional use in all zoning
districts and subject to all other requirements of the zoning district applying
to the land below as well as to the procedures and criteria governing
conditional uses.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-6-7: ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING PER LOT:
Except within Integrated Design Districts, Planned Unit Developments, and the
Health Care District, no more than one principal building or use shall be
permitted on any lot in any zoning district.
(Ord. 97-672; amd. Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
11-6-8: OPERATIONS WITHIN ENCLOSED BUILDINGS:
All business, service, storage, merchandise display and, where permitted,
repair and processing shall be conducted wholly within enclosed buildings,
except for off street parking, off street loading, and for open sales lots or
outside storage where these uses are permitted, with the exception of outdoor
retail displays and outdoor seating in compliance with the following
conditions:
(Ord. 15-1113)
   A.   Display Of Merchandise: The intent of this section is to provide
appropriate locations for the outdoor display of merchandise and to mitigate
any adverse impacts on adjacent properties and public right-of-way while
maintaining public health, safety and welfare. Any person who owns or operates
a retail business that has a storefront that opens directly onto a street,
public way or private way, shall be permitted to display products which are
part of the regular inventory of the business. This includes, but is not
limited to, vending machines, Red Box kiosks, propane cylinder displays, etc.,
that are wholly contained, ancillary to the business and kept outside at all
times. The display shall be limited to the area directly in front of such
business, provided:
      1.   A permit is obtained from the Community Development Department,
prior to the display of product.
      2.   Outside display is limited to properties that are permitted to have
retail sales as listed in this title, and (retail) legal nonconforming
properties in existence prior to the date of the ordinance codified herein,
only.
      3.   Display is only permitted during hours the business is open and
accessible to the public. At all other times the product shall be stored inside
the building.
      4.   Approved ingress and egress to and from a building must be
maintained as required by the City’s currently adopted Building Code.
      5.   Public and private sidewalks shall not be reduced to a clear usable
width of less than forty eight inches (48").
      6.   A minimum of four feet (4') of horizontal clearance must be
maintained between any display and trees, landscaping, utility poles, sign
poles, fire hydrants, shelters and other similar devices or structures.
      7.   Display shall not be permitted to be placed in parking stalls, drive
aisles, alleys, streets or roads.
      8.   Pedestrian and motor vehicle vision clearance must not be blocked at
intersections, driveways, doors and signage. Note: Product being displayed is
not permitted to be located within two feet (2') of the latch side of any door.
      9.   Alcoholic beverages, tobacco, firearms, munitions, adult oriented
items, or any other article or product that a minor (as defined by Federal,
State or local ordinance) is prohibited from purchasing by law, shall not be
permitted outside the building.
      10.   McHenry County Health Department approval must be obtained prior to
placing anything that can be eaten, consumed or ingested, outside the building.
      11.   The use of signage, pennants, banners, flags (other than American),
lighting, electric amplification or noisemaking devices shall not be used to
attract attention to the display.
      12.   The display is placed on an approved surface, such as concrete,
asphalt or paver bricks.
      13.   The display will not be permitted to be anchored or secured to the
ground, trees, signs, fire hydrants or buildings.
      14.   All products shall be kept flush or parallel, with the face of the
building where the retail business is located and in no case shall the area
used for the display exceed the following dimensions:
         a.   Twenty percent (20%) of the width of the business frontage of the
building as defined in this title.
         b.   Exceed six feet (6') in height measured from the sidewalk
surface.
         c.   Be placed more than six feet (6') from the face of the building.
      15.   All sales and transfer of product shall take place inside the
building where normal retail transactions occur.
      16.   Outside display shall only be allowed when weather conditions are
favorable for this use.
      17.   The display shall be kept neat and orderly and remain free from
trash and debris at all times.
      18.   The display shall be immediately removed by the business owner any
time the City Administrator or his designee, determines a clear sidewalk is
needed because of traffic, street cleaning, maintenance, utility work, crowd
control, parade, emergency or violation of any of the above listed conditions.
(Ord. 12-1059)
   B.   Outdoor Seating:
      1.   Application form for an outdoor seating permit shall be submitted
which identifies business name, address, PIN, zoning designation, name,
address, phone, fax, e-mail of applicant and property owner.
      2.   A dimensioned site plan indicating the number and location of the
tables (including table measurements), chairs, trash receptacles and any other
related elements.
      3.   A separate “Waiver of Liability” form signed by the business owner,
and in the case of leased property, the property owner for outside seating on
public property, or alternatively a “Waiver of Liability” provision shall be
included on the outdoor seating permit application.
      4.   Once an outdoor seating permit is issued, it shall remain active
until such time as the requesting business ceases to exist. In other words, it
does not have to be renewed annually. The outdoor seating permit shall include
a statement that authorizes the City to revoke the permit if any of the
established conditions are not met.
      5.   Establishments with existing outdoor seating and/or with an existing
conditional use permit which addresses outdoor seating, service of food and/or
alcohol, outdoor preparation of food and/or live entertainment and/or dancing
may be permitted to continue to exist; however, any changes proposed by any of
those establishments in the future will require submittal of an outdoor seating
permit application as defined herein and all conditions included herein shall
be met which may include a variance and/or amendment to an existing ordinance
if applicable.
      6.   Approved ingress and egress to and from a building must be
maintained as required by the City’s currently adopted Building Code.
(Ord. 15-1113)
      7.   The Building Commissioner or their designee may grant permission for
the sale, dispensing and consumption of alcoholic liquor and/or food in an
outdoor area adjacent to the licensed building. Except as provided herein, the
area for which permission is issued shall be subject to review by the Building
Commissioner or their designee and shall be of a secure nature with a partition
defining the outdoor seating area and shall facilitate access in the area only
through the licensed premises or through an occupied host or hostess station.
If the outdoor seating area protrudes into the public way, an indemnification
agreement releasing the City from all liability must accompany the permit
application.
(Ord. 19-1200, 7-15-2019)
      8.   Outdoor seating must be located on a hard surface such as asphalt,
concrete, brick or wood.
      9.   Outdoor seating is prohibited within a required landscape island or
area.
      10.   Outdoor seating located adjacent to a vehicular parking area or
driving aisle shall be separated by a physical barrier (fence, gate, landscape
planter, etc.).
(Ord. 15-1113)
      11.   A permit fee as established by the City Council shall be required
for any establishment seeking an outdoor seating permit in accordance with the
recommended provisions included herein.
(Ord. 15-1113; amd. 2019 Code)
      12.   An inspection shall be required following outdoor seating permit
review and prior to use of outdoor seating.
      13.   Sidewalks shall not be reduced to a clear usable width of less than
forty eight inches (48").
      14.   Pedestrian and motor vehicle vision clearance must not be blocked
at intersections, driveways, doors and signage. This includes the use of
appurtenances (umbrellas, etc.).
(Ord. 15-1113)
      15.   Tables, chairs, table umbrellas and other related items utilized in
conjunction with an outdoor seating area shall be appropriately secured in the
case of high winds.
(Ord. 19-1200, 7-15-2019)
      16.   Operation of outdoor seating area is only permitted when the
business for which the outdoor seating permit was issued is open, but in no
instance prior to seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. or after ten o’clock (10:00) P.M.
(Ord. 15-1113)
      17.   Outdoor seating on public property must be removed during the off
season when it is not being utilized.
(Ord. 19-1200, 7-15-2019)
      18.   The use of signage, pennants, banners, flags (other than American),
lighting, electric amplification or noisemaking devices is prohibited.
      19.   No electrical appliances or open flame devices shall be located or
utilized within the outdoor seating area; however, the use of “infrared style”
heaters is permitted in accordance with any applicable testing organization
(UL) or other listing and in accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications.
      20.   Outdoor seating on public property shall be immediately removed by
the business owner any time the City Administrator or his/her designee,
determines that a clear sidewalk is needed because of traffic, street cleaning,
snow or ice removal, maintenance, utility work, crowd control, parade,
emergency, or in the case of violation of any of the conditions included in
this section.
(Ord. 15-1113)
11-6-9: SPACING OF SERVICE STATIONS:
No automobile service station shall be located within six hundred feet (600')
of any other automobile service station.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-6-10: ADULT BUSINESSES:
   A.   Intent And Purpose: It is the intent of this section to protect and
preserve the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the City by
regulating adult business within the City.
   B.   General Standards:
      1.   CUP Required: A separate conditional use permit must be issued for
each adult business, as defined in section
4-3A-1 of this Code.
      2.   Location Restrictions: No adult business shall be operated within
one thousand feet (1,000') of a Residential Zoning District or within one
thousand feet (1,000') of the property boundaries of any school, daycare
center, cemetery, public park, public housing, nursing home, rest home,
sheltered care facility and place of religious worship. The distance limitation
shall be measured in a straight line from the lot lines of said adult business
and applicable Residential Zoning District, school, daycare center, cemetery,
public park, public housing, nursing home, rest home, sheltered care facility
and place of religious worship.
      3.   Number Permitted Per Block: Only one adult business shall be
permitted per block face.
      4.   Sign Requirements: The following sign requirements shall apply to
any adult business:
         a.   All signs shall be flat wall signs.
         b.   The amount of allowable sign area shall be one square foot of
sign area per foot of lot frontage on a street, or as permitted by title 10,
chapter 20 of this Code, whichever is more restrictive.
         c.   Window areas shall not be covered or made opaque in any way. No
sign shall be placed in any window. One (1) 1-square foot sign may be placed on
the door to state hours of operation and admittance to adults only.
      5.   Advertising: No merchandise or pictures of the products or
entertainment on the premises shall be displayed in window areas or any area
where they can be viewed from the sidewalk in front of the building.
      6.   Alcoholic Liquor Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any adult
business to sell, distribute or permit beer or alcoholic beverages on the
premises.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-6-11: TEMPORARY USES:
   A.   Permitted: Temporary uses of land shall be permitted in any zoning
district upon the issuance by the Community and Economic Development Department
of a temporary use permit, subject to the provisions of this section.
   B.   Application: An application for any temporary use permit shall be filed
with the Community and Economic Development Department at least thirty (30)
days before the requested beginning of the temporary use. The application and
associated guidelines are available through the Community and Economic
Development Department, as well as on the City’s website, www.ci.mchenry.il.us,
under document resources. A separate temporary sign permit application must be
completed if applicable. An additional permit fee is required for a temporary
sign. The temporary use permit shall be displayed within plain view on the
premises of the temporary use for the duration of the use. Application and
payment of sixty dollars ($60.00), thirty dollars ($30.00) of which may be
refunded upon successful compliance with all conditions associated with an
approved temporary use permit application.
   C.   Exempt From Permitting Or Minor Or Major: Temporary use permits shall
either be exempt from permitting or be classified as minor or major in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   D.   Exempt Temporary Uses: The following uses are excluded from the
requirement of obtaining a temporary use permit:
      1.   Picnics at a private park, corporate picnics on a corporate campus/
property.
      2.   Private, noncommercial events on the sponsor’s property, such as
homeowners’ association.
      3.   Private weddings at a private residence or private subdivision
clubhouse.
      4.   Any temporary use previously approved by the City Council, as part
of another agreement, such as an annexation agreement.
      5.   Any event which proposed to be held in a City park subject to
receiving a permit for group activity under section
8-2-39 of this Code, as amended from time to time.
      6.   Any use which requires a City license or permit where City Council
approval is not typically required, such as peddlers adjacent to the Riverwalk,
ice cream vendors and solicitors compliant with terms in the City’s Solicitors
and Peddlers Ordinance, etc.
   E.   Minor Temporary Uses: Minor temporary use permits shall be reviewed and
approved, approved with conditions or denied administratively by the Community
and Economic Development Department staff. If a minor temporary use permit is
denied or the applicant disputes any condition(s) placed on the approval of the
temporary use, the applicant may appeal the administrative review and
determination to the City Council.
      1.   Criteria: Each of the following criteria must be satisfied for a
temporary use (other than the specific uses listed below) to be classified as
minor. If any one of the following criterion is not met, the temporary use
shall be classified as major and comply with the provisions outlined in this
section for major temporary use permits.
         a.   No more than seven (7) consecutive calendar days in length,
including setup and takedown (setup and takedown includes erecting/removing
tents, lighting, fencing, merchandise specifically associated with the
temporary use being proposed);
         b.   Use is permitted by right in the zoning district in which it is
proposed;
         c.   Use is consistent with activities typically associated with the
existing principal land use on the property being proposed;
         d.   Use is proposed on a property where the existing principal use is
conforming;
         e.   Use is only proposed for one time per calendar year;
         f.   All applicable permits are obtained, including, but not limited
to, any food service permit required from the McHenry County Department of
Health.
      2.   Specific Minor Temporary Uses: The following is a nonexclusive list
of specific minor temporary uses which shall only be required to meet the
conditions set forth herein. If one or more specified criterion cannot be met,
these uses shall be considered and reviewed by the City Council in accordance
with the provisions outlined herein for major temporary uses.
Carnival or circus:
         a.   Limited in duration to ten (10) consecutive days.
         b.   Operated or sponsored by a nonprofit group.
         c.   Not located in or adjacent to any developed residential area
other than on church, school or park property.
         d.   Must comply with title 4, chapter 4, “Amusements”, of this Code.
Downtown or shopping center sidewalk sales:
         a.   Must not exceed ten (10) days per calendar year.
         b.   Must not be held more than twice in any one year.
         c.   Must not cover an area exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the width
of any public sidewalk at any point within the shopping center or downtown
area.
Outside display and sale of landscaping materials:
         a.   Must not exceed one hundred twenty (120) days per calendar year.
         b.   Conducted in Commercial Districts only.
         c.   Must not cover an area exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the width
of any public walkway.
         d.   Must be operated or sponsored by an established business in
operation on the same property or a nonprofit group, but only with the prior
written consent of the property owner.
Roadside display and sale of farm produce, landscaping material, or related
merchandise:
         a.   Not conducted in or adjacent to any developed residential area.
         b.   Limited in duration to ninety (90) days.
         c.   Must provide adequate ingress and egress from adjoining roadways.
         d.   Must provide one off street parking space per seventy five (75)
square feet of display area with a minimum of three (3) spaces. Such spaces
need not meet the code requirements of the off street parking and loading or
landscaping.
Sale of Christmas trees:
         a.   Limited in duration to thirty (30) days.
         b.   Must not be conducted in or adjacent to any developed residential
area.
Trailers for the temporary storage of merchandise:
         a.   Only applies to businesses eighty thousand (80,000) square feet
or more in size.
         b.   No more than eight (8) such trailers shall be allowed on a site
at any given time.
         c.   All trailers shall be stored in a rear yard out of public view
whenever possible. No trailer shall be located in front of the front building
line of the principal building.
         d.   Only allowed from October 1 to January 31 of the following year.
   F.   Major Temporary Uses:
      1.   Criteria: If any of the criteria for minor temporary uses above are
not met or if any one of the criteria below is applicable to the requested use,
the temporary use shall be classified as major and requires consideration,
review and approval by the City Council:
         a.   Any use proposed which also involves any type of sign variance
request;
         b.   Any use proposed which cannot comply with the outdoor lighting
regulations or performance standards for noise as outlined in this title;
         c.   Use is proposed for more than one time per calendar year, either
on the same application or multiple applications submitted within the same
calendar year;
         d.   Use proposed is not compliant with all other applicable City
ordinances, rules and regulations.
      2.   Consideration; Decision: Major temporary use permits will be
forwarded to the City Council for consideration at a regularly scheduled City
Council meeting. The City Council shall approve, approve with conditions or
deny the application. Upon approval by the City Council, the Community and
Economic Development Department shall issue a temporary use permit.
(Ord. 14-1684)
11-6-12: EXCEPTIONS TO ARTERIAL LOT DIMENSIONS:
The following lots are exempt from the special required minimum lot dimensions
along streets designated as arterials in the City Comprehensive Plan that are
provided in the regulations for individual zoning districts:
   A.   Existing Lots: Existing lots of record as of the effective date of this
title.
   B.   Later Subdivided Lots; Conditions: Lots subdivided after the effective
date of this title that meet any of the following conditions:
      1.   The only access to the lot is from public streets or public access
drives that are not arterials, and are either already in existence or have been
planned and approved by the City. Except in the case of a lot in a Residential
District, such streets or access drives shall not primarily serve a residential
area.
      2.   The only access to the lot is from curb cuts provided jointly with
one or more other lots with a combined frontage on the arterial of one hundred
fifty feet (150') or more.
Where such lots are part of the same subdivision, the curb cuts shall meet all
City requirements. Where such lots are not part of the same subdivision, City
requirements shall be met to the extent possible, and the total number of curb
cuts shall not be increased.
      3.   The only access to the lot is ultimately to be provided from a
frontage road planned and approved by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, the County or the City and where right-of- way adjacent to the
lot has been dedicated totaling one hundred feet (100') from the centerline of
the arterial or such lesser distance equaling or exceeding fifty feet (50') as
the City may approve.
      4.   Other arrangements approved by the City establish a minimum distance
of one hundred fifty feet (150') between each curb cut on the lot and all other
curb cuts on the lot or on adjacent parcels or control left turns in and out of
curb cuts by driveway channelization and signage.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-6-13: IDENTICAL AND SIMILAR USE DESCRIPTION LISTINGS IN DIFFERENT USE
GROUPS:
   A.   Identical Use Descriptions Listed Both As Permitted Uses And As
Conditional Uses: Where an identical use description is listed, both as a
conditional use and as a permitted use in the same zoning district, the use
shall be construed as a conditional use.
   B.   Similar Use Descriptions Listed As Permitted Uses In Different Zoning
Districts Or Listed As Conditional Uses In Different Zoning Districts: Where a
proposed use can logically be included under similar use descriptions in
different permitted use groups or in different conditional use groups, such use
shall be construed as being included within that use description which is the
most specific or narrow in scope.
   C.   Similar Use Descriptions Listed Both As Permitted Use And As
Conditional Use: Where a proposed use can be included in a use description of a
permitted use group in one zoning district and in a use description of a
conditional use group in another zoning district, such proposed use shall be
construed as being included within the conditional use group and excluded from
the permitted use group.
(Ord. 91-553)
11-6-14: OUTDOOR LIGHTING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose and intent of this section is to
establish outdoor lighting standards which promote safety and security,
encourage energy conservation and reduce or eliminate light pollution, glare
and light trespass.
   B.   Applicability:
      1.   Uses During Darkness: To uses that operate during hours of darkness,
where there is public assembly or navigation, including, but not limited to,
the following uses: multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, office,
business park, public-recreational, and institutional.
      2.   Residential Excluded: Single-family residential shall be excluded
from the provisions of this section except where specifically stated.
      3.   Necessary: Required lighting incorporated for other uses or
locations as deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
      4.   Glare Control: Glare control requirements contained herein shall
apply to all uses.
   C.   Exempt Lighting:
      1.   Emergency Lighting: All emergency lighting and traffic control
lighting.
      2.   Single-Family Home Lighting: All single-family residential homes,
except in the instance where glare and/or light trespass onto another property
is apparent.
      3.   Temporary Lighting: The temporary use of low wattage or low voltage
lighting for public festivals, celebrations and the observance of holidays,
except where they create a hazard or nuisance from glare or light trespass.
Temporary lighting shall be permitted for a maximum of ninety (90) days from
the date of installation.
      4.   Public Right-Of-Way Lighting: Streetlights installed or maintained
in a public right-of-way.
   D.   Prohibited Lighting:
      1.   Motion Lighting: Use of search lights, laser lighting or lights that
pulse, flash, rotate or simulate motion for advertising or promotions.
      2.   Glare: All lighting that produces glare.
      3.   Multiple Purposes: Lighting intended to serve more than one specific
purpose, e.g., a building and parking lot.
      4.   Nuisance: Lighting deemed a public nuisance by the Zoning
Administrator.
   E.   Lighting Regulations:
      1.   General Regulations:
         a.   All outdoor lighting shall be shielded and aimed so that
illumination is directed only to the areas designated for lighting.
         b.   Light trespass from nonresidential development onto residential
development and from multi-family residential onto single-family residential
development shall not exceed one-half (0.5) foot-candles at the property line.
         c.   Mounting heights of all lighting fixtures, except those fixtures
existing as of the date of passage of this section, shall not exceed thirty
feet (30') in Nonresidential Districts, and twenty four feet (24') in
Residential Districts.
         d.   All luminaries shall be full cutoff fixtures.
         e.   All lighting on a premises shall be of the same color.
         f.   All outdoor lighting shall be turned off or reduced to minimum
levels necessary for security purposes by eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. each
night. This provision shall not apply to places of business or public venues
that are open twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   Parking Lot Lighting: Parking lot lighting shall be required for all
new development and other pedestrian areas.
         a.   A minimum of one and one-half (1.5) foot-candles and a maximum of
ten (10) foot-candles shall be maintained in a parking lot.
         b.   Security lighting intended to light the perimeter of a property
may include motion sensors.
         c.   All parking lot lighting standards and luminaries used to
illuminate the same premises shall be of the same design and color.
      3.   Building Lighting: Lighting fixtures on buildings shall be full
cutoff and located, aimed and shielded so that light is directed only onto the
building surface. Ground mounted fixtures used to highlight a building shall
shine upwards towards a building surface. Lighting fixtures shall not be
directed toward adjacent streets or roads.
      4.   Additional Regulations Applicable To Gas Stations And Automobile
Dealerships:
         a.   Gas/Automobile Service Stations: A maximum of forty (40) foot-
candles shall be permitted under the canopy of gas or automobile service
stations.
         b.   Automobile Dealerships: A maximum of thirty five (35) foot-
candles shall be permitted anywhere in the lot of an automobile dealership,
provided off site glare and light pollution are minimized by shielding light
fixtures or using other appropriate methods.
   F.   Lighting Plans Required: A photometric grid shall be required for all
new developments, excluding single-family. The location of all light standards
and luminaries, and illumination levels in foot- candles, shall be indicated
within the site and at the property lines. A cut sheet of all types of proposed
light standards and luminaries shall be provided, indicating the type of
lighting to be used, the mounting height, cutoffs, and any other pertinent
information as deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator.
   G.   Effective Date/Nonconformity Provisions: These provisions shall apply
to all new lighting installations. All existing lighting not in compliance with
the provisions of this section shall be brought into compliance by June 1,
2007.
(Ord. 06-879)
11-6-15: WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish guidelines for the
location of wireless communication facilities (WCF) without prohibiting their
location but protecting the health, safety, welfare of the public and the
character of the area by:
      1.   Recognizing the communication needs of residents and businesses;
      2.   Establishing appropriate standards for WCF sites;
      3.   Preserving the existing unique and rural character of the City;
      4.   Requiring collocation of WCFs;
      5.   Minimizing adverse visual effects of towers and facilities by
establishing setbacks and design standards; and
      6.   Discouraging the creation of new monopole wireless communication
towers.
   B.   General Provisions:
      1.   Applicability: No WCF, as defined herein, shall hereafter be
located, erected, moved, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted or
structurally altered unless the required permits have been submitted to the
City and approved.
      2.   Bulk Standards:
         a.   WCFs located as permitted uses:
            (1)   No more than twelve feet (12') higher than the structure in
or on which they are located.
            (2)   In accordance with zoning district requirements.
            (3)   No alteration to the structure for the WCF shall make the
structure unsafe to the public.
         b.   WCFs located as conditional uses:
            (1)   The height of any new WCF shall not exceed fifty five feet
(55'); provided, however, that a WCF greater than fifty five feet (55'), but no
more than one hundred feet (100'), may be allowed upon the granting of a
variance. Height is measured from the base of the structure to the tallest
point, including any antenna.
            (2)   Setbacks from any public roadway or adjacent property line
shall be equal to the height of the tower. The setback from Residentially zoned
property shall be double the height of the tower, as illustrated below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2037.gif]
 
         c.   The location, height or construction of this new WCF shall not
give this WCF provider an unfair advantage over any other WCF provider in the
City.
      3.   Aesthetics: The following requirements apply to all WCFs located in
the City:
         a.   WCFs shall be designed to blend in with its surroundings. This
may mean that the facility be designed as a flag pole, tree or other similar
structure. It can also mean that the WCF may be designed and painted to blend
in with the adjacent area, or structure on which it is located.
         b.   The WCF site shall be landscaped to provide sufficient screening.
See figures 2 and 3 of this subsection:
FIGURE 2
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2967.gif]
 
FIGURE 3
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2041.gif]
 
         c.   The WCF shall have no exposed wiring. All wiring must be enclosed
within the structure or pole.
   C.   Regulations:
      1.   Federal Guidelines: All WCFs must meet the guidelines established by
the FCC and FAA.
      2.   Security; Safety: All WCFs shall show the construction of security
fencing or climb guards to ensure the safety of the site.
      3.   Identification Signage: No WCF provider identification signage may
be erected on site.
      4.   Site Lighting: Site lighting shall conform to the City’s lighting
regulations and all FAA or other State or Federal agency requirements.
      5.   Abandonment: WCF providers shall notify the City of abandonment of a
facility within thirty (30) days. All WCFs shall be removed within ninety (90)
days of abandonment unless an extension is otherwise requested and granted.
      6.   Damage: All WCFs shall be repaired within fourteen (14) days of
damage.
      7.   Required Licenses: The WCF providers shall submit copies of all
licenses as required by State or Federal authorities.
      8.   Property, Lease Information: The WCF provider shall submit all
information regarding the ownership of the property, a copy of the lease
agreement and contact information for the WCF provider company.
      9.   Siting: The siting of any WCF shall not interfere with any public
safety communications, the City’s wireless mesh network or the City’s wireless
internet service network.
      10.   Collocation: Collocation is required. Collocation is when three (3)
or more WCF providers locate on a single structure.
      11.   Freestanding: All new freestanding WCFs shall be of a monopole
design.
   D.   Maintenance And Repair Required: The appearance and safety of the WCF
shall be maintained at all times. A maintenance agreement shall be filed with
the City which details the WCF provider’s intent to maintain the site. It shall
contain a contact name, with direct phone line number, fax number and mailing
address. Each year the WCF provider shall submit to the City updated contact
information. Failure to maintain the site properly will be considered a
property maintenance violation and is regulated by this Code.
   E.   Administration:
      1.   The following is a list of the necessary information in order to
process a WCF:
         a.   WCFs as permitted uses:
            (1)   All licenses;
            (2)   Site plan showing the location of the WCF, including the
existing structure and all adjacent improvements (buildings, landscape,
lighting, etc.);
            (3)   Signed contract with the property owner;
            (4)   All engineering plans;
            (5)   Projected diameter of coverage.
         b.   WCFs as conditional uses:
            (1)   All licenses;
            (2)   Proof of ownership of property or lease agreement and signed
letter of authorization from property owner;
            (3)   All applicable application forms;
            (4)   Site plan (fully dimensioned);
            (5)   Landscape plan;
            (6)   Lighting plan;
            (7)   Engineering plans;
            (8)   Projected diameter of coverage;
            (9)   Map of all existing towers, public facilities and buildings
within a six (6) mile radius of proposed site;
            (10)   Written proof describing why the WCF cannot be located on
any of the identified existing towers, public facilities or buildings. Please
address each identified site separately.
      2.   Once a completed application is received, the City shall review the
provided materials and return comments back to the applicant within thirty (30)
calendar days. The applicant shall address all of staff’s comments and make a
complete resubmittal. After all necessary staff reviews, the request will
proceed to the Planning and Zoning Commission for a public hearing, then to the
City Council for final approval.
   F.   Existing WCFs: All existing WCFs shall be allowed to continue to remain
as existing nonconforming uses. Any proposed new antennas shall be allowed to
be constructed on the tower, provided the WCF provider notify the City of
intent to do so and the new antenna shall not be higher than the lowest
existing antenna.
   G.   Wireless Communication Facility Definitions: See section
11-3-1, “Definitions”, of this title.
   H.   Examples:
   EXAMPLES OF WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2043.gif]   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/IMAGES/0-0-0-2045.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2047.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2049.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2051.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2053.gif]   
 
   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2055.gif]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2089.gif]
(Ord. 06-889)
11-6-16: DISPLAYING VEHICLES AT AUTOMOBILE DEALERSHIPS:
Vehicles may be displayed on grass surfaces at businesses only where the sale
of vehicles is the principal use on the subject property and in accordance with
the following provisions:
   A.   One vehicle/one hundred feet (100') of property frontage may be
displayed on grass;
   B.   Grass underneath vehicles must be maintained in accordance with City
ordinances;
   C.   Vehicles cannot create any vision/line of sight problems;
   D.   Vehicle lights shall remain off and doors and hoods must remain closed;
   E.   Vehicles can be displayed between March 1 and November 1 only;
   F.   Vehicles must be evenly spaced across full property frontage and cannot
be clumped together;
   G.   Vehicles only are permitted to be displayed;
   H.   Vehicular ramps are prohibited;
   I.   Vehicles cannot be located in road right-of-way.
(Ord. 13-1643)
11-6-17: MEDICAL CANNABIS:
   A.   Purpose And Applicability: It is the intent and purpose of this section
to provide regulations regarding the cultivation and dispensing of medical
cannabis occurring within the corporate limits of the City. Such facilities
shall comply with all regulations provided in the Compassionate Use of Medical
Cannabis Pilot Program Act, as enacted by the State of Illinois, effective
January 1, 2014, as may be amended from time to time (hereinafter referred to
as the “Act”), as well as those additional regulations provided below. In the
event the Act is amended, the more restrictive of the State or local
regulations shall apply.
   B.   Conditional Use Permit: Medical cannabis facilities, as defined in
section
11-3-1 of this title, requiring approval of a conditional use permit in the
respective zoning districts in which they are requested shall be processed and
reviewed in accordance with chapters 4, “Filing Procedures”, and 15,
“Conditional Uses”, of this title, and this section.
   C.   Medical Cannabis Facility Components: In determining compliance with
chapter 15, “Conditional Uses”, of this title, the following additional
components of the medical cannabis facility shall be evaluated based on the
entirety of the circumstances affecting the particular property in the context
of the existing and intended future use of the properties:
      1.   Impact of the proposed facility on existing or planned uses located
within the vicinity of the subject property.
      2.   Proposed structure in which the facility will be located, including
co-tenancy and Building Code compliance.
   D.   Medical Cannabis Cultivation Center: In those zoning districts in which
a medical cannabis cultivation center may be located, the proposed facility
must comply with the following regulations:
      1.   Facility may not be located within two thousand five hundred feet
(2,500') of the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school, daycare center, daycare home or
residential care home. Learning centers and vocation/trade centers shall not be
classified as a public or private school for purposes of this section.
      2.   Facility may not be located within two thousand five hundred feet
(2,500') of the property line of a pre-existing property zoned for residential
use.
      3.   Facility may not conduct any retail sales.
      4.   For purposes of determining required parking, medical cannabis
cultivation centers shall be classified as “industrial-manufacturing, research,
testing” in accordance with section
11-12-4, table 4, “Required Parking Spaces For Nonresidential And Nonlodging
Uses”, of this title.
      5.   Petitioner/applicant shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with this section as provided herein and all other requirements of
the Act.
   E.   Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization: In those zoning districts in
which a medical cannabis dispensing organization may be located, the proposed
facility must comply with the following regulations:
      1.   Facility may not be located within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
property line of a pre- existing public or private nursery school, preschool,
primary or secondary school, daycare center, daycare home or residential care
home. Learning centers and vocation/trade centers shall not be classified as a
public or private school for purposes of this section.
      2.   Facility may not be located in a building or structure which is also
utilized as a dwelling unit or on a property which contains a building or
structure which is utilized as a residential dwelling.
      3.   For purposes of determining required parking, medical cannabis
dispensing organizations shall be classified as “other retail and personal
service” in accordance with section
11-12-4, table 4, “Required Parking Spaces For Nonresidential And Nonlodging
Uses”, of this title, unless the medical cannabis dispensing organization is
located within a shopping center, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, and in this instance shall comply with the off street
parking and loading requirements for “shopping centers” in accordance with
section
11-12-4, table 4, “Required Parking Spaces For Nonresidential And Nonlodging
Uses”, of this title.
      4.   Petitioner/applicant shall file an affidavit with the City affirming
compliance with this section as provided herein and all other requirements of
the Act.
(Ord. 14-1094)
11-6-18: ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS:
   A.   Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments:
      1.   Intent And Purpose: It is the intent and purpose of this section to
protect the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the City by
regulating the cultivation, processing and dispensing of adult-use cannabis
occurring within the City. Such facilities shall comply with all regulations
provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be
amended from time-to-time, and regulations promulgated thereunder, and the
regulations provided below. In the event that the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
Act is amended, the more restrictive of the State or local regulations shall
apply.
      2.   General Standards:
         a.   The minimum distance between any Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing
Organization and the property line of a pre-existing Adult-Use Cannabis
Dispensing Organization shall be one thousand five hundred feet (1,500').
         b.   The minimum distance between any Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing
Organization and the property line of a pre-existing public or private nursery
school, preschool, primary or secondary school shall be one thousand feet
(1,000'). Learning centers and vocational/trade centers shall not be classified
as a public or private schools for purposes of this section.
      c.   A maximum of one (1) Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organizations
shall be permitted to be operating in the City at any one time.
         d.   At least seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area of any
space occupied by an Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization shall be
devoted to the activities of the Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization as
authorized by the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
         e.   Location:
            (1)   Adult Use Cannabis Dispensaries.
               (A)   Permitted Use. Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensaries shall be a
permitted use on properties located next to a State Highway, or located in a
Subdivision abutting a State Highway, and zoned C-3 Community Commercial
District or C-5 Highway Commercial District.
            (2)   Cannabis Craft Grow, Cannabis Infuser Organizations, Cannabis
Processing Organizations, and Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organizations.
               (A)   Permitted Use. Adult Use Cannabis Craft Grow, Infuser,
Processor, and Transportation Organizations shall be a permitted use in the I-
1 Industrial District, BP Business Park District, or when co-locating with a
cannabis dispensary in the C-3 Community Commercial District or C-5 Highway
Commercial District.
               (B)   Conditional Use. Adult Use Cannabis Craft Grow, Infuser,
Processor, and Transportation Organizations shall be required to obtain a
Conditional Use Permit to operate on property zoned C-5 Highway Commercial
District unless co-locating with a cannabis dispensary.
         f.   Exceptions. No Cannabis Business shall be permitted to operate
within the Core-Downtown Sub Area as identified in the Core-Downtown Sub-Area
Plan approved by ORD-09-1480 or on Main Street from Crystal Lake Road to IL-31.
         g.   An adult-use cannabis business establishment may not conduct any
sales or distribution of cannabis other than as authorized by the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act.
         h.   On-site consumption at any Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing
Organization of cannabis and/or any product containing cannabis is prohibited.
         i.   An adult-use cannabis business establishment shall file an
affidavit with the City affirming compliance with all requirements of the
Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act.
(Ord. 21-38, 7-19-2021; amd. Ord. 22-68, 11-7-2022)
11-6-19: VAPE STORES:
   A.   Vape Stores And Accessory Use Of Vaping Products:
      1.   Principal Use: Vape stores may be established as a principal use
only in the C-5 Highway Commercial Zoning District as specified by this section
after obtaining a tobacco license.
      2.   Accessory Use: Vaping products may also be sold as an accessory use
in all Commercial Zoning Districts so long as: a) the vaping products display
and storage utilize less than two percent (2%) of the gross floor area of the
authorized principal structure or two hundred (200) square feet, whichever is
less; b) they are customarily and traditionally incidental to the principal
use, such as in the case of a grocery store, convenience store, or similar
retail use; and c) a tobacco license is obtained prior to the sale and/or
distribution of any vaping products.
      3.   Minimum Distance Between Two Vape Stores: The minimum distance
between any two (2) vape stores shall be one thousand feet (1,000'), as
measured from front door to front door.
      4.   Minimum Distance Between Vape Store And Child Related Establishment:
The minimum distance between any vape store and any lot, premises or building
used primarily as a school, child care facility, or for the education or
recreation of children under eighteen (18) years of age shall be one thousand
feet (1,000'), as measured from the front door to the front door.
(Ord. 19-1209, 10-7-2019)
11-6-20: OUTDOOR STORAGE:
   A.   Applicability: The following standards apply to outdoor storage as an
accessory to a non-residential use. The storage of construction equipment and
materials on properties under active construction are not subject to these
restrictions.
      1.   All outdoor storage shall be paved with asphalt or concrete unless
determined by the Zoning Administrator to not be necessary.
      2.   Outdoor storage is prohibited within the required front and corner
side yard setback of the underlying zoning district.
      3.   All materials stored onsite shall be related to a permitted use of
the property and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly appearance as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      4.   No required parking area can be used for outdoor storage.
      5.   Outdoor storage areas shall be reasonably screened from view off the
property by any combination of buildings, solid fencing, or solid landscaping.
         a.   The fencing or landscaping shall have a minimum height of six
feet (6') at the time of installation. Storage is prohibited outside the
screened area.
         b.   The Zoning Administrator may require the installation of fencing
in addition to solid landscaping.
         c.   Storage exceeding six feet (6') shall require review by the
Zoning Administrator who may give consideration to the type of materials being
stored and the impact of the visibility on the adjacent and surrounding
property owners. The Zoning Administrator may approve, approve with conditions,
or deny requests for outdoor storage in excess of six feet (6') in height.
(Ord. 21-3, 1-18-2021; amd. Ord. 23-8, 2-6-2023)
11-6-21: Apiculture / Beekeeping:
   A.   No more than two (2) hives shall be kept or maintained on every parcel
or lot of land under ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area; provided that
for every ten thousand (10,000) square feet in excess of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, there may be one additional hive.
   B.   No hive shall be kept or maintained within twenty five feet (25') of
any property line of the lot or parcel upon which it is situated and no hives
are permitted in the front yard or corner side yard. Where a hive is placed
within twenty five feet (25') of the property line, a six-foot (6') high
barrier or vegetated fence is required to direct the bees flight upward or the
hive must be raised six feet (6') high, such as on a roof.
   C.   Hive entrances shall be oriented so as to direct bee flight away from
the vicinity of patios, decks, balconies or entrances to living spaces on
adjoining properties.
   D.   A supply of fresh water shall be maintained in a location readily
accessible to all bee colonies on the site throughout the day to prevent bees
from congregating at neighboring swimming pools or other sources of water on
nearby properties.
   E.   No Africanized bees may be kept on the property.
   F.   All colonies shall be managed to promote gentleness and mitigate
swarming. Any colony exhibiting aggressive behavior without provocation shall
be immediately destroyed or re-queened by the beekeeper with a queen bred for
gentleness and non-swarming characteristics.
   G.   Proof of registration of the colonies with the State of Illinois
Department of Agriculture must be provided.
(Ord. 23-32, 6-5-2023)
11-6-22: DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENTS (DRIVE-THROUGH):
   A.   Permitted Use: Drive-In Establishments shall be a permitted use in the
C-3 Community Commercial District and C-5 Highway Commercial District when not
abutting a residential district.
   B.   Conditional Use Permit Required: Where a Drive-In Establishment is
adjacent to a residential property, or located within the C-2 Neighborhood
Commercial District or C-4 Downtown Commercial District, or if any of the
provisions of this Ordinance have not been met as determined by the Zoning
Administrator, a Conditional Use Permit shall be required.
   C.   Drive-through windows and lanes placed between the right-of-way of a
street and associated building shall require landscape plantings installed and
maintained along the entire length of the drive-through lane, located between
the drive-through lane and the adjacent right-of-way (not including an alley)
in accordance with §
11-13-2 Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping.
   D.   Stacking Spaces.
      1.   Estimates of anticipated drive-through traffic, processing rates, or
other operational data from other existing comparable facilities shall be
provided.
      2.   Drive-through lanes shall be separated from off-street parking
areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked, or otherwise distinctly
delineated.
      3.   Stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through stations shall not
impede on and off-site traffic movement, shall not cross or pass through off
street parking areas, and shall not create a potentially unsafe condition where
crossed by pedestrian access to a public entrance of a building.
(Ord. 25-21, 4-7-2025)
CHAPTER 7: A-1 AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
Section
11-7-1: Intent
11-7-2: Permitted Uses
11-7-3: Conditional Uses
11-7-4: Bulk And Setback Regulations
11-7-1: INTENT:
The intent of the A-1 Agriculture District is to permit agricultural uses and
activities. Residences are allowed on agricultural parcels within the City. The
standards of the A-1 District promote farming and protection of agricultural
land uses from the encroachment of incompatible land uses.
(Ord. 18-1918, 12-17-2018)
11-7-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in the A-1 District are:
   Apiculture/beekeeping.
   Agriculture.
   Animal care shelter.
   Conservation area.
   Dwelling, single-family.
   Farmstand.
   Feed, tack, grain, and seed sales.
   Garden center.
   Greenhouse/landscape and nursery business.
   Outdoor storage associated with a permitted or conditional use.
   Park.
   Public facility.
(Ord. 18-1918, 12-17-2018; amd. Ord. 23-8, 2-6-2023; Ord. 23-32, 6-5-2023)
11-7-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses in the A-1 District are:
Agricultural implement sales and service.
Agriculture employee housing.
Agricultural produce processing.
Agritourism (an agriculturally based operation which draws visitors).
Art gallery.
Arts studio.
Assembly use.
Athletic facility, outdoor.
Bed and breakfast.
Campground.
Cemetery/cemetery, pet.
Club, lodge.
Country club.
Cultural facility.
Day camp.
Drive-in theater.
Dwelling unit, accessory.
Farrier.
Food processing.
Golf course/driving range-commercial.
Grain elevator-commercial.
Halfway house.
Homeless/domestic violence shelter.
Horse arena, indoor/outdoor.
Horse stables.
Hotel.
Kennel-commercial.
Landing area-restricted.
Landing area-restricted-personal use.
Landscape waste composting facility.
Medical cannabis cultivation center.
Power production.
Public safety training facility.
Reception facility.
Resort.
Sawmill.
Solar farm.
(Ord. 18-1918, 12-17-2018; amd. Ord. 23-8, 2-6-2023)
11-7-4: BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
 
         Minimum Maximum  Maximum   Front Yard Corner     Interior   Rear Yard
Minimum  Lot     Building Building  Building   Side Yard  Side Yard  Building
Lot Area Width   Height   Coverage  Setback    Building   Building   Setback
                                               Setback    Setback
         Up to 2 Up to 2
         acres:  acres:   Up to 2
         150'    40'      acres:
                        30%
         2 - 3   2 - 3             30' from   30' from   30' from   30' from
         acres:  acres:   2 - 3     ROW or 65' ROW or 65' ROW or 65' ROW or 65'
         175'    60'      acres:    from       from       from       from
1 acre                  20%       centerline centerline centerline centerline
         3 - 5   3 - 5             if no      if no      if no      if no
         acres:  acres:   3 - 5     dedicated  dedicated  dedicated  dedicated
         250'    80'      acres:    ROW exists ROW exists ROW exists ROW exists
                        15%
         5+      5+        
         acres:  acres:   5+ acres:
         330'    No       10%
                 maximum
 
(Ord. 18-1918, 12-17-2018)
CHAPTER 8: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS REGULATIONS
Section
11-8A-1: Applicability
11-8A-2: Home Occupations
11-8A-3: Standards For Nonresidential Uses
11-8A-4: Residential Lots Abutting Arterial Streets
11-8A-5: Temporary Refuse Containers And Storage Units
11-8A-1: APPLICABILITY:
The following provisions apply in all Residential Districts.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8A-2: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
   A.   Scope: The home occupation regulations set forth herein are intended to
allow residents to engage in home based business activities, while ensuring
adjoining properties will not be adversely impacted and character and
livability of the surrounding area compromised. Home occupation regulations
establish performance standards rather than lists of allowable uses which are
considered home occupations. The determination as to whether or not an activity
constitutes a home occupation shall be made by the City Administrator or their
designee. A home occupation may not commence until it has been approved and
authorized by the City.
   B.   Regulations Specified: Home occupations shall be governed by the
following regulations:
      1.   The operator of a home occupation shall be a full time permanent
resident of the dwelling unit.
      2.   Home occupations shall not employ more than one person who does not
reside on the premises.
      3.   Home occupations shall be conducted entirely within enclosed
structures, and there shall be no exterior storage of equipment or materials
used.
      4.   There shall be no visible evidence of the conduct of such occupation
in the outside appearance of the premises.
      5.   Any need for parking generated by the occupation shall be met off
the street.
      6.   No home occupation shall involve construction features or the use of
electrical or mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the
structure or of the fire district in which the structure is located.
      7.   It is clearly incidental or subordinate to the primary residential
use of the property.
      8.   It shall be conducted in such a manner that it is compatible and
will not adversely impact established residential character of the neighborhood
in which it is located.
      9.   No signs advertising a product, service, business or occupation are
permitted, with the exception of a one square foot sign for any home
occupations, which are required to display one by the Federal or State
government (see section
10-20-13 of this Code).
      10.   It shall not create any nuisance, hazard or other offensive
condition, such as increased traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, dust, odor, electric
or mechanical equipment interference.
      11.   No mechanical equipment is to be used, except such as is normally
used for purely domestic or household purposes.
      12.   No more than twenty five percent (25%) of the footprint of the
principal structure or five hundred (500) square feet (whichever is less), may
be devoted to the home occupation.
      13.   Home occupations must comply with all City ordinances, rules and
regulations applicable to Residential or Residentially zoned areas, including,
but not limited to, performance standards (such as, but not limited to, noise,
vibration, odor, nuisances, lighting, driveways, commercial and recreational
vehicles, etc.).
      14.   Wholesale, retail, manufacturing, boarding, repair or warehouse
business shall be prohibited unless they comply with all provisions in this
section, chapter 17, “Performance Standards”, of this title, and all other
applicable City rules, ordinances and regulations, or unless they are conducted
entirely using external communication devices (such as, but not limited to,
phone, electronic mail, facsimile, electronic meetings, Skype, etc.), regular
United States Postal Service residential mail delivery or delivery vehicles
limited to those normally servicing residential neighborhoods (such as, but not
limited to, UPS, FedEx, etc.) and does not involve the receipt, sale, boarding,
manufacturing or storage of merchandise or animals on the premises, including,
but not limited to, kennels and shelters of any kind.
   C.   Prohibited Home Occupations: The following uses are expressly
prohibited as home based businesses, unless they comply with all provisions in
this section, chapter 17, “Performance Standards”, of this title, and all other
applicable City rules, ordinances and regulations:
      1.   Any type of repair, body work, painting, assembly or storage of
vehicles or equipment with engines (such as, but not limited to, motor
vehicles, motorcycles, scooters, snowmobiles, outboard marine engines,
lawnmowers, chain saws and similar equipment) or appliances (such as, but not
limited to, washing machines, dryers and refrigerators) or any other work
associated with equipment with engines and parts.
      2.   Dispatch centers where employees come to the site to be dispatched
to other locations.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8A-3: STANDARDS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL USES:
   A.   Yard Requirements: Yard requirements for nonresidential permitted and
conditional uses, except permitted and conditional public uses and temporary
uses, shall be the same as required for single- family detached dwellings in
the same zoning district. Where a building height is over thirty five feet
(35'), however, each required yard shall be increased by two feet (2') for each
additional foot of building height over thirty five feet (35').
   B.   Lot Width, Area Requirements: The lot width and area requirements for
each nonresidential permitted use, except permitted public uses and temporary
uses, shall be the same as required per dwelling unit in the same district. For
nonresidential conditional uses, such requirements shall be as determined by
the City Council. For both nonresidential permitted and conditional uses,
maximum building height shall be governed by a maximum floor area ratio of 0.6
and off street parking and loading and landscaping requirements and sign
regulations shall be as provided in chapters 12 and 13 of this title, and title
10, chapter 20 of this Code.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8A-4: RESIDENTIAL LOTS ABUTTING ARTERIAL STREETS:
In subdivisions created after the effective date of this title, residential
lots accommodating fewer than four (4) dwelling units and abutting an arterial
street shall not have direct access onto the arterial. Such lots shall front
upon and have access only to existing or new collector or local streets, and
not to an arterial, except where the Planning and Zoning Commission determines
this to be impractical. Arterial streets shall be as designated in the City
Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8A-5: TEMPORARY REFUSE CONTAINERS AND STORAGE UNITS:
A permit is not required for a temporary storage unit or temporary refuse
container, in a Residential Zoning District, as long as all applicable criteria
established below are met:
   A.   Number Permitted: No more than one temporary storage unit or one
temporary refuse container is permitted on any Residentially zoned property;
   B.   Term: Any temporary storage unit and/or temporary refuse container that
is not associated with a building permit can remain on a property for no more
than fifteen (15) consecutive days and one (1) 15-day extension may be granted
administratively by the City Administrator or their designee if no complaints
have been received. When requested as part of a building permit, temporary
storage units and temporary refuse containers are permitted for the duration of
construction and shall be removed from the site within fourteen (14) days of
the end of construction or upon expiration of the building permit whichever is
sooner;
   C.   Container Size: Temporary refuse containers can be no larger than
twenty three feet (23') long, eight feet (8') in width and seven feet (7') in
height;
   D.   Unit Size: Temporary storage units can be no larger than twenty feet
(20') long, eight feet (8') in height and ten feet (10') in width;
   E.   Control Of Contents; Overloading: Temporary refuse containers must
control contents at all times; and containers, regardless if they are
associated with a building permit, filled in excess of the height of the
container, must be emptied within five (5) calendar days;
   F.   Placement Surface: Except when new residential construction is
occurring, temporary storage units and refuse containers must be placed on an
approved paved surface and cannot be placed, kept, maintained and/or stored on
grass while actively being utilized;
   G.   Location In Right-Of-Way: Temporary storage units and refuse containers
are not permitted on/in a public right-of-way and cannot obstruct sight lines
of pedestrians or vehicles, or impact required parking. The only exception is a
temporary storage unit or refuse container may be placed within a public right-
of-way if it is scheduled to be picked up, but only if it will not inhibit or
obstruct sight lines of pedestrians or vehicles, but in no instance can any
temporary storage unit or refuse container be located, stored or maintained
within any public right-of-way for more than five (5) working days;
   H.   Uses; Contents: Temporary storage units may be used for temporary
storage of personal goods and belongings. Units may not be used for occupancy,
sleeping, housing of animals, storage of firearms, storage of hazardous, toxic
or flammable materials or storage of materials which are otherwise unlawful to
possess;
   I.   Maintenance: Temporary storage units shall be maintained in good
condition, free from evidence of deterioration, weathering, discoloration,
graffiti, rust, ripping, tearing or other holes or breaks, at all times; also
temporary storage units must be equipped with a locking device;
   J.   Temporary Use Permit; When Required: Any temporary storage unit or
refuse container not meeting any of these applicable regulations requires a
temporary use permit and City Council approval.
   K.   Enforcement And Penalties: Any person, corporation, firm, or
partnership found guilty of violating any provision of Title 11, Chapter 8,
Article A, section 11-8A-5, shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found in
Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the City's
cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 13-1655; amd. Ord. 23-26, 5-15-2023)
ARTICLE B: SINGLE-FAMILY DISTRICTS
Section
11-8B-1: Purpose
11-8B-2: Regulations
11-8B-3: E Estate District
11-8B-4: RS-1 Low Density Single-Family Residential District
11-8B-5: RS-1a Medium Low Density Single-Family Residential District
11-8B-6: RS-2 Medium Density Single-Family Residential District
11-8B-7: RS-3 Medium High Density Single-Family Residential District
11-8B-8: RS-4 High Density Single-Family Residential District
11-8B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these districts is to recognize, preserve and protect the
present character of existing single-family residential neighborhoods and to
provide for the development of new neighborhoods in accordance with
contemporary residential development standards.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8B-2: REGULATIONS:
The regulations for these districts are as provided in sections
11-8D-1 and
11-8D-2 of this chapter, tables 1 and 2.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8B-3: E ESTATE DISTRICT:
The purpose of this residential land use is to provide land outside of the
intensely developed portions of the City for low density estate single-family
residences of not less than one acre.
(Ord. 91-553)
11-8B-4: RS-1 LOW DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is intended to provide in existing and newly
developing outlying areas for a single-family detached residential environment
characterized by large lots.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8B-5: RS-1a MEDIUM LOW DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is intended to provide in existing and newly
developing outlying areas for a single-family detached residential environment
characterized by medium sized large lots.
(Ord. 01-786)
11-8B-6: RS-2 MEDIUM DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is intended to provide in existing and newly
developing areas for a single- family detached residential environment
characterized by medium sized lots.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8B-7: RS-3 MEDIUM HIGH DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is intended to provide for the appropriate zoning
of existing single-family neighborhoods in the City and to provide areas for
new single-family detached dwellings in an environment characterized by
innovative designs, maintenance of natural features and topography,
preservation of open space, and provision of amenities to serve residents.
(Ord. 91-553; amd. Ord. 05-861)
11-8B-8: RS-4 HIGH DENSITY SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is intended to provide for the appropriate zoning
of existing single-family neighborhoods in the City developed years ago under
less stringent development standards.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
ARTICLE C: MULTI-FAMILY DISTRICTS
Section
11-8C-1: Purpose
11-8C-2: Regulations
11-8C-3: RA-1 Attached Residential District
11-8C-4: RM-1 Low Density Multi-Family Residential District
11-8C-5: RM-2 High Density Multi-Family Residential District
11-8C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of these districts is to provide for a variety of housing types
suited to the differing age groups and lifestyles of present and future City
residents in a way that most effectively controls the impacts on the
environment and public services created by high population densities.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8C-2: REGULATIONS:
The regulations for these districts are as provided in sections
11-8D-1 and
11-8D-2 of this chapter, tables 1 and 2.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8C-3: RA-1 ATTACHED RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is intended to:
   A.   Provide for intermediate housing types and densities between single-
family detached and apartment development in order to further a balanced
distribution of nonsingle-family detached housing in the City.
   B.   Provide for intermediate density residential development in locations
where apartment buildings would not be compatible.
   C.   Provide in a flexible manner for numbers and sizes of dwelling units
that will produce approximate population densities of up to twenty (20) persons
per acre in such dispersed locations as will produce minimal conflict with
single-family areas.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8C-4: RM-1 LOW DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to provide in a flexible
manner for numbers and sizes of dwelling units that will produce approximate
population densities of up to twenty six (26) persons per acre in locations
along major arterial streets and near centers of activity.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-8C-5: RM-2 HIGH DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is primarily intended to provide in a flexible
manner for numbers and sizes of dwelling units that will produce approximate
population densities of up to thirty one (31) persons per acre in areas where
the compatibility of high densities can be assured by means of special review
under conditional use procedures.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
ARTICLE D: TABLES
Section
11-8D-1: Table 1; Residential Districts Requirements
11-8D-2: Table 2; Permitted And Conditional Uses In Residential Districts
11-8D-1: TABLE 1; RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS REQUIREMENTS:
   TABLE 1
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
 Zoning District
 E RS-1 RS-1a RS-2 RS-3 RS-4 RA-1 RM-1 RM-28
             Zoning District
             E         RS-1   RS-1a  RS-2   RS-3  RS-4  RA-1  RM-1  RM-28
Minimum lot
area per
dwelling                                                     
unit in
square
feet7:
Efficiency   Not       30,000 18,000 10,890 9,000 5,000 2,175 1,675 1,405
unit         permitted
1-bedroom    1 acre    30,000 18,000 10,890 9,000 5,000 2,900 2,178 1,815
unit
2-bedroom    1 acre    30,000 18,000 10,890 9,000 5,000 4,850 3,630 3,111
unit
3-bedroom    1 acre    30,000 18,000 10,890 9,000 5,000 7,250 5,445 4,356
unit
4-bedroom
and larger   1 acre    30,000 18,000 10,890 9,000 5,000 7,900 6,223 4,840
unit
Minimum lot                                                  
width per:
Dwelling     150       100    90     80     70    50    40    301   301
unit in feet
Abutting
arterial     200       200    200    200    200   50    200   200   200
street2
Minimum
required
front yard   50        50     40     30     30    25    30    30    30
depth in
feet3
Minimum
required
corner side  25        15     15     15     15    15    15    15    15
yard width
in feet3
Minimum
interior     10% lot
side yard    width     10*    10     10*    10*   6     15    15    15
width in
feet3,4
Minimum
required
rear yard    40        40     35     30     25    25    25    25    25
depth in
feet3
Maximum
building
height in    35        35     35     35     35    35    35    40    40
feet for
residential
uses only
Minimum
percent of                                                   
net site
area in:
Uncovered    -         -      -      -      -     -     -     73%   73%
space
Nonvehicular -         -      -      -      -     -     -     45%   45%
space
Recreation   -         -      -      -      -     -     -     5%    5%
space
Permitted
use group    A         A      A      A      A     A     A,C   A,C,D A,C,D
(s)5
Conditional
use group    B         B      B      B      B     B     B     B,E   B,E
(s)6
Parking and  As provided in chapter 12 of this title.
loading
Landscaping
and          As provided in chapter 13 of this title.
screening
Signs        As provided in title 10, chapter 20 of this Code.
Other        As provided in general Residential District regulations and
requirements general district regulations.
 
Notes:
Single-family detached dwellings in RA and RM Districts shall meet the same
requirements as provided in the RS-3 District for such dwellings.
   *    Or 10 percent of the width of the lot, whichever is less.
      1.    For uses also permitted in RA Districts only. No minimum lot width
per dwelling unit shall be required for other uses permitted in RM Districts.
      2.    Required front and required corner side yard frontages for any lot
abutting an arterial street designated in the City Comprehensive Plan or in an
annexation agreement or subdivision plat and not qualifying under exceptions in
general district regulations.
      3.    Plus 2 feet for each 1 foot of building height over 35 feet, where
maximum height restriction permits.
      4.    Side yard requirements for attached dwelling units shall not apply
where the unit is attached to another unit at the side lot line.
      5.    See section
11-8D-2, table 2 in this article for permitted and conditional uses by group.
      6.    Subject to the provisions of chapter 15, “Conditional Uses”, or 11,
“Integrated Design District”, of this title.
      7.    Alleys are not permitted in the E Estate District.
      8.    Exclude Lots 20 - 43, 71 - 83 and 139 - 151 of the final plat of
subdivision of Patriot Estates (duplex lots) dated January 9, 2006, and
recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds, McHenry County, Illinois on
November 3, 2006 as document 2006R0081409 from a minimum side yard setback
requirement of 15 feet to a minimum side yard setback of 7 feet.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 88-455; Ord. 88-456; Ord. 91-553; Ord. 96-
647; Ord. 01-786; Ord. 04-846; Ord. 05-866; Ord. 06-878; Ord. 19-1201, 7-15-
2019)
11-8D-2: TABLE 2; PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
TABLE 2
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Group A:    Permitted uses in all Residential Districts:
Apiculture/beekeeping as an accessory use, subject to the regulations of
section
11-6-21 of this title.
Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all permitted uses in the district,
including off street parking and loading and signs as provided in
chapter 12 of this title, and
title 10, chapter 20 of this Code.
Community Residence.
Home occupations.
Parks, playgrounds, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries and other publicly
owned open space.
Permitted public uses, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Single-family detached dwellings.
Streets and alleys.
Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed the period of construction.
Wireless communication facilities, provided they are located on an existing
structure, subject to the regulations of section
11-6-15 of this title.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 88-457; Ord. 06-889; Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022;
Ord. 23-32, 6-5-2023)
Group B:    Conditional uses in all Residential Districts:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all conditional uses in the
district, including off street parking and loading and signs as provided in
chapter 12 of this title and title 10, chapter 20 of this Code.
Assembly uses.
Bed and breakfast establishments. Bed and breakfast establishments shall also
comply with renter occupancy requirements of this Code.
Cemeteries.
Conditional public uses, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Golf courses and country clubs.
Institutional uses.
Integrated Design Districts.
Planned Unit Development.
Residential Care Facility.
(Ord. 06-903; amd. Ord. 88-457; Ord. 09-978; Ord. 12-1059; Ord. 22-26, 4-5-
2022; Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022)
Group C:    Permitted uses in RA and RM Residential Districts:
In unit groupings of six (6) or fewer dwelling units:
Single-family attached dwellings, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Townhouses, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Group D: Permitted uses only in RM Residential Districts:
Multiple-family dwellings, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Two-family dwellings that are not townhouses, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Group E: Conditional uses only in RM Residential Districts:
Mobile home parks, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Mobile home subdivisions, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
CHAPTER 9: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Section
11-9-1: Regulations
11-9-2: C-1 Convenience Commercial District
11-9-3: C-2 Neighborhood Commercial District
11-9-4: C-3 Community Commercial District
11-9-5: C-4 Downtown Commercial District
11-9-6: C-5 Highway Commercial District
11-9-7: Tables
11-9-8:    Penalty
11-9-1: REGULATIONS:
The regulations for these districts are as provided in section
11-9-7, “Tables”, of this chapter.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-9-2: C-1 CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is intended to provide convenient access to goods
and services close to residential areas in a manner that is environmentally
compatible with such areas. To accomplish this intent, the district provides
close to home locations for a very limited range of frequently patronized
establishments providing convenience goods and services that predominantly
serve only the immediate neighborhood. It is intended that such uses will
create minimal land use incompatibility with surrounding residential areas.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-9-3: C-2 NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is intended to provide locations for a broader
selection of convenience goods and services and a limited selection of shoppers
goods in locations serving more than one neighborhood.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-9-4: C-3 COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is intended to provide locations for a broad
selection of convenience and comparison shoppers goods and services in
centralized and highly accessible locations that serve the entire City and
surrounding areas.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-9-5: C-4 DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is intended to provide appropriate standards for
development in the City’s older central business areas and to reflect and
protect the existing character of those areas.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-9-6: C-5 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
The purpose of this district is intended to provide locations for highway
oriented commercial uses, businesses having large space needs, and other
establishments offering goods and services that are less frequently purchased.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-9-7: TABLES:
TABLE 1
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
 Zoning District
 C-1 C-2 C-3 C-4 C-5
                            Zoning District
                            C-1 C-2  C-3     C-4        C-5
Minimum lot area in square  -   -    -       -          -
feet
Minimum lot width in feet   -   -    -       -          -
Along arterial street1      200 200  200     -          200
Minimum required front yard
depth or corner side yard   30  30   30      -          30
width in feet2
Minimum interior side yard:                          
Width in feet2              10  10   10      -          10
Adjacent to Residential     20  20   20      -          25
District2
Minimum rear yard:                                    
Depth in feet2              15  15   15      -          15
Adjacent to Residential     30  30   30      -          30
District2
Maximum floor area ratio    0.5 1.0  2.0     3.0        1.0
Permitted use groups3       A   A, C A, C, E C, E, G    C, E, G, I
Conditional use groups4     B   B, D B, D, F B, D, F, H B, D, F, H, J
Parking and loading         As provided in chapter 12 of this title
Landscaping and screening   As provided in chapter 13 of this title
Performance standards       As provided in chapter 17 of this title
Signs                       As provided in title 10, chapter 20 of this Code
Other requirements          As provided in general district regulations
 
Notes:
      1.    Required front and required corner side yard frontages for any lot
abutting an arterial street designated in the City Comprehensive Plan or in an
annexation agreement or subdivision plat, except for lots meeting requirements
under exceptions in general district regulations.
      2.    Plus 2 feet for each 1 foot of building height over 35 feet.
      3.    See table 2 of this section for permitted and conditional uses by
group.
      4.    Subject to the provisions of chapter 15, “Conditional Uses”, or 11,
“Integrated Design District”, of this title.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 93-606; Ord. 94-630; Ord. 96-647; Ord. 05-
866)
TABLE 2
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS
Uses are listed alphabetically within groups.
Group A: Permitted uses in all Commercial Districts:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all permitted uses in the district,
including off street parking and loading and signs as provided in chapter 12 of
this title and title 10, chapter 20 of this Code.
Automated teller machines.
Beauty shops, barber shops and hair styling salons.
Candy, ice cream, popcorn, nut and yogurt stores.
Currency exchanges.
Drug stores.
Dry cleaners and laundries (processing to be done off site) and laundromats.
Food and grocery stores under five thousand (5,000) square feet, convenience
marts, meat markets, fish markets, dairy stores, health food stores and
bakeries, with no food preparation on premises.
Liquor stores (package goods only).
Newspaper, magazine, and tobacco shops.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries and
other publicly owned open spaces.
Permitted public uses, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out; delicatessens, retail bakeries, donut shops
and convenience marts with limited food preparation on premises; including
restaurants with or without indoor entertainment, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, but not including drive-in restaurants, as defined in
section
11-3-1 of this title.
Streets and alleys.
Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed the duration of construction.
Wireless communication facilities, provided they are located on an existing
structure, subject to the regulations of section
11-6-15 of this title.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 06-889; Ord. 12-1059; Ord. 15-1113)
Group B: Conditional uses in all Commercial Districts:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all conditional uses in the
district, including off street parking and loading and signs as provided in
chapter 12 of this title and title 10, chapter 20 of this Code.
Air rights development.
Assembly uses.
Automobile fueling stations.
Cemeteries.
Conditional public uses, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Golf courses and country clubs, private.
Institutional uses.
Integrated Design Districts.
Planned Unit Development.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 93-606; Ord. 94-630; Ord. 07-947; Ord. 09-
978; Ord. 12-1059; Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
Group C: Additional permitted uses in C-2 and higher numbered Commercial
Districts:
Card and gift stores.
Clothing repair, hat repair and shoe repair stores and tailor shops.
Domestic appliance repair shops.
Domestic appliance stores, including radio, television, stereo, video,
lighting, clock and music stores.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, and
commercial loan offices. Financial institutions, including banks, savings and
loan associations, and commercial loan offices (“financial use”) shall only be
permitted in the C-5 Highway Commercial District where: a) the financial use
possesses fee simple title or is party to an executed real estate sales
contract to purchase fee simple title to property for a financial use within
the district, upon the effective date of this title; and b) subject to the
financial use obtaining a City building permit within two (2) years from the
effective date of this title to construct such financial use.
Florist shops.
Insurance offices.
Jewelry and watch sales and repair stores.
Medical, dental and optometry offices.
Newspaper distribution agencies for home delivery and retail trade.
Office, stationery, school, art and graphics supply stores.
Optician sales, retail.
Outdoor storage associated with a permitted or conditional use. Outdoor storage
is prohibited in the C-4 Downtown Commercial District.
Paint, tile and wallpaper stores.
Photo processing stores (except kiosks).
Print shops with six (6) or fewer employees.
Real estate offices.
Supermarkets.
Tax preparation offices.
Ticket offices, theater and amusement.
Travel agencies.
Yard goods stores.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 04-847; Ord. 07-947; Ord. 23-8, 2-6-2023)
Group D: Additional conditional uses in C-2 and higher numbered Commercial
Districts:
Child daycare centers, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Drive-in establishments, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Game rooms, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Kiosk, a single freestanding, with not more than fifty (50) square feet of
floor area, on the same lot as all or a portion of a shopping center, and used
for any permitted or conditional use in its district.
Parking, off street, lots, public garages or storage garages as a principal
use.
Recreational institutions, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Taverns and bars without indoor entertainment, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 12-1059; Ord. 15-1113)
Group E: Additional permitted uses in C-3 and higher numbered Commercial
Districts:
Adult-use cannabis dispensing organizations. Adult-use cannabis businesses are
prohibited in the C-4 District including any property on Main Street from
Crystal Lake Road to IL-31 and the Core-Downtown Sub Area as identified in the
Core-Downtown Sub-Area Plan approved by ORD-09-1480.
Adult-use cannabis craft grow, transportation, processing, and infusion
businesses when co-locating with an adult-use cannabis dispensing organization.
Adult-use cannabis businesses are prohibited in the C-4 District including any
property on Main Street from Crystal Lake Road to IL-31 and the Core-Downtown
Sub Area as identified in the Core-Downtown Sub-Area Plan approved by ORD-09-
1480.
Animal hospitals.
Antique shops.
Art shops or galleries, but not including auction rooms.
Automobile part and accessory stores.
Bicycle sales, rental and repair shops.
Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
Bookstores or book and stationery stores.
Business machine sales, rental and service.
Camera and photographic supply stores.
Camping equipment sales.
Carpet and rug stores (retail sales).
Catering establishments.
China and glassware stores.
Clothing and shoe stores.
Coin and philatelic stores.
Computer sales and rental.
Custom dressmaking establishments.
Department stores, junior department stores and discount department stores.
Drive-In Establishments when not abutting a residential district. Drive-in
establishments shall require a Conditional Use Permit in the C-4 Downtown
Commercial District.
Employment agencies.
Exterminating services.
Frozen food stores, including locker rental.
Furniture stores, including upholstery when conducted as part of the retail
operations and secondary thereto.
Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs.
Garden supply, tool, and seed stores, including lawn mower, snow blower, and
snowmobile sales and service.
Hardware stores.
Health clubs, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Hobby and craft shops.
Hotels and motels.
Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and the making of draperies,
slip covers, and other similar articles when conducted as part of the retail
operations and secondary thereto.
Kennels, pet grooming and veterinary offices.
Laboratories, medical, dental, research and testing.
Leather goods and luggage stores.
Locksmith shops.
Millinery and textile shops.
Movie and video game rental and sales.
Music stores.
Musical instrument sales and repair.
Offices, business and professional.
Offices, governmental, political and institutional.
Orthopedic and medical appliance stores (retail sales only).
Pawnshops.
Pet shops.
Photography studios, including the development of film when conducted as part
of the retail business.
Picture framing shops.
Post offices.
Produce markets.
Schools, commercial, for music, dance, business or trade.
Secondhand stores and rummage shops.
Sewing machine sales and service.
Sporting goods stores.
Tanning salons.
Taxidermists.
Theaters, indoor.
Toy stores.
Travel bureaus.
Group F: Additional conditional uses in C-3 and higher numbered Commercial
Districts:
Dry cleaning plant and laundry with processing to be performed on site.
Indoor amusement establishments, including bowling alleys, pool halls,
commercial swimming pools and skating rinks.
Mortuaries, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Printing and publishing plants.
Radio and television towers.
Group G: Permitted uses in C-4 and higher numbered Commercial Districts:
Body art establishment.
Dwelling units above the ground floor in buildings with a ground floor in
nonresidential use.
Off street parking lots, public garages or storage garages as principal uses.
Plazas and public spaces.
Radio and television stations and studios.
Recording studios.
Tourist information and hospitality centers.
Group H: Conditional uses in C-4 and higher numbered Commercial Districts:
Bed and breakfast establishments. Bed and breakfast establishments shall also
comply with renter occupancy requirements of this Code. Bed and breakfast
establishments shall comply with parking requirements for a bed and breakfast
use and not in accordance with the C-4 Zoning District parking requirements.
Group I: Additional permitted uses in C-5 District:
Adult-use cannabis craft grow, transportation, processing, and infusion
cannabis businesses when co-locating with an adult-use cannabis dispensing
organization.
Building materials and products sales.
Contractors and construction offices.
Electrical showrooms and shops.
Equipment rental.
Fuel and ice sales.
Fuel storage, bulk.
Golf courses and country clubs, private.
Greenhouses and nurseries.
Monument sales (no open sales lot).
Motor vehicle, trailer, and mobile home repair shops.
Motor vehicle sales (no open sales lot) or rental, including cars, trucks,
boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, motorcycles, motor
scooters and mopeds.
Plumbing and heating sales.
Sewer cleaning and rodding service.
Swimming pool sales (no open sales lot).
Vape stores.
Water softener service.
(amd. Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022; Ord. 23-8, 2-6-2023)
Group J: Additional conditional uses in C-5 District:
Adult businesses, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Adult-use cannabis craft grow, transportation, processing, and infusion
businesses when not co-locating with a dispensing organization. Adult-use
cannabis businesses are prohibited on Main Street from Crystal Lake Road to IL-
31 and the Core-Downtown Sub Area as identified in the Core-Downtown Sub-Area
Plan approved by ORD-09-1480.
Automobile washes and detailing facilities.
Crematories.
Machinery sales.
Medical cannabis dispensing organization, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Mini-warehouses.
Model home and garage displays.
Motor vehicle body shops.
Open sales lots, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, as a principal or accessory use.
Outdoor amusement establishments, including archery ranges, miniature golf and
similar facilities.
Towing businesses.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 93-602; Ord. 93-606; Ord. 94-630; Ord. 04-
846; Ord. 06-903; Ord. 07-947; Ord. 12-1059; Ord. 14-1094; Ord. 15-1113; Ord.
19-1206, 10-7-2019; Ord. 21-3, 1-18-2021; Ord. 21-38, 7-19-2021; Ord. 21-54,
10-18-2021; Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022; Ord. 23-8, 2-6-2023; Ord. 25-21, 4-7-2025)
11-9-8: PENALTY:
   Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of violating any
provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines and Penalties
found it
Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be responsible for the City's
cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney fees. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. 23-37, 7-17-2023)
CHAPTER 10: OFFICE, INDUSTRIAL, BUSINESS, HEALTH CARE, MIXED USE AND OVERLAY
DISTRICTS
ARTICLE A: OFFICE DISTRICTS
Section
11-10A-1: Regulations
11-10A-2: O-1 Local Office District
11-10A-3: O-2 Office Park District
11-10A-1: REGULATIONS:
The regulations for these districts are as provided in article H of this
chapter.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-10A-2: O-1 LOCAL OFFICE DISTRICT:
   A.   Purpose: This district is intended to provide for small office
buildings on smaller sites housing uses that do not generate large amounts of
traffic.
   B.   Intent: The district is intended for locations that can serve as a
buffer between commercial and residential development and locations that are
not best suited either for residential or for more intensive business
development.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-10A-3: O-2 OFFICE PARK DISTRICT:
This district is intended to provide locations on larger sites for large office
buildings and planned office park developments, including office related retail
and service uses.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
ARTICLE B: I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Section
11-10B-1: Purpose
11-10B-2: Regulations
11-10B-1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to provide primarily for low nuisance industrial uses
that are compatible with a residential community but also to allow, after
special review, heavier industrial facilities that can meet suitable
environmental performance standards.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-10B-2: REGULATIONS:
The regulations for this district are as provided in article H of this chapter.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
ARTICLE C: BP BUSINESS PARK DISTRICT
Section
11-10C-1: Purpose
11-10C-2: Regulations
11-10C-3: Prohibited Uses
11-10C-4: Development Standards
11-10C-1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to:
   A.   Provide a course of predictability in business park development, set a
minimum level of standards by which a business park can be developed, and
establish a regulatory framework within which the community and the developer
can work together to plan rationally for future business and industrial growth;
   B.   Provide for maintenance of open space areas, water detention areas,
landscaping and other common areas to promote an attractive and aesthetically
pleasing corporate environment;
   C.   Provide for adequate transportation mobility into and throughout the
business park as to avoid traffic congestion problems;
   D.   Promote a planned business environment that stresses employee
amenities, maintained in a high quality fashion consistent with first class
office/industrial developments within the metropolitan area.
(Ord. 91-553)
11-10C-2: REGULATIONS:
The regulations for this district are as provided in article H of this chapter.
(Ord. 91-553)
11-10C-3: PROHIBITED USES:
The following operations and uses shall not be permitted on any property within
the Business Park District:
Commercial excavation of building materials.
Concrete mixing plants and other outside bulk material handling and mixing
processes.
Dumping, disposal, incineration or reduction of garbage, sewage or other
refuse.
Junkyards.
Refining of petroleum or of its products.
(Ord. 91-553)
11-10C-4: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Parking Requirements: No parking shall be permitted on any street or at
any other place other than on paved parking spaces to be constructed on each
lot. Off street parking shall be in accordance with the provisions of chapter
12 of this title.
   B.   Landscaping: In an attempt to unify the building sites and their
architecture in the Business Park, landscaping as a design element shall play
the key role in creating and conveying the parklike working environment.
Landscaping shall be in accordance with the provisions of chapter 13 of this
title.
   C.   Water Retention/Detention Areas: To increase the maximum allowable
building to gross land area ratio, water retention/detention areas shall be
provided in one or more locations in the Business Park to handle stormwater
drainage from all improved sites within the Business Park. The water retention/
detention areas shall be landscaped so as to maintain aesthetic conformity with
the entire Business Park landscape design. Such water retention/detention areas
and any lot retention/detention areas shall be maintained to achieve a high
quality environment by the owner or a property owners’ association and their
successors and assigns.
   D.   Maintenance Of Improved Sites And Condition Of Improved Lots: Sites
that are not improved or built upon shall be maintained in a clean and neat
appearance by the property owner. Weeds and brush shall be removed as required
by City ordinances. The owner or occupant of any lot shall at all times keep it
and the buildings, improvements and appurtenances thereon in a safe and clean
condition and comply with all applicable Governmental, Health, Fire and Safety
Ordinances and regulations. Trash shall be removed expeditiously.
   E.   Storage, Service And Maintenance Areas: Storage, service and
maintenance areas (hereinafter collectively referred to as “storage areas”)
must be constructed, maintained and used in accordance with the following
conditions:
      1.   No materials, trash, supplies or equipment shall be stored upon a
site, except inside a closed building or behind a durable material wall to
match adjacent building construction not less than six feet (6') in height,
screening such material, supplies or equipment from adjacent sites so as not to
be visible from neighboring properties and streets. No stored items may
protrude above the screen. The outdoor storage of uncontained bulk material is
prohibited. Any outdoor storage areas shall be located in the side or required
rear yard adjacent to the main structure and shall not exceed one thousand
(1,000) square feet in area. Any attempted variation from these standards shall
require a conditional use permit.
      2.   Refuse shall not be visible from outside the refuse enclosure. All
trash receptacles shall be confined to the required rear yard of all lots.
Storage areas shall be kept in a neat and orderly manner. The contents of all
storage and trash areas must be directly related to the primary use of the
business. Refuse collection enclosures shall be designed of durable materials
with finishes and colors which are unified and harmonious with the overall
architectural theme.
   F.   Loading: Sufficient space for loading and unloading shall be provided
on each lot to accommodate trucks not less than seventy feet (70') in length.
Improvements shall be designed and located on each building site so that
vehicles may not be loaded or unloaded on or from any street. All docks which
face the street or open only to a yard which is adjacent to a Residential
District must be interior and enclosed, except for buildings of less than
thirty thousand (30,000) square feet. For buildings under thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet, exterior docks may face streetside, but shall be set back
a minimum of seventy feet (70') from the front of the building. Such exterior
docks shall be designed so as to not hamper pedestrian movement in and out of
the building.
   G.   Architecture:
      1.   Building Exterior Wall Materials:
         a.   For buildings of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or less,
the front exterior walls shall be defined as the closest wall to the most major
of streets the property adjoins and shall be of masonry, stone, glass or
architectural precast concrete panels. The side exterior walls facing the
interior and rear yards may be of metal, except that the lower one-third (1/3)
or lower seven feet (7'), whichever is less, of the wall shall be of masonry,
stone, glass or architectural precast concrete panels. In no event shall plain
concrete blocks be allowed on any exterior surface of a building.
         b.   For buildings of more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet,
the same restrictions as above shall apply, except that the lower four feet
(4') of the side exterior wall facing the interior and rear yards shall be of
masonry, stone or architectural precast concrete panels.
      2.   Height Limitations: No building erected shall exceed thirty five
feet (35') in height. If building exceeds thirty five feet (35') in height, the
required front yard and the corner side setback shall be increased by one foot
(1') for every one foot (1') in excess of thirty five feet (35'). The maximum
height shall not exceed fifty feet (50').
      3.   Rooftop Appurtenances: No part of any rooftop HVAC unit, nor other
rooftop appurtenances, including chimneys, cooling tower, etc., nor screening
of roof appurtenances, shall be installed above the maximum permitted building
height. All cooling towers, mechanical equipment or appurtenances, vents,
intakes or stacks, or other rooftop structures, shall be screened from view on
all sides of the building by a parapet wall, solid metal sight screening or
similar systems designed for use as screening of these types of devices. All
screening shall comply to all Building and Fire Codes for appearance, fire
rating, wind load and structural integrity. All screening shall be of a
material and color compatible with the materials used on the exterior of the
building, the intent being that the screening system is designed so as to be an
architectural component, consistent with the overall building design.
   H.   Lighting Guidelines: The objectives of properly designed lighting are:
      1.   To contribute to the safe and efficient use of a development site;
      2.   To contribute to the site security;
      3.   To complement and reinforce the architecture and site design
character;
      4.   To keep on site parking lot lighting fixtures and illumination
levels consistent throughout the Business Park;
      5.   To prevent casting glare onto adjacent lots and streets;
      6.   To encourage conformity with energy saving guidelines; and
      7.   Architecturally, to articulate and animate the particular building
design, as well as provide the required functional lighting for safety and
clarity of pedestrian movement.
(Ord. 91-553)
ARTICLE D: A-M AGRICULTURE AND MINING OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section
11-10D-1: Purpose
11-10D-2: Permitted Uses
11-10D-3: Conditional Uses
11-10D-1: PURPOSE:
This zoning district is designed principally to maintain restricted
agricultural uses. Keeping of farm animals or horses, earth materials
extraction and site reclamation and earth materials processing shall be
permitted on a conditional use basis only.
(Ord. 88-435; amd. Ord. 06-889; Ord. 91-553)
11-10D-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in Agriculture and Mining Overlay District:
Agricultural purposes, except the keeping of farm animals and horses.
Wireless communication facilities, provided they are located on an existing
structure, subject to the regulations of section
11-6-15 of this title.
(Ord. 88-435; amd. Ord. 06-889; Ord. 91-553)
11-10D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses in Agriculture and Mining Overlay District:
Earth materials and aggregate extraction and site reclamation.
Earth materials processing.
The keeping of farm animals or horses.
Wireless communication facilities, provided they are not located on an existing
structure, subject to the regulations of section
11-6-15 of this title.
(Ord. 88-435; amd. Ord. 06-889; Ord. 91-553)
ARTICLE E: HC HEALTH CARE DISTRICT
Section
11-10E-1: Purpose
11-10E-2: Development Standards
11-10E-3: Circulation And Land Use Plan
11-10E-1: PURPOSE:
This district is intended to:
   A.   Provide for a coordinated variety of uses and facilities which serve
the health care needs of the residents of McHenry and its surrounding area in a
planned campus that has a hospital as the first principal use.
   B.   Provide for the maintenance of open space areas, water detention areas,
landscaping and other common areas to promote an attractive and aesthetically
pleasing environment.
   C.   Provide for adequate transportation mobility into and throughout the
health care campus.
   D.   Promote a comprehensively planned, designed and maintained environment
that stresses patient, employee and visitor amenities in a manner consistent
with the needs of all user groups.
   E.   Promote a creative approach to the use of land and related physical
facilities resulting in a better design and development.
   F.   Provide for a detailed review process of land use proposals that allows
flexibility and special protection for the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare that would not be possible through traditional land use
regulations.
(Ord. 97-672)
11-10E-2: DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
   A.   Regulations: The regulations for this district will be as provided in
article H of this chapter.
   B.   Multiple Uses And Buildings On A Single Lot: More than one principal
use and one principal building may be located on a single lot.
   C.   Storage, Service And Maintenance Areas:
      1.   All materials, trash, supplies or equipment shall be stored within
an enclosed building, or screened on all sides by walls that are a minimum of
six feet (6') in height and that are constructed of materials similar to those
used for the adjacent building.
      2.   The outdoor storage of bulk materials is prohibited.
      3.   Screened outdoor storage areas shall not be located in a required
front yard or corner side yard, and shall not exceed one thousand (1,000)
square feet in area.
      4.   Screened outdoor storage areas shall be kept in a neat and orderly
manner.
      5.   The contents of all storage areas must be directly related to a use
permitted on the site.
      6.   Refuse collection enclosures shall be designed of durable materials
with finishes and colors which are similar to the adjacent building.
      7.   Refuse shall not be visible from outside the refuse enclosure.
   D.   Architecture:
      1.   Building Exterior Wall Materials:
         a.   Buildings that are larger than one thousand (1,000) square feet
in area shall have exterior walls made entirely of masonry, stone, glass or
architectural precast concrete panels.
         b.   Buildings that are less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in
area shall have a front exterior wall made entirely of masonry, stone, glass or
architectural precast concrete panels, and side exterior walls made of metal,
except that the lower one-third (1/3) or seven feet (7') of the walls,
whichever is less, shall be made entirely of masonry, stone, glass, or precast
concrete panels.
         c.   There may be a maximum of two (2) buildings, each less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet in area, that shall be required to comply only
with the standards for buildings that are less than one thousand (1,000) square
feet in area.
      2.   Height Limitations:
         a.   No building shall exceed thirty five feet (35') in height when
located within the first one hundred feet (100') from the boundary of a Health
Care District.
         b.   No building shall exceed fifty feet (50') in height when located
between one hundred feet (100') and five hundred feet (500') from the boundary
of a Health Care District.
         c.   No building shall exceed one hundred twenty feet (120') in height
when located more than five hundred feet (500') from the boundary of a Health
Care District.
      3.   Rooftop Appurtenances: No part of any rooftop HVAC unit or other
appurtenance shall exceed fifteen feet (15') above the maximum permitted
building height. All rooftop appurtenances shall be designed or screened to be
compatible with the architectural style of the building.
   E.   Lighting: All exterior lighting shall:
      1.   Contribute to the effective use of a development site.
      2.   Contribute to site security.
      3.   Complement and reinforce the building architecture and campus
environment.
      4.   Keep on site parking lot lighting fixtures and illumination levels
consistent with the campus environment.
      5.   Prevent casting glare onto adjacent properties and public streets.
      6.   Respect the conservation of energy.
      7.   Appropriately articulate primary buildings and their access routes
consistent with visitor orientation, and with safety of vehicular and
pedestrian movement.
   F.   Subdivision Ordinance Compliance:
      1.   Whether or not the development constitutes a subdivision of land, as
defined in the Subdivision Ordinance, the development shall conform to the
minimum requirements and general design principals set forth therein and the
minimum design standards and procedures for the installation of public
improvements.
      2.   Any construction guarantee required by the Subdivision Ordinance
shall be posted prior to the issuance of a building permit if the scope of such
permit includes the construction of improvements to be dedicated to the City.
      3.   Any division of land in the Health Care District shall be by plat of
subdivision.
(Ord. 97-672)
11-10E-3: CIRCULATION AND LAND USE PLAN:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: A Circulation and Land Use Plan shall be required
for any property classified as a Health Care District. This plan shall require
a public hearing and recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission,
and shall be approved by the City Council in conjunction with the approval of
the Health Care District classification. The minimum requirements of this plan
are as follows:
      1.   The site plan shall be drawn with waterproof nonfading ink on Mylar,
but may include descriptive text or other attachments.
      2.   The preparation date with succeeding revision dates, north arrow and
a graphic scale not to exceed one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100').
      3.   The exact boundaries of the Health Care District.
      4.   The location and width of any existing public streets, rights-of-way
or road easements on or adjacent to the property.
      5.   Proposed access points to existing or planned public streets.
      6.   The location of any proposed public arterial or collector streets,
or a range in which the centerline of such streets shall be located.
      7.   If no public arterial or collector streets are proposed, the
location of proposed private arterial and collector streets.
      8.   Distances from intersections to access points and other relevant
site distances.
      9.   A representation of the location of all existing buildings.
      10.   Watercourses, drainage ditches or other stormwater management
facilities.
      11.   Land area, in acres, of the Health Care District.
      12.   Building setback lines from district boundaries.
      13.   The location of any flood hazard areas.
      14.   The name of any proposed public street, if known.
      15.   The location of proposed permitted and conditional land use
groupings.
      16.   A site plan or text describing the location and design of any
landscaping, or specific setback requirements for uses or groups of uses that
are identified.
   B.   Details Not Required: The location of minor streets, driveways and
parking areas need not be shown.
   C.   Modifications; Exceptions: The Circulation and Land Use Plan may not be
modified after its approval by the City Council except as follows:
      1.   Minor adjustments may be made with the approval of the Zoning
Administrator. Minor adjustments are defined as: a) altering the location of
the public streets shown on the plan by a distance which is twenty feet (20')
outside of the parameters shown on the plan; or b) changing the boundary of the
permitted and conditional land use groupings by a distance of less than fifty
feet (50'). Minor adjustments shall be consistent with the intent of the
Circulation and Land Use Plan.
      2.   Major adjustments may be made only with the approval of the City
Council. The City Council may refer any major adjustments to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for review and recommendation. Major adjustments are defined
as any alteration that is not a minor adjustment, including any alteration or
addition to the permitted or conditional land uses.
(Ord. 97-672)
ARTICLE F: DOD DOWNTOWN OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section
11-10F-1: Purpose And Scope
11-10F-2: Overlay Boundaries
11-10F-3: Applicability
11-10F-4: Site Plan Review
11-10F-5: Administrative Site Plan Review Procedure
11-10F-6: Expanded Site Plan Review Procedure
11-10F-7: Criteria For Review
11-10F-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   The purpose of the Downtown Overlay District (DOD) is to preserve and
protect the existing historical character of the downtown area, promote the
transformation of the downtown into an even more compact pedestrian, transit
oriented mixed use area, and promote the downtown area as an economically
viable part of the City. The DOD seeks to assist in the growth of existing
businesses, enhance the character of their buildings and facades, and provide
guidance for those exterior alterations and encourage new infill development.
The DOD also seeks to provide a mechanism to complement the development of the
City’s proposed McHenry Riverwalk. The primary goals of the DOD Ordinance are
as follows:
      1.   Enhance the economic viability of the downtown area and foster
reinvestment and economic development;
      2.   Promote a pedestrian oriented twenty four (24) hour Downtown
District;
      3.   Encourage, where practical, the adaptive reuse of downtown buildings
and structures;
      4.   Plan for new commercial, residential and mixed use infill
development that is compatible to the character and function of the downtown;
      5.   Encourage the use of appropriate building materials and facades so
as to enhance the character and continuity of the downtown areas;
      6.   Provide an avenue whereby downtown businesses can benefit and
enhance their business from the construction of the McHenry Riverwalk;
      7.   Continue to maintain the historical fabric of the downtown area;
      8.   Provide a mechanism for additional signage along the McHenry
Riverwalk, in the rear of the downtown businesses;
      9.   Further the goals of the City of McHenry Downtown Plan and Downtown
District Design Guidelines.
   B.   In order to accomplish these goals, the City recognizes that new
development, redevelopment and building modifications within the boundaries of
the DOD is more likely to require relief from strict compliance with this
title. Instead of using the traditional zoning and variance processes to
consider this relief, the DOD provides a mechanism, the site plan review
process, for allowing flexibility from the requirements of this title. Through
the site plan review process, development proposals in the DOD can be reviewed
on a more comprehensive level to ensure the goals and objectives of the
district are met.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-10F-2: OVERLAY BOUNDARIES:
The DOD boundaries are indicated on the map on file in the City, which shall be
made part of this article by reference.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-10F-3: APPLICABILITY:
The requirements of the DOD are applicable to all parcels falling within the
established DOD boundaries.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-10F-4: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
Site plan review shall be applicable to all development, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, and any other activity requiring a building permit.
   A.   Administrative Site Plan Review: Administrative site plan review shall
be required for all development and other activities requiring a building
permit that comply with:
      1.   The regulations for permitted and conditional uses, bulk
requirements, such as lot area, width and coverage, required yards, building
height and floor area ratio, as provided in the underlying zoning district in
which said property is located; and
      2.   All other applicable requirements of this title, including parking,
accessory uses and structures, landscaping, lighting, signage, etc.
   B.   Expanded Site Plan Review: Any development and any other activity
requiring a building permit that is unable to meet any of the requirements of
the underlying zoning district or other applicable requirements of this title
shall be subject to the expanded site plan review procedures.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-10F-5: ADMINISTRATIVE SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE:
The procedure for administrative site plan review shall be as follows:
   A.   Application: Applications for administrative site plan review shall be
made on forms provided by the City.
   B.   Required Submittals:
      1.   Information Required: The following information shall be submitted
with all applications for administrative site plan review:
         a.   Narrative description of the proposal describing the request and
how it meets the purpose, intent, goals and criteria for review of the DOD.
         b.   Completed building permit application.
         c.   Recent plat of survey of the subject property, indicating all
existing improvements on the site.
         d.   Two (2) copies of detailed plans of the proposed construction or
activity, sign, awning, etc., including, but not limited to, site plan,
elevations, materials, method of construction and landscaping.
         e.   Any other information deemed necessary by City staff to perform a
complete analysis of the request in accordance with the DOD requirements.
      2.   Submittal: All required information shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for processing. The Zoning Administrator, in his/her sole
discretion, may waive the submittal of one or more of the required submittals
if it is determined that such information is unnecessary or irrelevant to the
review.
   C.   Administrative Review: Each request for administrative site plan review
shall be reviewed independently by City staff based on conformance with the
purpose and intent, goals and criteria for review of this article.
   D.   Administrative Decisions: Within twenty one (21) days after receipt of
all required submittals, the Zoning Administrator shall approve, approve with
modifications, or deny the request. Approval shall be in the form of issuance
of a valid building permit. Denials will be provided to the applicant in letter
form explaining the reasons for denial.
   E.   Appeals: Any person aggrieved by the decision made by the Zoning
Administrator in conjunction with this section may file an appeal in accordance
with the provisions of section
11-1-4 of this title.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-10F-6: EXPANDED SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE:
The procedure for expanded site plan review shall be as follows:
   A.   Application: Applications for expanded site plan review shall be made
on forms provided by the City.
   B.   Required Submittals:
      1.   Information Required: The following information shall be submitted
with all applications for expanded site plan review:
         a.   Narrative description of the proposal describing the request and
how it meets the purpose, intent, goals and criteria for review of the DOD, and
describing all departures from the underlying zoning requirements.
         b.   A plot plan/site plan depicting setbacks, the relationship of
buildings on the site, parking areas, driveways, walkways, landscaping and
lighting.
         c.   Building plans for all proposed buildings.
         d.   Exterior elevations with material designations and exterior color
descriptions, including facade improvements.
         e.   Plans for all signs, their dimensions, size and location on the
property.
         f.   Recent plat of survey of the subject property, indicating all
existing improvements on the site.
         g.   Any other information deemed necessary by City staff to perform a
complete analysis of the request in accordance with the DOD requirements.
      2.   Submittal: All required information shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator for processing.
   C.   Review: All applications for expanded site plan review shall be
required to obtain a conditional use permit and shall follow the conditional
use permit process in this title. Each application shall be reviewed by the
Planning and Zoning Commission for conformance with the purpose and intent,
goals and criteria for review of this article. The Planning and Zoning
Commission may require that additional information be provided by an applicant
in order to perform a complete analysis of the request in accordance with the
DOD requirements.
   D.   Planning And Zoning Commission Recommendation: Within thirty (30) days
after the close of the public hearing, a recommendation to approve, approve
with conditions, or deny the application shall be rendered by the Planning and
Zoning Commission and forwarded to the City Council for final action.
   E.   City Council Action: The City Council shall take final action on an
application for expanded site plan review at a regularly scheduled meeting. The
City Council shall not approve any application unless it finds that the
criteria for review in this chapter have been met. The City Council may make
its approval subject to any conditions or restrictions it deems necessary to
ensure the viability of the development and its compatibility with the
downtown.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-10F-7: CRITERIA FOR REVIEW:
All applications for administrative site plan review and expanded site plan
review shall be reviewed for compliance with the following criteria:
   A.   Downtown Plan: Conformance with the City of McHenry Downtown Plan.
   B.   Design Guidelines: Conformance with the City of McHenry Downtown Design
Guidelines.
   C.   Neighboring Property: Harmony and compatibility of proposed uses with
neighboring properties and structures.
   D.   Existing Site Characteristics: Relationship of the proposed activity to
the existing site characteristics, e.g., topography.
   E.   Circulation: Relationship of the proposed activity to existing
vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
   F.   Adverse Impacts: Adverse impacts on the health, safety and welfare of
the general public.
   G.   Materials, Colors: Harmony and compatibility of proposed materials and
colors with neighboring properties and structures.
   H.   Additional Improvements: Inclusion of additional improvements intended
to further the goals of the Downtown Plan, e.g.: landscaping, decorative
lighting, etc.
   I.   Riverwalk: Relationship to the McHenry Riverwalk (if applicable).
   J.   Benefits, Enhancements: Benefit associated with the development of the
property, related to, but not limited to, the following:
      1.   Economic benefits to the City.
      2.   Elimination of blighted conditions.
      3.   Enhancements to City tax base.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
ARTICLE G: MU MIXED USE DISTRICT
Section
11-10G-1: Intent
11-10G-2: Purpose
11-10G-3: Permitted Uses
11-10G-4: Conditional Uses
11-10G-5: Bulk And Setback Regulations
11-10G-1: INTENT:
The intent of MU Mixed Use District is to permit a vertical mix of commercial
and residential uses within the same building.
(Ord. 18-1919, 12-17-2018)
11-10G-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the district is to:
   A.   Accommodate a physical pattern of development often found along City
main streets and in neighborhood commercial areas of older cities;
   B.   Accommodate mixed use buildings with neighborhoods serving retail,
service and other uses on the ground floor and residential units above the
nonresidential space;
   C.   Encourage development that exhibits the physical design characteristics
of pedestrian oriented, storefront style shopping streets; and
   D.   Promote the health and well being of residents by encouraging physical
activity, alternative transportation and greater social interaction.
(Ord. 18-1919, 12-17-2018)
11-10G-3: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses in this district are:
Artist live/work space located above the ground floor.
Artist work or sales space.
Daycare.
Dwelling units located above the ground floor.
Group home.
Hotels.
Medical service.
Office.
Parks and recreation.
Personal service, including health clubs and gyms.
Public facilities.
Repair service, consumer, including bicycles.
Restaurants and eating and drinking establishments.
Retail sales, general.
Utilities and services, minor.
Veterinary.
(Ord. 18-1919, 12-17-2018)
11-10G-4: CONDITIONAL USES:
Conditional uses in this district are:
Artisan (hand tools only; e.g., jewelry or ceramics).
Artist/live work space, ground floor.
Assembly uses.
Assisted/independent living.
Detached house.
Drive-thru facility.
Multi-dwelling (3+ units), residential.
Nursing home.
Parking, commercial (nonaccessory).
Planned Unit Development.
Single room occupancy.
Tavern.
Townhouse.
Two-flat.
Utilities.
(Ord. 18-1919, 12-17-2018; amd. Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
11-10G-5: BULK AND SETBACK REGULATIONS:
   A.   Bulk Regulations:
 
                       Minimu m    Minimum
                       Floor To    Floor Area  Minimum Lot
Gross Floor Outdoor    Ceiling     Of          Area/       Minimu m Building
Area        Operations Height In   Commercial  Dwelling    FAR      Height
                       Commerc ial Space       Unit
                       Space
                                   800 sq. ft.
                                   or 25% of
                                   lots w/
                                   street
                                   frontage of
15,000 sq.  Not                    less than   1,000 sq.
ft. maximum permitted  11 feet     50 ft. or   ft.         2.0      38 - 50 ft.
                                   20% of the
                                   lot area on
                                   lots with
                                   50 ft. more
                                   of street
                                   frontage
 
   B.   Setbacks:
      1.   The entire building facade must abut front and/or side street
property lines or be located within ten feet (10') of such property lines.
Outdoor seating and display is permitted, as well as stoops. The minimum rear
yard setback will vary between zero (0) and thirty percent (30%) of the lot
depth. The setback will depend on lot development patterns in the area. When
abutting residential, the setback should be greater than when abutting an alley
or road where no setback may be required.
      2.   No interior side yard setbacks are required unless the property
abuts a Residentially zoned property and in that case, the minimum side yard
setback shall be the same as required for the abutting residential use in the
Residentially Zoned District.
   C.   Transparency:
      1.   A minimum of sixty percent (60%) to seventy five percent (75%) of
the street facing building facade between two feet (2') and eight feet (8') in
height must be comprised of clear windows that allows views of indoor space or
product display areas.
      2.   The bottom of any window or product display window used to satisfy
the transparency standard of subsection C1 of this section may not be more than
three feet (3') to four and one-half feet (41/2') above the adjacent sidewalk.
      3.   Product display windows used to satisfy these requirements must have
a minimum height of four feet (4') and be internally lighted.
   D.   Doors And Entrances:
      1.   Buildings must have a primary entrance door facing a public sidewalk
or alternatively a public right-of-way if no public sidewalk exists. Entrances
at building corners may be used to satisfy this requirement.
      2.   Building entrances may include doors to individual shops or
businesses, lobby entrances, entrances to pedestrian oriented plazas, or
courtyard entrances to a cluster of shops or businesses.
(Ord. 18-1919, 12-17-2018)
ARTICLE H: TABLES
Section
11-10H-1: Table 1; District Regulations
11-10H-2: Table 2; Permitted And Conditional Uses
11-10H-1: TABLE 1; DISTRICT REGULATIONS:
TABLE 1
OFFICE, INDUSTRIAL, BUSINESS PARK AND HEALTH CARE DISTRICT REQUIREMENTS
 Zoning District
 O-1 O-2 I-1 BP HC10
                            Zoning District
                            O-1   O-2    I-1    BP      HC10
Minimum lot area in square  5,000 40,000 15,000 10,0005 -10
feet
Minimum lot width in feet   -     100    100    506     -
Along arterial street1      200   200    200    506     -
Minimum required front yard
depth or corner side yard   30    30     40     507     3011
width in feet2
Minimum interior side yard:                          
Width in feet2              10    10     10     158     30
Adjacent to Residential     15    25     35     158     5012
District2
Minimum required rear yard:                           
Depth in feet2              15    15     15     208     30
Adjacent to Residential     25    35     50     208     5012
District2
Maximum floor area ratio    1.0   2.5    3.0    0.50    0.5013
Permitted use groups3       A     A, C   E      G       I
Conditional use groups4     B     B, D   F      H       I
Parking and loading         As provided in chapter 12 of this title
Landscaping and screening   As provided in chapter 13 of this title
Performance standards       As provided in chapter 17 of this title
Signs                       As provided in title 10, chapter 20 of this Code
Other requirements          As provided in general district regulations
 
Notes:
      1.    Required front and required corner side yard frontages for any lot
abutting an arterial street designated in the City Comprehensive Plan or in an
annexation agreement or subdivision plat, except for lots meeting requirements
under exceptions in general district regulations.
      2.    Plus 2 feet for every 1 foot of building height over 30 feet,
except for property in the Health Care District.
      3.    See section 11-10H-2, table 2 of this article, for permitted and
conditional uses by group.
      4.    Subject to the provisions of chapter 15, “Conditional Uses”, or 11,
“Integrated Design District”, of this title.
      5.    No building permit will be issued to any parcel of land in a
Business Park District containing less than 40,000 square feet.
      6.    No building permit will be issued to any parcel of land in a
Business Park District having a width of less than 200 feet at the building
line.
      7.    A green space having a minimum width of 10 feet shall be provided
between the back curb of any parking area and the building. The front parking
area shall be partially screened from view from the street by berming and/or
landscaping.
      8.    A green space having a minimum width of 25 feet shall be provided
between the front parking curb of any parking area and the property line.
      9.    In the Health Care District, buildings which are located within 150
feet of an arterial street shall be no less than 30 feet from another building
in such district.
      10.   There is no minimum lot area in the Health Care District. However,
the minimum overall size of a Health Care District shall be 100 acres.
      11.   The minimum required front yard depth or required corner side yard
width along an arterial street shall be 50 feet.
      12.   The required setback area shall not contain buildings, structures,
parking or any other aboveground structure or improvements.
      13.   The maximum floor area ratio in the Health Care District shall be
calculated for the district as a whole.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 96-647; Ord. 05-866)
11-10H-2: TABLE 2; PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES:
TABLE 2
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES IN OFFICE, INDUSTRIAL, BUSINESS PARK AND HEALTH
CARE DISTRICTS
Uses are listed alphabetically within groups.
Group A: Permitted uses in all Office Districts:
Insurance offices.
Medical, dental, and optometry offices.
Offices, business and professional.
Offices, government, political and institutional.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries, and
other publicly owned open space.
Permitted public uses, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Real estate offices.
Streets and alleys.
Tax preparation offices.
Temporary buildings or trailers for construction purposes for a period not to
exceed the duration of construction.
Travel agencies.
Travel bureaus.
Wireless communication facilities, provided they are located on an existing
structure, subject to the regulations of section
11-6-15 of this title.
Group B: Conditional uses in all Office Districts:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all conditional uses in the
district, including off street parking and loading and signs, as provided in
chapter 12 of this title and title 10, chapter 20 of this Code.
Air rights development.
Assembly uses.
Cemeteries.
Child daycare centers, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Conditional public uses, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations and
savings banks, finance companies and credit unions.
Golf courses and country clubs, private.
Institutional uses.
Integrated Design District.
Mortuaries, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Planned Unit Development.
Recreational institutions, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Residential care facility.
(amd. Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022)
Group C: Additional permitted uses in O-2 District:
Automated teller machines.
Automobile and truck rental establishments.
Blueprinting and photostating establishments.
Business machines sales, rental, and service.
Commercial schools for business, trade, electronics, or data processing.
Computer sales, rental, and service.
Currency exchanges.
Donut shops.
Employment agencies.
Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan associations, credit
unions and commercial loan offices.
Golf courses and country clubs, private.
Graphics and drafting services.
Health clubs as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Hotels and motels.
Laboratories, medical, dental, research and testing.
Mail order houses and letter shops.
Newspaper distribution agencies for home delivery and retail trade.
Office, stationery or art supply stores.
Plazas and public spaces.
Post offices.
Radio and television stations and studios.
Recording studios.
Research and development facilities.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, with or without indoor entertainment, as
defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, and including restaurants serving alcoholic beverages,
but not including drive-in restaurants as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Studios for artists, musicians, and photographers.
Wholesaling.
Group D: Additional conditional uses in O-2 District:
Airports.
Drive-in restaurants, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Integrated Design District.
Off street parking lots, public garages or storage garages, other than as
accessory uses.
Planned Unit Development.
Radio and television towers.
Taverns and bars, with or without indoor entertainment, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
The following uses as accessory uses located totally within a building housing
a principal permitted use and with neither any separate outside entrance nor
any sign facing or visible from any public street:
Barber shops and beauty shops.
Drug stores.
Flower shops.
Gift or card shops.
Newspaper, magazine and tobacco shops.
Group E: Permitted uses in I-1 Industrial District:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all permitted uses in the district,
including off street parking and loading and signs, as provided in chapter 12
of this title and title 10, chapter 20 of this Code.
Adult-use cannabis craft grower.
Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser.
Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor.
Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter.
Bakery plants.
Commercial schools.
Contractor and construction offices.
Dry cleaning plants and laundries.
Dwelling unit of caretaker or guard.
Fuel storage, bulk.
Golf courses and country clubs, private.
Graphics and drafting services.
Laboratories, medical, dental, research and testing.
Low nuisance light manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing, repair and assembly facilities not listed elsewhere as permitted or
conditional uses that are able to conform to the performance standards herein
for light industrial uses.
Outdoor storage associated with a permitted or conditional use.
Motor vehicle body shops.
Motor vehicle, trailer, and mobile home repair shops.
Motor vehicle sales (no open sales lot) or rental, including cars, trucks,
boats, trailers, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, motorcycles, motor
scooters and mopeds.
Parks, playgrounds, golf courses, forest preserves, wildlife sanctuaries and
other publicly owned open space.
Permitted public uses, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Printing and publishing establishments.
Radio and television stations and studios.
Recording studios.
Research and development facilities.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out; including restaurants with or without indoor
entertainment, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, and including restaurants serving alcoholic beverages,
but not including drive-in restaurants, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Streets and alleys.
Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the
duration of such construction.
Towing businesses.
Warehousing, storage and distribution facilities.
Wholesaling.
Wireless communication facilities, provided they are located on an existing
structure, subject to the requirements of section
11-6-15 of this title.
(amd. Ord. 23-8, 2-6-2023; Ord. 23-32, 6-5-2023)
Group F: Conditional uses in I-1 Industrial District:
Accessory uses, buildings and structures to all conditional uses in the
district, including off street parking and loading and signs as provided in
chapter 12 of this title and title 10, chapter 20 of this Code.
Airports.
Automobile service stations.
Batch asphalt, concrete, Portland cement or mortar mixing plants.
Cemeteries.
Conditional public uses, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Drive-in restaurants, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title; taverns and bars, with or without indoor entertainment,
as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Integrated Design Districts.
Manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or
assembly facilities that are not listed elsewhere as permitted or conditional
uses, including facilities for abrasive products; boilers and tanks; chemicals;
fiberglass; glass; metal; textiles; transportation equipment; and any other
facilities that are able to conform to the performance standards herein for
heavy industrial uses.
Medical cannabis cultivation center, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Mini-warehouse.
Motor, rail or air freight terminals.
Off street parking lots, public garages or storage garages, other than as
accessory uses.
Planned Unit Development.
Quarries.
Radio and television towers.
Recycling centers, solid waste.
Rubber, natural or synthetic, manufacture or manufacture of caoutchouc or gutta
percha.
Sand and gravel extraction.
Synthetic polymer manufacture.
Wireless communication facilities, provided they are not located on an existing
structure, subject to the requirements of section
11-6-15 of this title.
(amd. Ord. 23-8, 2-6-2023)
Group G: Permitted uses in a Business Park District:
The uses hereinafter permitted shall be restricted to those which require a
pleasant, hazard and nuisance free environment (located in a mutually
compatible environment within a large park and campus type setting) and do not
create either an appreciable nuisance or hazard to other property, individuals
or the public in general:
Adult-use cannabis craft grower.
Adult-use cannabis infuser organization or infuser.
Adult-use cannabis processing organization or processor.
Adult-use cannabis transporting organization or transporter.
Hospitality.
Limited retail.
Medium restrictive industrial.
Office.
Restaurants, eat in or carry out, with or without indoor entertainment, as
defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, including restaurants serving alcoholic beverages, but
not including drive-in restaurants, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Service.
Warehousing.
Wireless communication facilities, provided they are located on an existing
structure, subject to the requirements of section
11-6-15 of this title.
Group H: Conditional uses in a Business Park District:
Integrated Design District.
Medical cannabis cultivation center, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Outdoor storage tanks.
Planned Unit Development.
Taverns and bars, with or without indoor entertainment, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title; drive-in restaurants, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
Uses allowed as permitted uses in the C-5 District.
Wireless communication facilities, provided they are not located on an existing
structure, subject to the requirements of section
11-6-15 of this title.
Group I: Permitted and conditional uses in the Health Care District:
The permitted and conditional uses in the Health Care District shall be
established as defined in the Circulation and Land Use Plan that is approved in
conjunction with the Health Care District zoning classification. The permitted
and conditional uses and their appropriate locations, as identified in the
plan, shall be established in accordance with the purpose and intent of the
Health Care District.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 96-647; Ord. 97-691; Ord. 98-703; Ord. 02-
792; Ord. 04-846; Ord. 06-889; Ord. 07-947; Ord. 12-1059; Ord. 14-1094; Ord.
15-1113; 2019 Code; Ord. 19-1206, 10-7-2019 Ord. 21-38, 7-19-2021; Ord. 22-26,
4-5-2022)
CHAPTER 11: INTEGRATED DESIGN DISTRICT
Section
11-11-1: Purpose
11-11-2: General Standards
11-11-3: Standards For Development
11-11-4: Review Procedure
11-11-5: Approval Criteria For Development Review
11-11-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of the Integrated Design District (IDD) is to encourage
innovative design in the development of land by providing relief from rigid
zoning and subdivision standards, which are designed for conventional
developments and may inhibit creative land planning. In order to receive such
relief, a development must incorporate innovative design techniques that
protect and enhance the City’s natural and manmade resources, such as streams
and watercourses, wetlands, native vegetation, groundwater recharge areas,
mature tree stands, view sheds, historical character and the like. The IDD
requires that a site’s unique environmental features, which may be removed or
otherwise altered in the course of traditional land development, be integrated
into the overall design of a project, and protected through the use of
covenants and long term maintenance agreements. The IDD also encourages
multiple land uses where appropriate, as part of a unified development strategy
to reduce impervious surfaces and reduce the dependency on the automobile.
   B.   Ideally, no two (2) IDD developments will be identical. Through the use
of nonconventional design techniques, such as build to lines, clustering, land
conservation strategies, varied building placements, boulevards, one-way
streets and alleys, a specific development receives its own use, lot size,
bulk, parking, landscaping and design standards.
(Ord. 96-647; amd. Ord. 05-866)
11-11-2: GENERAL STANDARDS:
   A.   Applicability: The IDD is intended for properties designated as IDD on
the City of McHenry Comprehensive Future Land Use Map. This does not, however,
preclude other properties within or annexed to the City as being developed
under the provisions of this district.
   B.   Compliance: Any property developed under the provisions of this chapter
must adhere to the purpose and intent of the district, and comply with the
criteria for development and review procedures.
   C.   Ownership: Properties to be developed under the provisions of this
district shall be under unified ownership or control.
   D.   Conditional Use Permit: Properties to be developed under the provisions
of this district are required to obtain a conditional use permit and shall
follow the conditional use permit process.
   E.   No Minimum Acreage: There is no minimum acreage to develop property
under the provisions of this chapter.
   F.   Zoning Designation: There is no underlying zoning designation
associated with properties developed in accordance with the provisions of this
district. IDD will serve as the zoning designation for the property being
developed. Zoning, subdivision and other development standards for the property
shall be set forth in an ordinance passed by the City Council, and may vary
from the requirements of City ordinances.
   G.   Variances:
      1.   Each variance or deviation from City ordinances shall be evaluated
independently and based on the benefit(s) associated with the development,
related to, but not limited to, the following: physical condition(s) of the
property, proposed variance results in a cohesive, high quality development,
that any reduction(s) from minimum requirements are offset by sufficiently
exceeding other requirements of this title, which result in a greater benefit
to the community or future residents of the property being developed.
      2.   Subsequent to approval of an IDD Ordinance and associated plan,
additional variance requests are discouraged and the burden will be placed on
the applicant to substantiate a hardship created, in accordance with the
variance standards stated herein.
   H.   Management Plan: A Comprehensive Management Plan is required to govern
the long term management of natural areas, open areas, placement of accessory
structures on lots and other issues associated with “typical” subdivision
covenants, conditions and restrictions of a property.
(Ord. 96-647; amd. Ord. 05-866)
11-11-3: STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   In order to receive an IDD designation, a development must incorporate
one or more of the following design techniques:
      1.   Varied housing styles, in a cluster style, with varied elevations,
such as, but not limited to: Prairie, Traditional, Italianate, Victorian, row
houses;
      2.   Appropriate building materials;
      3.   Development of community centers and traditional town centers;
      4.   Varied lot layouts, including cluster housing design, with side and
rear loaded garages;
      5.   Varied house placement on lots;
      6.   Detached garages;
      7.   Build to lines;
      8.   Individual lot landscaping plans;
      9.   Neighborhood signage;
      10.   Commercial design guidelines;
      11.   Anti-monotony guidelines;
      12.   Boulevard entrance signage and associated landscaping;
      13.   Landscaping for environmental corridors, dominant with natural
prairie plantings;
      14.   Establishment of conservation easements for long term management
over high quality natural areas;
      15.   Decorative streetlighting;
      16.   Berming and landscaping proposed along major roadways;
      17.   Streetscape enhancements;
      18.   Vegetative swales;
      19.   Pedestrian path system;
      20.   Minimization of impervious surface area;
      21.   Permeable pavement where appropriate;
      22.   Preservation and enhancement of natural features;
      23.   Citywide benefits;
      24.   Economic benefits; and
      25.   Quality of life benefits, including, but not limited to:
recreational benefits to community, enhanced view sheds, street and pedestrian
connectivity to surrounding properties, preservation of large natural areas,
etc.
(Ord. 96-647; amd. Ord. 05-866)
11-11-4: REVIEW PROCEDURE:
   A.   Preapplication Meeting With City Staff:
      1.   Applicant shall meet with City staff and provide nine (9) copies of
a conceptual sketch of the proposed development, along with an analysis of how
the plan meets the purpose and the standards of this chapter. Criteria used for
evaluation of the conceptual sketch are set forth in section
11-11-5, “Approval Criteria For Development Review”, of this chapter.
      2.   City staff shall review the concept plan and analysis in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and City ordinances. Within twenty one (21)
days of the preapplication meeting, City staff will provide preliminary
comments to the applicant regarding the appropriateness of the development and
how the proposed development scheme meets the purpose of this chapter, as well
as the development criteria and standards set forth in this chapter.
      3.   The applicant shall revise the plans accordingly to address the
comments of City staff prior to the scheduling of a Committee of the Whole
meeting before the City Council.
   B.   Committee Of The Whole Meeting:
      1.   A meeting with the Committee of the Whole will be scheduled after
twenty five (25) copies of the following information are submitted to the City:
         a.   A concept plan of the proposed development depicting the
following: acreage of property, property boundaries and distances, adjacent
land uses, site features, including topography, drainage patterns, proposed
street layout, table listing average lot size, proposed land uses and
associated acreages, density, setback and bulk standards, floor area ratio for
nonresidential land uses, statement of ownership and management of property.
         b.   A narrative description of the overall concept of the proposed
development, and a demonstration of the uniqueness of the proposal and why
conventional zoning is not appropriate.
         c.   A description of all variances to City ordinances being
requested, as well as justification for each variance requested.
         d.   A draft development management plan for the property detailing:
long term maintenance and funding of open space and natural areas,
establishment of conservation easements over natural areas, location of
accessory structures, establishment of a community-wide board, etc.
         e.   Proof of ownership of all property proposed for development.
         f.   Any other information required by City staff, including, but not
limited to, the following: preliminary traffic study, school impact analysis
and/or fiscal impact analysis, including impact on City services and financial
benefits to the City.
      2.   A Committee of the Whole meeting will not be scheduled until all
required information is submitted. Required submittals shall be provided to the
City at one time, not in a piecemeal fashion.
      3.   At their meeting, the Committee of the Whole may provide comments,
feedback, suggestions and other input on the proposed development regarding the
appropriateness of the development and how the proposed development scheme
meets the purpose of this chapter, as well as the development criteria and
standards set forth in this chapter.
      4.   Within forty five (45) days after the Committee of the Whole
meeting, the applicant shall either:
         a.   Formally apply for a public hearing before the Planning and
Zoning Commission on the proposed IDD; or
         b.   Revise the plans to address the concerns of the City and request
a new Committee of the Whole meeting, following the same process as described
above; or
         c.   Withdraw the request.
If no action is taken by the applicant within said forty five (45) day period,
a concept plan shall be considered withdrawn.
   C.   Application For Public Hearing Before Planning And Zoning Commission:
After receiving comments by the Committee of the Whole about the IDD concept
plan, the applicant shall apply for a public hearing before the Planning and
Zoning Commission, using the same procedures and notification requirements as
for a conditional use permit, except as modified herein.
      1.   Preliminary Plat And Preliminary Engineering: Because the design of
an IDD typically incorporates conservation features and nontraditional
engineering measures to accommodate stormwater management, a preliminary plat
and preliminary engineering plans must be approved by the City before a public
hearing before the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         a.   Five (5) copies of a preliminary plat and preliminary engineering
plans, in accordance with the City’s Subdivision Control and Development
Ordinance and Technical Review Standards, shall be submitted for technical
engineering review.
         b.   A retained personnel fee of one thousand five hundred dollars
($1,500.00) shall be submitted to cover the review costs of plans and studies,
and any other information necessary to perform a complete analysis of the
project, which may completed by outside consultants.
         c.   Plans will be reviewed for compliance with the requirements for
preliminary plats and preliminary engineering as set forth in the Subdivision
Control and Development Ordinance and Technical Specifications Manual.
         d.   An analysis of all variances from City ordinances that are being
sought shall be performed, including, but not limited to, design and layout,
lot size, layout, block length, configuration, cul-de- sacs, lot widths, etc.
(i.e., all of the conventional subdivision design standards and restrictions).
         e.   Once all preliminary platting and engineering issues are
addressed to the satisfaction of the City, a public hearing before the Planning
and Zoning Commission will be scheduled.
      2.   Public Hearing Before Planning And Zoning Commission: Upon approval
of a preliminary plat and preliminary engineering, a public hearing before the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall be scheduled. Twenty five (25) copies of
the following documentation shall be submitted within thirty (30) days of
approval of a preliminary plat and preliminary engineering:
         a.   A narrative description of the overall development, demonstrating
the appropriate purpose and intent of development and how provisions of this
chapter have been met, including criteria listed in section
11-11-5, “Approval Criteria For Development Review”, of this chapter.
         b.   A preliminary plan including the following information: acreage
of property, adjacent land uses, site features, including topography, drainage
patterns, proposed street layout, table listing average lot size, proposed land
uses and associated acreages, density, setbacks, bulk standards, floor area
ratio for nonresidential land uses, and a statement of ownership and management
of property.
         c.   The preliminary plat of subdivision approved by the City staff.
         d.   A description of all variances to City ordinances being
requested, as well as justification for each variance requested.
         e.   A draft development management plan for the property detailing:
long term maintenance and funding of open space and natural areas,
establishment of conservation easements over natural areas, location of
accessory structures, establishment of a development wide board or association,
etc.
         f.   Any other information required by City staff, including, but not
limited to, the following: revised traffic study, school impact analysis and/or
fiscal impact analysis, including impact on City services and financial
benefits to the City, typical building elevations, site landscaping plans, etc.
      3.   Findings Of Fact: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold the
public hearing on the proposed IDD development. The commission may call any
additional witness and/or receive independent testimony, as it deems necessary,
and may continue said hearing from time to time in order to explore all
outstanding questions and to achieve thorough findings of fact. After the
hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the City Council
written findings of fact, based on section
11-11-5, “Approval Criteria For Development Review”, of this chapter, and
recommend to the City Council approval, approval with modifications or denial
of the application.
   D.   Drafting Of IDD Ordinance:
      1.   If a positive recommendation is made by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, staff will work with the applicant in formulating a draft IDD
Ordinance for the property. Using the existing preliminary plan and plat, as
well as the City’s Zoning Ordinance as a guide, an IDD Ordinance will be
drafted to address all zoning issues, as well as each variance that is
requested. Each IDD Ordinance will reference a specific preliminary plat,
management plan for the property, and any other documents deemed necessary by
City staff or required by the City Council. Also, at this time, a final
Comprehensive Management Plan shall be submitted and approved by staff prior to
City Council consideration. This plan shall dictate the long term management of
all common areas, funding sources that will be used, items typically listed in
covenants, conditions and restrictions and other items as required by staff.
Staff may consult, at their discretion and at the applicant’s expense, any
outside consultant or agency in order to ensure the establishment of a proper
and functional working document for the development of an IDD property.
      2.   If the property is proposed to be annexed to the City, a draft
annexation agreement will also be prepared at this time and a public hearing
for said annexation agreement before the City Council shall be scheduled.
   E.   City Council Consideration Of Preliminary Plan And Plat: After
receiving findings of fact from the Planning and Zoning Commission, the draft
IDD Ordinance for the property, and any other information requested by staff,
the City Council shall review the proposed IDD Ordinance at a regularly
scheduled City Council meeting. The Council will review the proposed IDD
Ordinance for the property and suggest any modifications to said ordinance.
   F.   City Council Consideration (Second Meeting): If, at the first meeting
the City Council votes to send the proposed IDD development forward for an
official vote, the City Council shall approve, approve with modifications or
deny the application at a future regularly scheduled meeting. If the City
Council elects to approve the application in any form, the City Council shall,
by ordinance, approve the preliminary plan and plat and grant the zoning of
IDD, in accordance with those standards set forth on the preliminary plan and
plat, comprehensive management plan and IDD Ordinance for the property. Said
ordinance may authorize, in the discretion of the City Council, the submission
of final plans and plats, and the development of the IDD in phases and include
such conditions as the City Council may deem appropriate. No building permit or
occupancy certificate shall be issued until the recording of the final plan and
plat for the proposed IDD or the phase in which the property to which such
permit or certificate relates is located.
   G.   Final Plan And Plat:
      1.   Within one year after adoption of the ordinance approving the IDD,
the owner shall submit five (5) copies of final engineering plans, in
accordance with the approved preliminary plan and plat of subdivision, as well
as the City’s Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance and Technical
Specifications Manual. After which, the plans will be reviewed for compliance
with the City’s technical engineering standards for final development, as set
forth in the Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance and Technical
Specifications Manual. After receiving internal approval, the final plan and
plat shall be transmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review. If
the Planning and Zoning Commission deems the plan and plat to be substantially
compliant with the preliminary plan and plat, they shall be approved and
recommended to the City Council for consideration.
      2.   This recommendation shall be transmitted in writing to the City
Council within thirty (30) days. Upon receipt, the City Council shall review
said final plan and plat and approve said plan and plat with modifications or
deny said plan and plat.
      3.   As a condition of approval of any IDD plan and plat, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may stipulate such
conditions and restrictions upon the establishment, location, design, layout,
height, density, construction, maintenance, aesthetics, operation and other
elements of the IDD as deemed necessary for the protection of the public
interest, improvement of the development and protection of the adjacent area.
In all cases in which IDD are granted, the City Council shall require such
evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions
stipulated in connection therewith are being and will be complied with.
   H.   Changes And Modifications To Approved Plans:
      1.   If the final plan and plat are not in substantial compliance with
the approved preliminary plan and plat, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall not approve said final plan and plat and may require the submittal of a
new application. The City Council may, however, approve variances from any
phasing schedule contained within the ordinance granting the IDD without
requiring a new application.
      2.   After the final plan and plat approval, the development of the
property shall be in substantial conformance with the approved final plan and
plat and IDD Ordinance. No changes shall be made to the approved final plan,
except upon written application to the appropriate body in accordance with the
following procedures: minor changes, dealing primarily in the location, siting
of utilities, location of streets and ways of public access and in the size and
location of open space, shall be reviewed and may be authorized by the City
Administrator as required by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at
the time that the final plan was approved if they are generally consistent with
the purpose and intent of the final plan.
      3.   All changes in land uses, rearrangement of lots, blocks, building
tracts and any major changes in the provision of open space and all other
changes in approved final plans must be made by the City Council. If an
amendment to the IDD is required then, an additional public hearing shall be
held at the Planning and Zoning Commission, after which the amendment and
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be sent to the
City Council for review and approval, approval with conditions or denial. 
(Ord. 96-647; amd. Ord. 05-866)
11-11-5: APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR DEVELOPMENT REVIEW:
The following criteria will be used to evaluate all proposals for development
under an IDD. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall, after the required
public hearing, set forth to the City Council the reason for recommendation and
said recommendation shall set forth with particularity what respects the
proposal are in the public interest, promoting the public health, safety and
welfare and including, but not limited to, findings of fact based on the
following:
   A.   In what respects is the proposed plan consistent with the City’s
Comprehensive Plan and the stated purpose and intent of the IDD regulations?
   B.   To what extent does the proposed plan depart from the requirements of
the City’s Zoning and Subdivision Control and Development Ordinances that are
otherwise applicable to the property, including, but not limited to: density,
bulk regulations and uses and the reasons why such departures are deemed to be
in the public interest and/or as a result of the physical topography of the
property and other circumstances unique to the property and not solely in the
interest of the developer?
   C.   To what extent and what accommodations are made for the unique
topographical and/or environmental features of the property, how are they
incorporated into the overall development and design of the property and
management plan for the property, while preserving and maintaining the
integrity and character of those features and using them for the overall
benefit of the public?
   D.   To what extent does the proposed plan provide adequate control for
vehicular traffic and pedestrian circulation, accommodation for and protection
of designated open space and further the amenities of light, air, recreation
and visual enjoyment?
   E.   Does the plan provide appropriate street connectivity and functional
connection among buildings within the development, such as pedestrian
connections, that promote the public interest and enhance the quality of life
of persons within the development?
   F.   Is there a continuity of scale amongst the buildings to promote visual
enjoyment, while maintaining maximum sunlight exposure?
   G.   The relationship and compatibility of the proposed plan to the adjacent
properties.
   H.   The desirability of the proposed plan with regard to physical
development, tax base and economic well being of the City.
   I.   The desirability of the proposed plan with regard to the burden placed
on City services and facilities in relation to the public benefits that will be
realized after the development of the property, including, but not limited to:
sewer, water, fire, police, schools, roads and making adequate provision for
those public services.
   J.   Is the plan in conformance with existing Federal, State and other local
regulations?
(Ord. 96-647; amd. Ord. 05-866)
CHAPTER 12: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section
11-12-1: Applicability To Parking And Loading
11-12-2: Off Street Parking Requirements
11-12-3: Off Street Loading Requirements
11-12-4: Tables
11-12-1: APPLICABILITY TO PARKING AND LOADING:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of the requirements in this chapter is to further
the appropriate provision and design of off street parking and loading areas
that will:
      1.   Provide access to land uses generating large traffic volumes in a
community dependent on automobile and truck transportation.
      2.   Foster safe and efficient circulation of vehicles and pedestrians
both on private property and on adjacent public streets.
      3.   Minimize nuisance in residential areas from on street parking of
large numbers of vehicles.
   B.   Applicability: The requirements in this chapter apply to any provision,
removal, enlargement or alteration of any off street parking or loading spaces
or areas accessory to any building or structure existing as of the effective
date of this title, or any new spaces or areas required to be provided under
this title or voluntarily provided in excess of the requirements herein. These
provisions shall likewise apply to parking that is the principal use of a
parcel.
   C.   Number And Size Of Required Facilities:
      1.   Numbers and sizes of off street parking and loading spaces shall be
provided for all new uses and existing uses that are enlarged, expanded or
changed, in conformance with the standards of section
11-12-4, “Tables”, of this chapter.
      2.   No additional spaces shall be required for expansion or change of an
existing use if the standards herein would require an increase over the spaces
already provided on the site of less than fifteen percent (15%).
   D.   Exception For C-4 Downtown Commercial District: In recognition of the
existing character and pedestrian orientation of the City’s older downtown
business areas, no off street parking or loading shall be required for
individual uses located entirely within the C-4 Downtown Commercial District.
This exception is made to minimize curb cuts disruptive to safe and efficient
pedestrian circulation and to encourage provision of off street parking in
centralized locations that serve multiple uses.
   E.   Preservation And Replacement Of Existing Spaces: No off street parking
or loading spaces either provided in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter or a previous ordinance or voluntarily provided in excess of what such
provisions require, shall be reduced in size or number below the requirements
herein, or further below such requirements, so long as the use they serve
continues in operation.
   F.   Submission Of Site Plan: A site plan showing off street parking and
loading facilities shall accompany an application for any of the following for
any use required to provide over four (4) off street parking spaces or one or
more off street loading spaces:
      1.   Building permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
      2.   Conditional use permit.
      3.   Rezoning.
      4.   Preliminary or final plat approval as provided in the Subdivision
Control Ordinance.
      5.   Variance from off street parking or loading requirements.
      6.   Integrated Design District preliminary or final plan.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
      7.   Use variance.
(Ord. 94-614)
The City Council may waive or defer this requirement in any instance in which
the specific use of the premises, and therefor the specific parking and loading
requirements applicable, are not yet determined, such as in the case of a
rezoning for an industrial subdivision. The site plan shall meet the
requirements of section
11-4-7, table 2 of this title, in the filing procedures section herein.
   G.   Storage And Repair: No storage of any kind, nor motor vehicle repair
work, except for emergency services, is permitted in any open off street
parking or loading area, except those provided for single-family detached or
attached dwellings.
   H.   Access: Each required off street parking space and loading space shall
open directly upon an aisle or driveway of such width and design as to provide
a safe and efficient means of vehicular access, and shall have vehicular access
to a public thoroughfare in a manner that will least interfere with traffic
movement thereupon. Dimensions of aisles and driveways shall be as provided in
section
11-12-4, table 1 of this chapter.
   I.   Grading: All parking and loading areas shall be graded for proper
drainage, and the volume of stormwater runoff that exceeds that existing prior
to the installation of such areas shall discharge into an approved drainage
system.
   J.   Maintenance: All parking and loading areas shall be maintained free of
dust, trash and debris. The surfacing, curbing, lighting fixtures, signage and
related appurtenances shall be maintained in good condition so long as such
areas are used for parking or loading purposes.
   K.   Landscaping And Screening: All parking and loading areas shall be
landscaped and screened as provided in chapter 13, “Landscaping And Screening”,
of this chapter.
   L.   Parking Reductions: The Zoning Administrator is authorized to approve
up to a ten percent (10%) reduction in the required number of off-street
parking spaces.
   M.   Rounding of Integers: Fractional spaces shall be rounded to the nearest
integer.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022)
11-12-2: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Use Of Parking Spaces: Except as otherwise provided herein, required
off street parking shall be used solely for parking for patrons, occupants,
guests, visitors or employees of the premises on the same lot.
   B.   Collective Provision: Required parking spaces for different uses may be
provided collectively. Except as provided herein for shopping centers, the
total number of spaces so provided shall not be less than the sum of the spaces
required for each separate use. No space shall serve as the required space for
more than one use.
   C.   Parking For Shopping Centers: The number of parking spaces required for
retail and personal service uses located in a shopping center shall be as
provided for shopping centers in section
11-12-4, table 4 of this chapter, rather than the sum of the spaces required
for the individual uses. Except that the number of spaces for restaurants,
taverns and drive-in facilities located in a shopping center, and for any
establishment occupying over fifty percent (50%) of the gross leasable area of
the center, shall be as provided in section
11-12-4, table 4 of this chapter, for these individual uses and shall be added
to the number of spaces required under the provisions for shopping centers for
the balance of the uses in the center.
   D.   Surfacing Of Parking Areas: All open off street parking areas and
related vehicular access drives and aisles shall be surfaced with a blacktop,
sealcoat, brick or concrete all weather pavement. Any expansion or extension of
such areas shall be surfaced with the same materials as the original
installation, except that no expansion of an existing gravel parking area shall
be permitted. Other than as provided for in this title, parking, displaying,
maintaining and/or storing vehicles on grass is prohibited.
   E.   Wheel Guards: Where more than four (4) parking spaces abut on a
sidewalk, wheel guards, bumper guards or curbs shall be installed with respect
to such spaces so as to prevent parked vehicles from extending beyond the
parking surface.
   F.   Fuel Sales In Parking Areas: Fuel or motor oil may be sold in an off
street parking area only to users thereof and only within a completely enclosed
building with no advertising sign visible from the outside, and with all fuel
pumps screened from the view of the street. No fuel or oil shall be sold in a
parking area in a Residential District.
   G.   Location Of Parking Spaces:
      1.   On Same Lot: Required off street parking for single-family detached
and attached dwellings shall be provided on the same lot as the use served.
Required parking for other uses may also be provided on a separate lot that is
in the same possession, by deed or lease, so long as the nearest point of the
parking area thereupon is within three hundred feet (300') walking distance of
the nearest entrance to the use served.
      2.   In Yards:
         a.   Required off street parking for single-family detached and
attached, and townhouse dwellings, may be located in front, side and rear
yards.
         b.   It may be located forward of the actual building line opposite a
front or corner side lot line the front of the dwelling faces, only if the
parking is located entirely on a driveway.
         c.   Required off street parking for other uses may be located in
required front, side and rear yards in all districts, subject to the
requirements for parking screening strips in chapter 13, “Landscaping And
Screening”, of this title.
         d.   No off street parking for any nonsingle-family residential use is
permitted within any required yard abutting property in an RS District. No
parking for any nonresidential use is permitted within any required yard
abutting property in any Residential District.
   H.   Parking Of Recreational Vehicles And Trailers:
      1.   Residential Districts:
         a.   Only one recreational vehicle or trailer shall be permitted in
the required front yard or required corner side yard, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
         b.   Trailers and recreational vehicles must be properly licensed.
         c.   Additional recreational vehicles and trailers shall be
maintained, kept, stored and/or parked on an approved solid parking surface no
less than the minimum dimensions of the vehicle or trailer being parked
thereon, but in no case shall the parking surface be less than nine feet by
eighteen feet (9' x 18').
         d.   Said parking surface shall be constructed of paved, permanent,
dust-free, homogenous material or brick pavers provided the parking surface
does not allow grass or other vegetation to grow within, on or above the solid
parking surface unless approved by the Zoning Administrator.
         e.   Said parking surface shall be required to connect to the right-
of-way.
      2.   Other Districts: There shall be no restrictions on parking of
recreational vehicles in Nonresidential Districts, other than those concerning
outdoor storage.
   I.   Parking Of Commercial Vehicles:
      1.   Residential Districts:
         a.   No commercial vehicle, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, exceeding nine feet (9') in height and twenty five feet
(25') in length may be parked and/or stored in a Residential Zoning District.
Exterior ladders and any appurtenances on top of the vehicle shall be excluded
from the height calculation. The following commercial vehicles are expressly
prohibited from being parked and/or stored in a Residential Zoning District:
stake bed trucks, box trucks, dump trucks, boom trucks, earth moving equipment,
tow trucks, step vans, semitractor cabs with or without a trailer, and any
vehicle in excess of ten thousand (10,000) pounds.
         b.   No more than one commercial vehicle, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, that does not exceed nine feet (9') in height and twenty
five feet (25') in length may be parked and/or stored on a premises in a
Residential Zoning District in accordance with the regulations for parking and/
or storing of vehicles in a Residential Zoning District contained in this
title.
      2.   Nonresidential Districts: No commercial vehicle, as defined in
section
11-3-1 of this title, may be parked or stored in a Commercial or Office
District, other than in a completely enclosed garage unless it is used in a
business located on the same premises or is being parked temporarily by a
customer, supplier, contractor or visitor, or for loading, unloading, moving,
or construction, maintenance or repair of the premises.
   J.   Driveways: Refer to title 12, chapter 9, “Driveways And Parking Lots”,
of this Code.
   K.   Bicycle Parking: All uses providing over twenty five (25) spaces shall
provide space and facilities for bicycle parking. This provision is not
applicable to properties zoned Business Park or Industrial District
classifications.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; Ord. 91-553; Ord. 10-1021; Ord. 10-1022; Ord. 12-
1059; Ord. 21-3, 1-18-2021)
11-12-3: OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Location Of Loading Spaces: All required loading spaces shall be
located:
      1.   On the same lot as the use to be served, except when collectively
provided as central loading facilities in conformance with the requirements
herein.
      2.   Twenty five feet (25') or more from the right-of-way lines of the
nearest point of intersection of any streets.
      3.   Outside of required front and side yards.
      4.   In such a manner that no portion of a vehicle shall project into a
street.
   B.   Surfacing Of Loading Areas: All open off street loading spaces and
related vehicular access drives and aisles shall be surfaced with a hard
surfaced, all weather pavement capable of bearing a live load of two hundred
(200) pounds per square foot.
   C.   Collective Provision: Loading spaces required for individual lots may
be collectively provided in central facilities; provided, that all of the
following requirements are met:
      1.   The number of spaces provided is not less than that required by the
total floor space for each category of use served.
      2.   Each lot served has direct access to the central facilities without
crossing streets at grade.
      3.   The central facilities are not more than five hundred feet (500')
from any lot they serve.
      4.   Any tunnel or ramp between the central facilities and any lot served
is at least seven feet (7') wide and has a vertical clearance of at least seven
feet (7').
      5.   Written covenants and easements approved by the City and recorded
with the County provide for the retention, maintenance and use of such
facilities.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
   D.   Loading Within Health Care District:
      1.   Sufficient space for loading and unloading shall be provided on each
building site to accommodate trucks that serve or are likely to serve that
building.
      2.   Improvements shall be designed and located on each building site so
that vehicles may not be loaded or unloaded on or from any street.
      3.   For buildings that are larger than thirty thousand (30,000) square
feet in area, loading docks may be exterior, but shall not face a public street
and shall be screened from view from the public street. If a loading dock faces
a Residential District it must be interior and enclosed.
      4.   For buildings that are less than thirty thousand (30,000) square
feet in area, exterior loading docks may face a public street, but shall be set
back a minimum of seventy feet (70') from the public right-of-way. Loading
docks that open only to a yard which is adjacent to a Residential District must
be interior and enclosed. Exterior loading docks shall be designed so that they
do not restrict pedestrian entrances.
(Ord. 97-672)
11-12-4: TABLES:
   TABLE 1
   PARKING AND LOADING DIMENSIONS
 Parking Space Loading Space
               For Tractor Trailers For Other Trucks2
                           Parking Space Loading Space
                                         For Tractor Trailers For Other Trucks2
Minimum depth in feet      181           60                   25
Minimum width in feet      9             14                   10
Minimum vertical clearance 7             14                   14
in feet
Minimum aisle width in                                       
feet:
Angle of spaces:                                             
0 degrees3                 13            -                    -
30 degrees                 12            -                    -
45 degrees                 13            -                    -
60 degrees                 18            -                    -
90 degrees                 24            -                    -
Driveway width4 in feet:                                     
Residential Districts:                                       
Minimum                    9                                  
Maximum                    20                                 
All other districts:                                         
Maximum                    36                                 
 
Notes:
      1.    Parallel parking spaces shall be 22 feet deep.
      2.    Permitted for uses not normally serviced by tractor-trailers.
      3.    0 degree parking refers to parallel parking.
      4.    Measured at outer edge of sidewalk. See also title 12, chapter 9 of
this Code.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 12-1059)
   TABLE 2
   REQUIRED NUMBER OF OFF STREET LOADING SPACES
Type Of Use Building Size In Square Feet1 Number Of Spaces2
Type Of Use             Building Size In Square Feet1 Number Of Spaces2
Cartage and express     40,000 - 100,000              2
Institutional uses      10,000 - 100,000              1
Manufacturing           5,000 - 40,000                1
Offices                 10,000 - 100,000              1
Public uses             10,000 - 100,000              1
                        5,000 - 10,000                1
Retail and service      10,001 - 25,000               2
                        25,001 - 40,000               3
                        40,001 - 100,000              4
Warehousing and storage 5,000 - 40,000                2
 
Notes:
      1.    Building size measured by net floor area, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title.
      2.    1 additional space shall be provided for every 100,000 square feet
over 100,000 square feet, with fractional spaces rounded to the nearest
integer.
No space shall at the same time fully or partially serve to meet the
requirement for both off street parking and loading facilities.
Uses smaller than the smallest values given for each category, shall be
provided with other receiving facilities for motor vehicles judged adequate by
the City Council.
Requirements of this table shall not apply to C-4 Downtown Commercial District.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. 2019 Code)
               TABLE 3
   REQUIRED PARKING SPACES FOR RESIDENTIAL AND LODGING USES
Residential - Minimum Required Spaces Per Dwelling Unit
Single-family attached/detached dwelling 2
Multi-family dwelling                    1.5
Dwelling above non-residential first     1
floor
Community residence                      0.5 per bed
Lodging - Minimum Required Spaces Per Dwelling Unit
Apartment hotel1                         1
Bed and breakfast                        1 per dwelling unit + 2 for
                                         establishment owner
Boarding house1                          1
Hotel1                                   1
Motel1                                   1
Residential Care Facility - Minimum Required Spaces Per Dwelling Unit
Assisted living facility                 0.5
Independent living facility              1
Nursing home or hospice                  0.5 per bed
Memory care facility                     0.5 per bed
 
Notes:
   1.    Plus 1 parking space per employee on largest shift, plus 1 space for
each business vehicle employed by an establishment.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022)
         TABLE 4
   REQUIRED PARKING SPACES FOR
   NONRESIDENTIAL AND NONLODGING USES
 Minimum Number of Required Spaces1
 Per Employee at Largest Per 1,000 Square Feet Net Per Person Design Capacity
 Shift                   Floor Area                of Facility
                               Minimum Number of Required Spaces1
                               Per Employee at Per 1,000       Per Person
                               Largest Shift   Square Feet Net Design Capacity
                                               Floor Area      of Facility
Adult-use cannabis craft
grower, adult-use cannabis
infuser organization or
infuser, adult-use cannabis    1               1.5             See note 2
processing organization or
processor, adult-use cannabis
transporting organization or
transporter
Adult-use cannabis dispensing  -               3               -
organization
Assembly uses                  -               -               0.25
                                                               Plus, stacking
                                                               spaces equal to
                                                               5 times the
                                                               capacity of the
                                                               car wash. The
                                                               capacity shall
Auto laundry, carwash facility 1               -               be calculated as
                                                               the number of
                                                               vehicles that
                                                               can be
                                                               accommodated at
                                                               any phase of the
                                                               washing or
                                                               waxing process
Service station                1               -               Plus 2 per
                                                               service bay
                                               1 per 1,000 of
                                               showroom, plus
Vehicle sales                  -               2 per service   -
                                               bay, plus
                                               accessory uses
                                                               Plus 5 stacking
Bank or financial institution  -               3               spaces per
                                                               drive- in window
Contractor or construction     1               -               Plus business
office                                                         vehicle parking
Department store               -               3               -
Furniture and appliance sales  -               1.5             -
or repair store
Industrial:                                                   
   Cartage and express firms1               -               -
   Manufacturing, research, 1               1.5             See note 2
testing
   Radio or TV station or   1               -               -
studio
   Warehousing and wholesali1g              0.5             See note 2
Institutional uses             -               -               0.25
Miscellaneous:                                                
   Animal hospital          -               2.5             -
   Child daycare center     -               2               -
   Public utility and servic1               -               -
Mortuary (funeral home)        1               10               
Office building                -               2.5             -
Other retail and personal                                      Plus 5 stacking
service                        -               3               spaces per
                                                               drive- in window
Body art establishment                        3                
Recreational:                                                 
   Bowling alley:                                          
                                                               5 per lane plus
      Per lane           -               -               all other
                                                               accessory use
                                                               required parking
      Restaurant/bar     -               3               -
   Indoor theater           -               -               0.33
   Skating rink             -               -               0.25
   Swimming pool            -               -               0.25
Restaurant:                                                   
                                               4 per 1,000 SF
                                               or 1 per every
   Carry out only           -               4 seats,        -
                                               whichever is
                                               greater
                                               4 per 1,000 SF
                                               or 1 per every  Plus 5 stacking
   Drive in and eat in      -               4 seats,        spaces per
                                               whichever is    drive- in window
                                               greater
                                               4 per 1,000 SF
                                               or 1 per every
   Eat in, no drive in      -               4 seats,        -
                                               whichever is
                                               greater
Shopping center:                                              
   Under 400,000 square feet-               4               -
   400,000 - 600,000 square -               4.5             -
feet
   Over 600,000 square feet -               5               -
   Supermarket or food store-               5               -
                                               3 plus, 1 per
Self-storage, mini- warehouse                 50 storage       
                                               units
                                               4 per 1,000 SF
                                               or 1 per every
Tavern                         -               4 seats,        -
                                               whichever is
                                               greater
 
Notes:
   1.    1 space for each business vehicle employed by an establishment on the
premises shall be provided in addition to the number of spaces specified.
   2.    Use of employment standard or floor space standard, whichever is
greater. If employment is not known when plans are drawn, floor space standard
may be used. If upon occupancy the employment standard yields a greater number
of required spaces, the City Council may require the provision of additional
parking before granting a Certificate of Occupancy.
   3.    Parking for uses not listed shall be as provided for the most similar
listed use.
   4.    Requirements of this table do not apply to C-4 Downtown Commercial
District.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 06-885; Ord. 12-1059; Ord. 19-1206, 10-7-
2019; 2019 Code; Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022; Ord. 23-20, 4-3-2023)
CHAPTER 13: LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
Section
11-13-1: Purpose
11-13-2: Types Of Landscaping And Screening Required
11-13-3: Landscape Plan Submittal Requirements
11-13-4: Tree Preservation
11-13-5: Landscape Materials
11-13-6: Installation Procedures
11-13-7: Maintenance Of Landscaping
11-13-8: Conditional Uses
11-13-9: Plantings List
11-13-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the requirements in this chapter is to provide for landscaping
and screening of parking and other outdoor areas that will:
(Ord. 91-553)
   A.   Protect residential environments from effects of more intensive
adjacent uses;
   B.   Protect users of parking areas from excessive wind, glare and
temperature extremes;
   C.   Reduce the adverse effects on public streets and adjacent properties of
noise, blowing dust and debris and motor vehicle headlight glare;
   D.   Discourage unsafe access to and circulation within off street parking
areas;
   E.   Allow for a degree of flexibility to accommodate property owners based
upon unique site specific circumstances;
   F.   Contribute to improved community appearance and maintenance of property
values;
   G.   Promote environmental conservation; and
   H.   Be functional with deciduous trees providing natural shading for
windows in the summer and evergreen trees provided year round screening and
protection from the winter wind.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 20-20, 5-4-2020)
11-13-2: TYPES OF LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REQUIRED:
   A.   Residential Screening Strip: The purpose of the residential screening
strip is to provide a healthy buffer between residential uses and more intense
commercial or industrial uses.
TABLE 1
ZONING DISTRICTS REQUIRING RESIDENTIAL SCREENING STRIPS
 
If The Below Zoning                       Screen Strip Area For
District Located    This Zoning District. Side And Rear Yards   Minimum Height
Adjacent To...
O 1-2, C 1-5, I 1-2 E, RS, 1-4, RA-1, RM  5-foot                6 feet
                    1-2
RA-1, RM 1-2        E, RS, 1-4            5-foot                6 feet
 
Note:
   1.   Applies also when yard is adjacent to an improved or unimproved alley
right-of-way that is adjacent to property in these districts.
TABLE 2
RESIDENTIAL SCREEN STRIP DESIGN STANDARDS
 
The residential screening strip shall consist of a privacy fence and a landscaped
barrier.
Privacy    1.   A 6-foot high opaque masonry wall (stone, stucco, or brick), privacy
fence/     fence, or dense evergreen hedge shall be installed in addition to the
opaque     landscaped screening unless adjacent to a public road right-of-way.
screening  2.   Shall be along 100% of the yard length.
           A.   A 5-foot wide landscaped perimeter shall be installed.
Landscaped B.   Shall be along 100% of the yard length.
screening  C.   Trees shall be planted to provide a continuous canopy at maturity.
           D.   Shrubs shall be planted on average of 1 for every 3 feet of yard
           length.
 
   Note:
   1.   The Zoning Administrator has the ability to waive these provisions if
the administration of the code is deemed excessive based on the uniqueness of
the site and the intent of the ordinance has been met.
   B.   Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping: The intent of parking lot perimeter
landscaping is to screen head lights from view from the right-of-way and from
other adjoining properties. The Zoning Administrator has the ability to waive
these provisions if the administration of the code is deemed excessive based on
the uniqueness of the site and the intent of the ordinance has been met.
TABLE 3
PARKING LOT PERIMETER LANDSCAPING DESIGN STANDARDS
 
Screening   Landscaped     Landscape     Shade Tree Shade Tree    Landscape
Strip Width Screening      Base          Canopy     Plantings     Screening
            Composition                  Height1                  Length2
            Contiguous
            row/canopy of
            evergreen
            screening or
            other          Any
            appropriate    combination              An average of
            substitute as  of 2 other               1 shade tree
            determined by  shrub species 7-feet     per 30 lineal 100% of
5 feet      the Zoning     in addition   minimum    feet of       parking lot
            Administrator. to the                   parking lot   perimeter
                          evergreen                perimeter
            A minimum of   screening
            3-feet up to a
            maximum of 4-
            feet in
            height/width
            at maturity
 
   Note:
      1.   At installation in order to prevent sight line obstruction.
      2.   Excluding ingress/egress points, site triangle, and other areas
determined by the Zoning Administrator to be inappropriate.
   C.   Parking Islands: The intent of parking islands is to provide shade
trees on hot summer days, reduce the effects of the urban heat island by
reducing paved surfaces and visually breaking up the expanse of asphalt. All
rows of parking spaces shall be terminated by a parking lot island or landscape
area. The Zoning Administrator has the ability to waive the termination island
or parking island design standards based upon the uniqueness of the site.
TABLE 4
PARKING ISLAND DESIGN STANDARDS
 
Parking Island Area Spacing1             Shade Tree Planting Shade Tree Canopy
                                                             Height
8' x 15'            1 parking island per 1 per island        7 feet minimum
                    20 spaces
 
   Note:
   1.   For parking lot rows greater than or equal to 40 spaces.
   or
   Unique designs that incorporate stormwater and green infrastructure best
management practices from a nationally recognized or accredited institution may
substitute parking island requirements. The Zoning Administrator has the
ability to determine if a unique design meets the intent of the ordinance.
   D.   Site Landscaping (Interior Site Landscape In Addition To Any Screening
Strips): A landscaped area equal in size to at least ten percent (10%) of a
parking lot area shall be planted onsite using a mixture of plants. Building
and parking lot perimeter landscaping can be credited towards the ten percent
(10%) requirement. The Zoning Administrator has the right to reduce this
requirement based upon the uniqueness of the site.
   E.   Building Perimeter Landscaping: Building perimeter landscaping is the
combination of curbing and landscape materials which helps to break up the base
of a building. It also incorporates pedestrian walkways and a safe waiting area
outside the main entry doors. Some examples of how building perimeter
landscaping may be incorporated into a site are included below. Building
perimeter landscaping is not required at loading areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2979.png]
 
Typical building perimeter landscaping around a building
   1.   Building Perimeter Landscaping Minimum Design Standards:
TABLE 5
BUILDING PERIMETER LANDSCAPING MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
Building Size Front Side Rear
Building Size    Front                Side                 Rear
Building <10,000
square feet      5-foot wide
Building >10,000 landscaped perimeter 5-foot wide          5-foot wide
square feet                          landscaped perimeter landscaped perimeter
                 Tree planting                             
                 requirement          25% of total side    5% of total lineal
Building >80,000                     lineal feet          feet landscaped
square feet      30% of total front   landscaped            
                 lineal feet
                 landscaped

Building Perimeter Landscape Design
Composed of at least 3 different plant or shrub species. The species of plant
shall be proportional. The remainder of space shall be composed of living plant
material.
Trees            Caliper At Maturity  Number Of Trees      Design
Tree planting                         1 per 30 lineal feet It is recommended
requirement      3 inches minimum     of building frontage that trees be
                                                           grouped in clusters
 
   2.   Drive-Thru Window Side Landscape Exception: Any building or site which
has a drive-thru or drive-up window shall not be required to meet the above
building perimeter landscaping requirements for that side. The landscape
perimeter shall be allowed to taper down to the window location if a five (5)
foot perimeter is not feasible. At least one species of shrub must be used. At
the window location a minimum six (6) inch curbing shall be provided to
distinguish the edge of the building from the pavement.
   Examples Of Building Perimeter Landscaping
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2981.png]
 
   Front Areas With Walkway And Landscape
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2977.png]
 
   3.   Mechanical Equipment (Rooftop And Ground Equipment): Includes all
mechanical equipment as defined herein. All cooling towers, mechanical
equipment or appurtenances, vents, intakes or stacks or other rooftop
structures, shall be screened by a parapet wall, solid metal sight screening or
similar systems designed for use as screening of these types of devices.
TABLE 6
SCREENING OF MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT (ROOFTOP AND GROUND EQUIPMENT)
 
Screen Required      From Proposed Zoning    To Existing Adjacent Zoning1
                     (Subject Property)
75% of height3 of    O-1-2, C 1-5, BP, I 1-2 O-1-2, C 1-5, BP, I 1-2
mechanical equipment
50%2 of height3 of   RA-1, RM 1-2            E, RS 1-4, RA-1, RM 1-2
mechanical equipment
50%2 of height3 of   O-1-2, C 1-5, BP, I 1-2 O-1-2, C 1-5, BP, I 1-2
mechanical equipment
 
   Note:
      1.   Adjacent zoning includes properties with yards abutting or across an
improved or unimproved street or alley from any boundary of the subject
property.
      2.   A minimum of a forty eight inches (48") high screen or fifty percent
(50%) of the height of the mechanical equipment, whichever is greater, shall be
required.
         (Ord. 14-1683)
      3.   Height shall be measured from the base of the equipment or structure
to the tallest point including any antenna or any ancillary appurtenances,
whether temporarily and/or permanently affixed/attached.
      Additional Mechanical Screening Provisions
      1.   All rooftop and ground screening, other than landscaping, shall be
of a material and color compatible with the materials used on the exterior of
the building.
      2.   Ground screening shall consist of a landscaped strip including
evergreen trees and shrubs, which may be combined with a solid fence or wall.
      3.   Chain link-style fencing is prohibited.
      4.   A three foot (3') clearance shall be provided around all equipment
to allow access and maintenance.
      5.   The Zoning Administrator has the ability to waive or lessen
mechanical screening requirements based on the uniqueness of the site, the
intent of the ordinance has been met, or if enforcement of the ordinance would
cause excessive financial hardship.
      4.   Detention Areas: Detention areas shall be designed per the City’s
Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance in terms of retaining or
detaining water and all engineering requirements. However, it shall be noted
that detention areas should be designed to appear as natural as possible.
Landscaping shall be required around the perimeter of all retention and
detention basins, which shall consist of trees, shrubs and emergent plantings
in a quantity, species and arrangement that will create an aesthetically
pleasing and ecologically functional environment. All landscaping shall conform
with the approved landscape list. Plantings around basins shall be salt
tolerant. Such landscaping shall be in conformance with Best Management
Practices as determined by the City.
      5.   Natural Areas: Natural areas shall be maintained and protected by
all applicable local, state and federal laws and requirements.
      6.   Refuse Enclosures: Refuse enclosures shall be required for all
buildings containing three or more dwelling units and all nonresidential-zoned
property. Properties located within Business Park and Health Care Districts
shall comply with refuse enclosure requirements outlined in Office, Industrial,
Business Park, Agricultural and Mining Overlay, and Health Care Districts.
         a.   All refuse shall be stored within an enclosed building, or if
located outside of an enclosed building all refuse and refuse containers shall
be screened on all sides by a solid wall or fence (chain link fencing is
prohibited) a minimum of six (6) feet in height. If a solid wall is utilized
the materials of the wall shall be designed of durable materials with finishes
and colors similar to the principal building. Refuse shall not be visible from
outside the refuse enclosure. All enclosures shall be accessible by vehicles
which will be required to access the containers. Refuse disposal areas shall
not be located between the front or corner side lot line and the principal
building.
         b.   Any site addition, alternation or modification, which requires
the re-location of an existing refuse disposal area, which does not comply with
the provisions of this chapter, must be brought into compliance with the new
ordinance provisions outlined herein.
   F.   Street Plantings: Street plantings must conform to the Subdivision
Control Ordinance Section 6.12 Landscaping and the Technical Specifications
Manual, Section I, Parkway Trees.
   G.   Business Park And Health Care District Landscape Requirements:
      1.   Curbing In Parking Areas: All parking island strips and parking
perimeters shall be separated on all sides from the parking surface by concrete
curbing.
      2.   Uses Requiring Landscaping Or Screening: A minimum of five percent
(5%) of the parking area in industrial uses and ten percent (10%) in all other
uses shall consist of landscaping. Any landscaped strip required hereunder may
be credited toward this requirement. A screen for off-street loading shall be a
minimum of six (6) feet high.
      3.    Sizes of minimum plant materials at planting:
         a.   Shade Tree: A deciduous tree with a minimum caliper of three
inches (3").
         b.   Conifer: A coniferous tree with a minimum six foot (6') height.
         c.   Ornamental: A deciduous tree or large shrub with a minimum
caliper of two inches (2") or minimum height of six feet (6').
         d.   Building Perimeter Landscaping: In addition to any before
mentioned building perimeter landscaping requirements for the building, health
care buildings shall provide a minimum six foot (6') walk and seven foot (7')
wide landscape area for safe drop off for patients.
   H.   Sign Landscaping: An effective monument sign not only draws the
public’s attention to the business located at that site, but also adds to the
aesthetic appeal of the site. Monument signs attract a significant amount of
attention so the use of strong landscape design principles, which incorporate a
variety of plant materials and provide visual interest throughout the year,
should be used.
      1.   A sign landscaping plan drawn to scale must be submitted as part of
a sign permit application for all monument signs.
      2.   For every one (1) square foot of gross sign area, there shall be
provided a minimum of two (2) square feet of landscape planting area including
both plant material and grasses and shall be located within five (5) feet of
the base of the sign. The base landscaping shall be composed of at least three
(3) different species of plant or shrub.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. MC-91-553; Ord. MC-97-672; Ord. 14-1683;
Ord. 20-20, 5-4-2020; Ord. 21-38, 7-19-2021; Ord. 25-21, 4-7-2025)
11-13-3: LANDSCAPE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   When Required: A Landscape Plan shall be filed with an application for:
      1.   Rezoning.
      2.   Conditional use permit.
      3.   Any variance from landscaping or screening requirements.
      4.   Integrated Design District preliminary or final plan approval.
      5.   Preliminary or final plat approval as provided in the Subdivision
Control Ordinance.
      6.   Any development, as defined in the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
      7.   Building permit or Certificate of Occupancy.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
      8.   Use variance.
(Ord. 94-614)
      9.   Freestanding monument sign application.
   B.   Waiver: The City Council may waive or defer this requirement in any
instance in which the specific use of the premises, and therefor the specific
landscaping and screening requirements applicable, are not yet determined, such
as in the case of a rezoning for an industrial subdivision.
   C.   Content Of Landscape Plan: The Landscape Plan shall include:
      1.   The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures,
parking lots and drives, roadways and right-of-way, sidewalks, bike paths,
ground signs, refuse disposal areas, bicycle parking areas, fences,
freestanding electrical equipment, utility easements, conservation easements,
lighting, tot lots and other recreational facilities, proposed locations of
stormwater inlets, valve vaults, hose bibs, manholes, hydrants, Fire Department
Siamese connections and other structural features as determined necessary by
the Zoning Administrator;
      2.   The location, quantity, size, root ball condition and name, both
scientific and common, of all proposed plant materials, and existing plant
materials to be preserved, as well as boundaries of all planting beds;
      3.   The location of all proposed berming and drainage swales, indicating
contours at one foot (1') intervals, percent of slope and the location of all
proposed drainage features with natural vegetation, including, but not limited
to, rain gardens and other stormwater detention and infiltration areas;
      4.   Specification and boundaries of all natural landscaping areas,
including prairie, woodland and wetland plant communities, identified by
specific community type and by scientific and common names of all species;
      5.   Elevations and details of all fences, bridges, retaining walls or
other decorative features proposed for location on site shall be included. The
details shall include, but are not limited to, materials, colors, styles and
sizes;
      6.   Landscape data box, which shall include the required and proposed
calculations for the following:
         a.   Total area in square feet of the lot or tract to be developed;
         b.   Total square feet and percentage of landscape area between the
buildings and any public or private street;
         c.   Total square feet and percentage of the area being landscaped;
         d.   Total number of trees required and provided, their common and
scientific names and their type; evergreen, shade or ornamental;
         e.   Total number of shrubs required and proposed, their common and
scientific name and their type; evergreen or deciduous;
         f.   Total area to be turf; and
         g.   Total area to be nonliving material;
      7.   Delineate the different landscape and screening areas, i.e., parking
lot screening strip, residential screening strip and right-of-way landscaping.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 20-20, 5-4-2020)
11-13-4: TREE PRESERVATION:
   A.   City Legislation: The City has adopted a Tree Preservation Ordinance,
title 8, chapter 3, article C of this Code.
   B.   Reduction Permitted: The City Council may reduce the number of new
trees required in response to preservation by a developer of any existing trees
on the site as follows:
 
Trunk Diameter Of Existing Tree To Be Reduction In Number Of New Trees Required
Preserved1
   4 - 10 inches                   1 tree
   11 - 20 inches                  2 trees
   Over 20 inches                  4 trees
 
   Note:
      1.    Measured at 54 inches above grade level ([dbh] the diameter at
breast height).
   C.   Protection Of Existing Trees: To ensure that existing trees are not
damaged during development:
      1.   Protective physical barriers shall be maintained around such trees
that prevent the passage of heavy machinery under the drip line.
      2.   No equipment, materials, fill or debris shall be stored under the
drip line except as may be necessary for a reasonable time if no other storage
area is available.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 20-20, 5-4-2020)
11-13-5: LANDSCAPE MATERIALS:
   A.   Compilation: The City has compiled a list of recommended, acceptable
and prohibited landscape.
   B.   Caliper: All on site required trees must be a minimum of two inch (2")
caliper (dbh) or six foot (6') coniferous. All street planting must conform to
the Subdivision Control Ordinance.
   C.   Materials Used: Living landscape materials used shall be healthy, hardy
and drought resistant; be suitable for the climate and environmental influences
on the site, such as exposure to sun, wind, water, heat, automobile exhaust
fumes and road salt; be compatible with the slope of the site, existing
vegetation to be preserved and utilities above or below ground level. Where
appropriate, landscape materials shall be protected from damage from pedestrian
or vehicular traffic by tree grates, pavers or other measures. Proposed plant
materials shall be compatible with Zone 5 conditions as defined by the United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Hardiness Zone Designations.
   D.   When Curbing Required: All “parking island strips” and “parking
screening strips” shall be separated on all sides from the parking surface by
curbing. The Zoning Administrator has the ability to waive curbing requirements
if a development is incorporating best management practices for stormwater
drainage and green infrastructure.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 20-20, 5-4-2020)
11-13-6: INSTALLATION PROCEDURES:
All living landscaping materials shall be installed in conformance with the
most current procedures established by the American Association of Nurserymen.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 20-20, 5-4-2020)
11-13-7: MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Responsibility; Replacement: The owner, occupant, tenant and the
respective agent of each, if any, shall be responsible for the maintenance,
repair and replacement of all landscaping and screening so as to preserve at
least the same quantity and quality as the remainder of the existing material
on site. If a mature tree is lost, a replacement tree of at least one-fourth
inch (1/4") per one inch (1") of caliper lost, but shall not be less than a
four inch (4") minimum. For example, a twenty inch (20") tree requires a
replacement by a five inch (5") caliper tree.
   B.   Maintenance; Guarantee: All living and nonliving landscaping, including
fences, walls and ornamental lighting, shall be maintained in a good condition
at all times, so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall
be kept free from refuse and debris. Any dead vegetation shall be promptly
replaced with healthy living plantings. The developer shall provide to the City
a two (2) year guarantee on all landscape materials in the form of a letter of
credit.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 20-20, 5-4-2020)
11-13-8: CONDITIONAL USES:
Certain conditional uses may be required to provide landscaping or screening
that exceeds the requirements of this chapter. Special screening requirements
for surface mining operations shall be as provided in the surface mining
provisions, chapter 18 of this title.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 20-20, 5-4-2020)
11-13-9: PLANTINGS LIST:
This list is not an exhaustive list of all plant materials that will be allowed
in the City. A registered landscape architect may propose additional species to
staff as long as they detail the plant’s specific properties. This list is
broken out into three (3) sections; recommended species, approved species and
undesirable species. The recommended species were selected to be used in areas
along roadways or detention areas because they are salt tolerant and root
friendly. The approved species were selected because they are native plants
which grow well in the Illinois climate and may also be salt tolerant. The
undesirable species are listed because they have problems such as spines, or
are an invasive species.
   A.   Recommended Street Trees:
   TABLE 8
   RECOMMENDED STREET TREES
Small:
 Amelanchier x grandiflora (Apple Serviceberry)
 Carnus mas (Cornelian Cherry Dogwood)
 Ceris Canadensis (Eastern Redbud)
 Crategus crusgalli var. inermis (Cockspur Hawthorn)
 Crategus virdis (Winter King Hawthorn)
 Prunus virginiana ‘Schubert’ (Canada Red Chokeberry)
 Syringa pekinesis (Peking Lilac):
  Malus species:
  Adams
  Donald wyman
  Prairiefire
  Sugar Tree
 Syringa reticulate cv. (Japanese Tree Lilac-Ivory Silk)
Medium:
 Carylys colorna (Turkish Hazelnut)
 Cercidiphyllum jajponicum (Katsuratree)
 Ostrya virginiana (Hophornbeam)
 Phellodendron amurense ‘Macho’ (Amur Corktree)
 Prunus maackii (Amur Cherry)
 Prunus sargenti (Sargent Cherry)
 Tilia cordata (Littleaf Linden)
 Tilia cordata cv.:
  Chancellor
  Glenleven
  Greenspire
  Tures
 Tilia Cuchlora (Redmond Linden)
Large:
 Acer freemanii (Armstrong Maple)
 Acer miyabei (State Street Miyabe Maple)
 Acer nigrum (Black Maple)
 Acer platanoides cv. (Norway Maple):
  Columnare
  Crimson Sentry
  Easy Street
 Acer rubrum cv. (Red Maple):
  Autumn Flame
  Bowhall
  Franks Red
  October Glory
 Acer saccharum cb. (Sugar Maple):
  Green Mountain
 Celtis laevigata (Sugar Hackberry)
 Celtis occidentalis (Hackberry)
 Ginko biloba cv. (Ginko):
  Autumn gold
  Princeton Sentry
 Gleditsia tricanthos var. inermis cv. (Honey Locust):
  Moraine
  Skyline
 Glymnocladus diocicus (Kentucky Coffee Tree)
 Ulmus cv.:
  Homestead and New Horizon Elm
  Pioneer and Regal Elm
 Ulmus Morton (Accolade Elm)
 
Please see the Subdivision Control and Development Ordinance for planting and
additional street tree requirements.
   B.   Tree Species Approved For Planting On Private Property Within The
Boundary Of The City of McHenry:
   TABLE 9
   TREES SPECIES APPROVED FOR PLATING N PRIVATE PROPERTY
      Acer ginnala (Amur Maple)
      Acer griseum (Paperbank Maple)
      Acer platanoides (Norway Maple)
      Aesculus glabra (Ohio Buckeye)
      Aesculus Hippocastenum (Common Horsechestnut)
      Alnus glutinosa (European Black Alder)
      Betula nigra (Riverbirch)
      Betula platyphylla ‘whitespire’ (Whitespire Birch)
      Carpus caroliniana (American Hornbeam)
      Carya cordiformis (Bitternut Hickory)
      Carya ovate (Shagbark Hickory)
      Catalpa speciosa (Catalpa)
      Cornus alterni folia (Pagoda Dogwood)
      Juglous nigra (Black Walnut)
      Juniperus virginiana
      Larix decidas (European Larch)
      Larix lariocina (American Larch)
      Liquidambar styraciflua (Sweetgum)
      Liriodendram tulipifera (Tulip Tree)
      Magnolia acuminate (Cucumber Tree Magnolia)
      Magnolia stellata (Star Magnolia)
      Magnolia x soulangiana (Saucer Magnolia)
      Malus supp. (Flowering Crabs)
      Metasequoia glyptostroboides (Dawn Redwood)
      Morus rubra (Red Mulberry)
      Nyssa sylvatica (Black Tupelo)
      Picea ables (Norway Spruce)
      Picea glance (White Spruce)
      Piceu glance densata (Black Hills Spruce)
      Pinus cembra (Swiss Stone Pine)
      Pinus strobes (Eastern White Pine)
      Platanus cerifolia (London Planetree)
      Pseudosuga menziesli (Douglas Fir)
      Pyrus calleryana (Callery Pear)
      Quercus acutissima (Sawtooth Oak)
      Quercus alba (White Oak)
      Quercus bicolor (Swamp White Oak)
      Quercus coccinea (Scarlet Oak)
      Quercus imbricario (Shingle Pear)
      Quercus macrocarpa (Burr Oak)
      Quercus muehlengergii (Chinkapin Oak)
      Quercus prinus (Chestnut Oak)
      Quercus robur (English Oak)
      Quercus rubra (Rec Oak)
      Querus velutina (Black Oak)
      Taxodium distichum (Bald Cypress)
      Thuja occidentalis (White Cedar)
      Tilia Americana (Basswood)
      Zelkova serrata (Japanese Zeklova)
   C.   Approved Recommended Shrubs:
   TABLE 10
   RECOMMENDED SHRUBS
Small - 5' tall:
 Alpine Currant
 Anthony Waterer Spirea
 Black Chokecherry
 Cranberry Cotoneaster
 Dwarf Burning Bush
 Dwarf Weigela
 Fragrant Gro-low Sumac
 Gold Flame Spirea
 Meadowsweet
 New Jersey Tea
 Rockspray Cotoneaster
 St John’s Wart
 Shrub Roses
 Shrubby Cinquefoil
 Slender Dentzia
Intermediate - 5' - 8' tall:
 Buttonbush
 Compact Winged Enonymus
 Judd Viburnum
 Koren Spice Virburnum
 Meadowlark Forsythia
 Miss Kim Lilac
 Pink Princess Old-fashioned Weigela
 Red Prince Old-fashioned Weigela
 Spreading Cotoneaster
Large - 8' tall:
 American Bladdernut
 American Hazelnut
 American Witchazel
 Arrowwood Viburnum
 Blackhaw Viburnum
 Burning Bush
 Elderberry
 Gray Dogwood
 Highbush Cranberry
 Nannyberry Viburnum
 Pussy Willow
 Red Chokeberry
 Silky Dogwood
 Spicebush
 
   D.   Approved Plants And Grasses:
   TABLE 11
   APPROVED PLANTS AND GRASSES
Awl-Fruited Sedge (Carex Stipata)
Bebb’s Sedge (Carex Bebbii)
Big Bluestem (Andropogon Gerardii)
Black Eyed Susan (Rudbeckia Hirta or Goldstrum)
Blue False Indigo (Baptisia Australis)
Bluejoint Reedgrass (Calamagrostis)
Blunt Spikerush (Eleocharis Obtusa)
Bottlebrush Grass (Hystrix Patula)
Bottlebrush Sedge (Carex Comosa)
Buffalograss (Buchlow Dactyloides)
Butterfly Weed (Asclepias)
Canada Wildrye (Elymus Canadensis)
Common Bur Sedge (Carex Grayii)
Common burred (Sparganium Eurycarpum)
Common Wood Reed (Cinna Arundinacea)
Common Wood Sedge (Carex Blanda)
Cream False Indigo (Babtisa Bracteata)
Creeping Spikerush (Eleocharis Smallii)
Crested Sedge (Carex Cristatella)
Curly-Styled Wood Sedge (Carex Rosea)
Dark Green Rush (Scirpus Atrovirens)
Dark Scaled Sedge (Carex Buxbaumii)
Fowl Managrass (Glyceris Striata)
Fox Sedge (Carex Vulpinoidea)
Groundnut (Apios Americana)
Hardstem Bubrush (Scirpus Acutus)
Heartleaf Golden Alexander (Zizia Aurea)
Heath (Aster Ericoides)
Hoary Vervain (Verbena Stricta)
Hop Sedge (Carex Lupulina)
Indiangrass (Sorghastrum Nutans)
Kentucky Bluegrass (Poa Pratensis)
Lake Sedge (Carex Lacustris)
Lanceleaf Coreopsis (Coreopsis Lanceloata)
Little Blue Stem (Schizachyrium Scoparium)
Little Bluestem (Andropogon Scoparius)
Marsh Spikerush (Eleocharis Palustris)
Penn’s Sedge (Carex Pensylvanica)
Periwinkle (Vinca Minor)
Porcupine Grass (Stipa Spartea)
Porcupine Sedge (Carex Hystericina)
Prairie Brome (Bromus Kalmii)
Prairie Cordgrass (Spartina Pectinata)
Prairie Dropseed (sporobolus Heterolepis)
Prairie Hunegrass (Loeleria Cristata)
Prairie Smoke (Geum Triflorum)
Prairie Switchgrass (Panicum Virgatum)
Purple Coneflower (Echincea Purpurea)
Purple Prairie Clover (Dalea Purpurea)
Red-Rooted Spikerush (Eleocharis Calva)
Rice Cutgrass (Leersia Orysoides)
River Bulrush (Scirpus Fluviatilis)
Riverbank Grape (Vitis Riparia)
Rough Blazing Star (Liatris Aspera)
Showy Goldenrod (Solidago Speciosa)
Showy Penstemon/Beardtongue (Penstemen Grandiflorus)
Sideouts Grama Grass (Boutelous Curtipendula)
Silky Wildrye (Elymus Villosus)
Sky Blue (Aster Asureus)
Slender Spikerush (Eleocharis Acicularis)
Slender Wedge Grass (Sphenopholis Intermedia)
Slender Wheatgrass (Agropyron Trachycaulum)
Smooth (Aster Laevis)
Soft Rush (Juncus Effusus)
Softstem Bulrush (Scirpus Validus)
Stiff Goldenrod (Solidago Rigida)
Streambank Rye (Elymus Riparius)
Sweet Glag (Acorus Calamus)
Three-Square Bulrush (Scirpus Americanus)
Torrey’s Rush (Juncus Torreyi)
Tussock Sedge (Carex Stricta)
Virgin’s Bower (Clematis Virginiana)
Virginia Creeper (Parthenocissus Quinquefolia)
Virginia Wildrye (Elymus Virginicus)
Wild Columbine (Aquilegia Candensis)
Woodland Brome (Bromus Pubescens)
Woodland Lily (Lillium)
Woolgrass (Scirpus Cyperinus)
   E.   Undesirable Trees And Plants:
   TABLE 12
   UNDESIRABLE TREES AND PLANTS
Amur Honeysuckle (Lonicera Maackii)
Autumn Olive (Elaeagnus Unbellata)
Bird’s-Foot Trefoil (Lotus Corniculatas)
Bittersweet (Solanum Dulcamara)
Black Locust (Robinia Pseudo-Acacia)
Bull Thistle (Cirsium Vulgare)
Canada Thistle (Cirsium Arvense)
Chinese Wisteria (Wisteria Sinensis)
Chinese Yam (Dioscorea Batatas)
Common Buckthorn (Rhamnus Cathartica)
Common Privet (Ligustrum Vulgare)
Common Reed (Phragmites Australis)
Common Teasel (Dipsaucus Sylvestris)
Creeping Charlie (Glechoma Hederacea)
Crown Vetch (Coronilla Caria)
Cut-Leafed Teasel (Dipsacus Laciniatus)
Dame’s Rocket (Hesperis Matrionalis)
English Ivy (Hedera Helix)
Eulalia, Japanese Grass (Microstegium Vimineum)
Eurasian Water Milfoil (Myriophyllum Spicatum)
European Highbush Cranberry (Viburnum Opulus)
Garlic Mustard (Alliaria Pertiolata)
Hybrid Honeysuckle (Lonicera X Bella)
Japanese Honeysuckle (lonicera Japonica)
Japanese Knotwood (Polygonum Cuspidatum)
Johnson Grass (Sorghum Halepense)
Kudzu (Pueraria Lobata)
Leafy Spurge (Wuphorbia Esula)
Mimosa (Albizzia Julibrissin)
Moneywort (Lysimachia Nummularia)
Morrow’s Honeysuckle (Lonicera Morrowii)
Multiflora Rose (Rosa Multiflora)
Nodding Musk Thistle (Carduus Nutans)
Oriental Bittersweet (Celastrus Orbiculantus)
Parsnip (Pastinaca Sativa)
Princess Tree (Paulownia Tomentosa)
Purple Loosestrife (Lythrum Salicaria)
Reed Canary Grass (Phalaris Arundinacea)
Rose-of-Sharon (Hibiscus Syriacus)
Sandbar Willow (Salix Interior)
Sawtooth Oak (Quercus Acutissima)
Sericea Lespedeza (Lespedeza Cuneata)
Siberian Elm (Ulmus Pumila)
Smooth Brome Grass (Bromus Inermis)
Smooth Buckthorn (Rhamnus Frangula)
Tall fescue (Festuca Arundinacea)
Tatarian Honeysuckle (Lonicera Tatarica)
Tree of Heaven (Alianthus Altissima)
Wayfaring Tree (Viburnum Lantana)
White Mulberry (Morus Alba)
White Poplar (Populus Alba)
White Sweet Clover (Melilotus Alba)
Yellow Sweet Clover (Melilotus Officinalis)
This planting list was compiled using information from the Conservation
Foundation, McHenry County Conservation District, the Mississippi National
River and Recreation Area Greenway Project, and the University of Minnesota,
salt tolerant plant study.
(Ord. 08-960; amd. Ord. 20-20, 5-4-2020)
CHAPTER 14: ACCESSORY USES, YARDS AND FENCES
Section
11-14-1: Accessory Uses And Structures
11-14-2: Yards
11-14-3: Fences
11-14-4: Tables
11-14-1: ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES:
   A.   Compatibility: Accessory uses and structures shall be compatible with
the principal use of the lot on which they are located and shall not be
established prior to the establishment of the principal use. The keeping,
preparation or culture of poultry, pigeons or livestock shall not be an
accessory use.
   B.   Location: Accessory uses may be located in courtyards and required
yards only as provided in section
11-14-4, table 1 of this chapter.
   C.   Standards: All accessory uses shall conform to the standards in section
11-14-4, table 2 of this chapter.
   D.   Wind Energy Conversion Systems: Requirements for Wind Energy Conversion
Systems shall be as provided in title 10, chapter 19 of this Code.
   E.   Dish Antennas (Earth Stations): Requirements for satellite dish
antennas shall be as provided in title 10, chapter 15 of this Code.
   F.   Other Television Or Radio Towers Or Antennas: Other radio or television
towers or antennas as accessory uses shall not have an antenna height exceeding
fifty five feet (55'), shall not be more than three feet (3') from the
principal building, and shall not be so positioned as to be a hazard to any
utility line.
   G.   Decks, Patios And Porches: Decks or patios that are enclosed by windows
or screens and a permanent roof shall be considered as part of the principal
building. Such decks, patios and porches shall be subject to the requirements
of the zoning district in which they are located. Porches, as defined in
section
11-3-1 of this title, may protrude twenty five percent (25%) into the required
front yard.
   H.   Dog Runs: No more than one enclosed dog run, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, shall be permitted on any lot in a Residential District.
The fence enclosing the run shall be an open fence, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, a maximum of eight feet (8') in height and fifty feet
(50') in total length on all sides and shall be located at least ten feet (10')
from all lot lines.
   I.   Garages, Carports And Parking: Garages, carports and open parking
spaces as accessory uses shall be subject to applicable provisions under
chapter 12, “Off Street Parking And Loading”, of this title.
   J.   Swimming Pools: A private swimming pool shall be located in a rear
yard, except that on a single- family lot having a lot area of thirty thousand
(30,000) square feet or more, a private swimming pool may be located between
the principal building and an interior side lot line, in accordance with the
following conditions:
      1.   The swimming pool shall be located behind the front and required
corner side yard building line; and
      2.   The swimming pool shall be set back a minimum of eight feet (8')
from the interior side property line, or the required side yard setback for the
district in which it is located, whichever is greater.
   K.   Accessory Storage Buildings: All garages and other common accessory
structures used for storage shall be considered accessory storage buildings.
      1.   Accessory storage buildings greater than two hundred (200) square
feet shall not be permitted to have an overhead door unless connected to a
public right-of-way by a driveway constructed of paved, permanent, dust-free,
homogenous material or brick pavers provided it does not allow grass or other
vegetation to grow within, on or above the solid surface unless approved by the
Zoning Administrator.
      2.   Accessory storage buildings less than two hundred (200) square feet
and do not contain a motor vehicle, recreational vehicle or trailer used for
transportation that will be accessing the right-of-way, an overhead door shall
be permitted but a connection to the public right-of-way is not required.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 99-728; Ord. 21-3, 1-18-2021)
11-14-2: YARDS:
It is hereby intended that the word “required” is added immediately prior to
any reference of the following terms “front yard”, “interior side yard”,
“corner side yard” and “rear yard”.
   A.   Obstructions: Court yards and required yards may be obstructed by
accessory uses or building projections only as provided in section
11-14-4, table 1 of this chapter.
   B.   Yards Used For Only One Structure: The minimum yard space required for
one building or structure shall not be used as the required yard space for
another adjoining building or structure.
   C.   Reduction In Lot Area: No lot shall be reduced in area so that the
yards or other open spaces shall be less than required by this title.
   D.   Vacant Through Lots: On a vacant through lot, either of the lot lines
abutting a street may be established as the front lot line, except that where
two (2) or more through lots are contiguous and a front lot line has been duly
established by the construction of a building on one lot, the same street lot
line shall serve as the front lot line of all such contiguous lots.
   E.   Corner Side Yards On Lots Of Record: If a corner lot that is a lot of
record as of the date of adoption of this section has insufficient width to
meet the requirement for the required corner side yard and still provide thirty
feet (30') of width for the building and the other side yard, then the required
corner side yard may be reduced to not less than thirty percent (30%) of the
lot width.
   F.   Conformity To Existing Required Front Yards:
      1.   The purpose of this provision is to protect view lines in single-
family residential neighborhoods, except where the view line from a home has
been voluntarily sacrificed by building with a setback that is greater than
that required in this or any applicable previous ordinance.
      2.   In any RS Residential District, where one or more side lot lines of
a lot abut one or more residential lots with a nonconforming front or corner
side yard, the minimum front and corner side yards on such lot shall be less
than the zoning district regulations require.
      3.   For such a lot that is an interior lot, the minimum required front
yard shall be the mean average of the actual required front yards established
on the two (2) abutting residential lots on either side. If there is no
structure on one of the abutting lots, the required front yard required by the
zoning district shall be used in lieu of the actual required front yard for
that lot to compute the average.
      4.   For such a lot that is a corner lot, the minimum front and required
corner side yard shall be the actual front or required corner side yard
abutting each such yard on the adjacent residential lot.
      5.   Where the actual front or corner side yards on the abutting lots are
conforming, the minimum front and corner side yards shall be as required in the
district regulations.
      6.   For such a lot that is a through-lot (double frontage lot), the lot
line abutting a street but does not have direct vehicular access shall be
considered a rear yard for the purposes of this section.
   G.   Vision Clearance Triangle: Within a triangular area located at the at-
grade intersection of two (2) streets, a street and a railroad, or a street and
a driveway, special restrictions apply.
      1.   The triangular area shall be formed by the right-of-way lines of the
streets or railroads between their intersection and points thirty feet (30')
from their intersection along each line, or ten feet (10') from the
intersection of a street and a driveway, and by a straight line connecting
these two (2) points.
      2.   Within this triangle, no solid fence, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, or any hedge, opaque landscaping or screening, wall or
other solid obstruction, having a height of over two and one-half feet (2-1/
2'), nor any open fence, as defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, with a height of over three and one-half feet (3-1/2'),
shall be permitted.
      3.   Overhanging objects, including tree branches, shall be permitted
within this triangle only if all parts thereof are higher than eight feet (8')
above the level of the railroad or the pavement of the street or driveway where
the centerlines intersect. Signs shall be permitted only if the sign clearance
is eight feet (8') or greater, or the sign height is two and one-half feet (2-
1/2') or less.
(Ord. 04-851; amd. Ord. 22-47, 8-15-2022)
11-14-3: FENCES:
Requirements for fences shall be as provided in title 10, chapter 13 of this
Code.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-14-4: TABLES:
   TABLE 1
   PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS OF REQUIRED YARDS2
Projection Or All Yards Rear Yard Interior Side Corner Side Yard Court Yard
Accessory Use                     Yard
Projection Or     All Yards Rear Yard Interior Side Corner Side Yard Court Yard
Accessory Use                         Yard
Arbors and        X         -         -             -                -
trellises
Awnings and
canopies
projecting into   X         -         -             -                -
10% or less of
yard depth
Balconies, open   X         -         -             -                -
Bay windows       X         -         -             -                -
Chimneys          X         -         -             -                -
Decks, open or    -         X         -             -                -
enclosed
Dish antennas1    -         X         -             -                X
Dog runs,         -         X         -             -                -
enclosed1
Eaves,            X         -         -             -                -
overhanging
Fences1           X         -         -             -                -
Flagpoles         X         -         -             -                -
Garages or        -         X         -             -                -
carports1
Gardens,          -         X         X             X                X
vegetable
Greenhouses       -         X         -             -                -
Gutters           X         -         -             -                -
Hedges (see       X         -         -             -                -
Fences1)
Laundry drying    -         X         X             -                -
equipment
Light standards,  X         -         -             -                -
ornamental
Loading, off      -         X         X             -                X
street, open1
Mechanical
equipment, as
defined in        -         X         X             -                -
section
11-3-1 of this
title3
Parking, off      X         -         -             -                -
street, open1
Patios            -         X         X             -                X
Porches/          -         X         -             -                -
breezeways, open1
Recreational      -         X         X             -                -
equipment
Refuse            -         X         X             -                -
enclosures1
Sheds and storage -         X         -             -                -
buildings1
Signs1            X         -         -             -                -
Stairways, open   X         -         -             -                -
unroofed
Steps             X         -         -             -                -
Swimming pools,   -         X         -             -                -
private1
Television or
radio towers or   -         X         X             X                -
antennas1
Tennis courts,    -         X         -             -                -
private
Trees, shrubs,    X         -         -             -                -
and flowers
Walls (see        X         -         -             -                -
Fences1)
Other accessory   -         X         -             -                -
uses
 
Notes:
      1.    See also separate regulations herein.
      2.    X = permitted, subject to requirements of table 2 of this section.
      3.    Mechanical equipment shall be prohibited between the front or
corner side lot line and the principal building.
(Ord. 14-1683)
TABLE 2
STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
 
A.   Maximum height in Residential Districts:
 In feet                                        17
 In stories                                     1
B.   Maximum coverage of required rear yard1 35%
C.   Minimum setback from any lot line in fee32
 
D.   Minimum setback from principal or other accessory building in feet:
 
Size Of Accessory Building Rear Yard Setback Setback From Principal And Other
                                             Accessory Buildings6
Less than 500 square feet  3 feet            10 feet
500 - 750 square feet5     25%3              15 feet
750 - 1,001 square feet5   50%3              20 feet
 
E.   Maximum number and size of residential accessory buildings4:
 
                    Maximum Number Permitted Maximum Floor Area In Square
                                             Feet
Detached garage     1                        1,000 square feet
All other accessory 1                        300 square feet
buildings
Cumulative for all  2                        1,000 square feet
accessory buildings
 
   Notes:
      1.   Cumulative for all accessory structures in rear yard. Excludes areas
occupied by open patios and decks and swimming pools. Percentage of coverage
applies to area of actual required rear yard when it is smaller than area of
required rear yard.
      2.   Except fences, walls, landscape screens, berms and hedges.
Structures are subject also to the yard requirements of table 1 of this
section, which may impose greater setbacks from lot lines for certain
structures.
      3.   Expressed as a percentage of the principal building rear yard
setback.
      4.   On residential lots in any RS District.
      5.   All accessory buildings 500 square feet and greater must use the
same building materials and color as the principal building.
      6.   Except enclosed decks and patios and accessory uses that are
structurally a part of the principal building; except a shed having a floor
area of less than 100 square feet and a height of less than 10 feet.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 99-729; Ord. 09-979)
CHAPTER 15: CONDITIONAL USES
Section
11-15-1: Purpose
11-15-2: Approval Process
11-15-3: Existing Special Uses
11-15-4: Review Of Conditional Uses
11-15-5: Approval Criteria For Conditional Uses
11-15-6: Issuance Of Permit
11-15-7: Revocation Of Permit
11-15-8: Expansion Or Alteration
11-15-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   Scope: Certain uses cannot be allowable generally in a particular
zoning district, or in any zoning district, because of the impact their special
character creates on surrounding areas.
   B.   Uses Permitted: Some such uses may, however, be allowed under special
conditions. These uses are provided for in this chapter as conditional uses.
   C.   Permit Required: Because a conditional use is compatible with the
applicable zoning district only under special conditions, a conditional use
permit is required before any use authorized herein as a conditional use may be
established.
   D.   Application: Except as specifically provided herein, all regulations of
the applicable zoning district, and all other applicable regulations of this
and other City ordinances, shall apply to conditional uses.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-15-2: APPROVAL PROCESS:
Conditional uses shall be approved only in conformance with the approval
process provided in the filing procedures section of this title and the
approval criteria in section
11-15-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-15-3: EXISTING SPECIAL USES:
   A.   Conditional Uses Same As Special Uses: Conditional uses, as provided
herein, shall be considered the same as special uses provided under State
Statute. Lawful special uses granted to a property prior to the effective date
of this title shall be considered lawful conditional uses without the need for
approval of a conditional use permit hereunder, whether or not such special use
is authorized as a conditional use in the applicable zoning district herein.
Where such a use is a permitted use in the applicable district, conditional use
status shall not be applicable.
   B.   Expansion, Alteration: Any expansion of, addition to, or structural
alteration of such a use shall, however, require the approval of a conditional
use permit.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-15-4: REVIEW OF CONDITIONAL USES:
   A.   Considerations: In evaluating the suitability of a proposed conditional
use, the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall examine the
following characteristics of the proposed use and its individual structures or
components:
      1.   Location and orientation.
      2.   Lot size.
      3.   Size of facility, including floor area, structure height, design
capacity and anticipated employment.
      4.   Site design and arrangement.
      5.   Provisions affecting on and off site pedestrian and traffic
movement, vehicle storage and the passage of emergency vehicles.
      6.   Appearance.
      7.   Screening or landscaping.
      8.   On or off site buffering from incompatible uses with open spaces or
transitional uses.
      9.   Operations factors, such as hours of use or environmental controls.
      10.   Other characteristics of the proposed use pertinent in the judgment
of the Planning and Zoning Commission or Council to an assessment of the impact
of the use on the area.
   B.   Technical Experts, Studies: The Planning and Zoning Commission or the
Council may call upon technical experts or have studies performed to determine
specific development standards or conditions for any particular conditional
use, with the expense thereof to be paid by the applicant.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-15-5: APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR CONDITIONAL USES:
In recommending approval or conditional approval of a conditional use, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the City Council written
findings of fact that on the basis of the characteristics cited under review of
conditional uses herein, or changes to such characteristics that the Planning
and Zoning Commission recommends, the proposed use will be compatible with
existing uses in the area, and with permitted uses in the zoning district, in
the ways specified below. The Council shall not be bound by the recommendation
of the Planning and Zoning Commission. However, in granting approval or
conditional approval, the City Council shall find that the proposed use will be
compatible with such uses in the following ways:
   A.   Traffic: Any adverse impact of types or volumes of traffic flow not
otherwise typical in the zoning district has been minimized.
   B.   Environmental Nuisance: Any adverse effects of noise, glare, odor,
dust, waste disposal, blockage of light or air, or other adverse environmental
effects of a type or degree not characteristic of permitted uses in the zoning
district, have been appropriately controlled.
   C.   Neighborhood Character: The proposed use will fit harmoniously with the
existing natural or manmade character of its surroundings, and with permitted
uses in the zoning district. The use will not have undue deleterious effect on
the environmental quality, property values, or neighborhood character already
existing in the area or normally associated with permitted uses in the
district.
   D.   Public Services And Facilities: The proposed use will not require
existing community facilities or services to a degree disproportionate to that
normally expected of permitted uses in the district, nor generate
disproportionate demand for new services or facilities, in such a way as to
place undue burdens upon existing development in the area.
   E.   Public Safety And Health: The proposed use will not be detrimental to
the safety or health of the employees, patrons, or visitors associated with the
use nor of the general public in the vicinity.
   F.   Other Factors: The proposed use is in harmony with all other elements
of compatibility pertinent to the conditional use and its particular location.
(Ord. 91-553)
11-15-6: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
The Zoning Administrator shall issue a conditional use permit after approval
thereof by the City Council, unless the City Council directs otherwise. Such
permit shall specify any conditions, restrictions and time limits to which the
Council has made its approval subject.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-15-7: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
A conditional use permit may be revoked at any time by a simple majority vote
of the City Council:
   A.   If any conditions or restrictions are not complied with within the time
limit specified in the ordinance granting said conditional use permit; or
   B.   If after they are initially complied with, compliance with such
conditions or restrictions is not maintained at any time; or
   C.   If the conditional use is not established, or a required building
permit is not obtained and building started, within one year of the date of the
ordinance granting said conditional use permit; or
   D.   If the conditional use ceases operation for more than one year.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-15-8: EXPANSION OR ALTERATION:
Any expansion, enlargement or structural alteration of a conditional use shall
require an additional conditional use permit.
(Ord. 12-1059)
CHAPTER 16: NONCONFORMITIES
Section
11-16-1: Purpose
11-16-2: Applicability
11-16-3: Nonconforming Uses
11-16-4: Nonconforming Structures
11-16-5: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
11-16-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate uses, structures, and lots that were
in compliance with previous zoning regulations, but do not conform to current
zoning regulations as a result of adoption of or amendments to this title. The
intent of this chapter is to specify the circumstances under which legal
nonconforming uses, structures, and lots may be continued, altered, or expanded
as well as circumstances under which such nonconformities shall be gradually
eliminated.
(Ord. 21-3, 1-18-2021)
11-16-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Authority To Continue:
      1.   Any use, structure, or lot that was established legally as of the
effective date of this title, or its subsequent amendments, may continue as
long as it remains lawful.
      2.   Any use, structure, or lot that was established legally as of the
effective date of this title, or its subsequent amendments, and has been made
nonconforming due to the regulations of this title, or its subsequent
amendments, is a legal nonconforming use, structure, or lot and may continue
subject to the provisions of this chapter as long as it remains otherwise
lawful.
      3.   Any use, structure, or lot that was established illegally as of the
effective date of this title, or its subsequent amendments, shall remain
illegal if it does not conform with the requirements of this title.
      4.   If property is used in a manner that was classified as a permitted
use prior to the effective date of this title, and that use is now classified
as a conditional use as of the effective date of this title, that use is deemed
a nonconforming use. Such uses are allowed to continue and are controlled by
the provisions of this chapter. However, any addition, enlargement, or
expansion of the use is required to obtain a conditional use permit at the time
of the addition, enlargement, or expansion.
   B.   Nonconforming Status: The legal nonconforming status of a nonconforming
use, structure, or lot rests with the property and shall not be affected by
changes in property ownership, tenancy, or management.
   C.   Burden Of Establishing Legal Status: The burden of establishing the
legal status of a nonconforming use, structure, or lot under the provisions of
this title shall be the responsibility of the owner of such use, structure or
lot.
(Ord. 21-3, 1-18-2021)
11-16-3: NONCONFORMING USES:
   A.   Applicability: A legal nonconforming use is the use of land that at one
time conformed to applicable zoning regulations, but no longer conforms due to
subsequent amendments to this title.
   B.   Expansion Of Use: A legal nonconforming use shall not be expanded,
enlarged, or increased in intensity to include any land area or structure not
previously occupied by such legal nonconforming use.
   C.   Relocation Of Use: A legal nonconforming use shall not be relocated on
the same lot or any other lot unless the relocation of such use meets the
requirements of the zoning district in which the use is relocated.
   D.   Damage Or Destruction Of Use:
      1.   In the event that any structure devoted in whole or in part to a
legal nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty percent
(50%) or more of its replacement value, then the use cannot be continued unless
it meets the requirements of the subject zoning district.
      2.   In the event that a legal nonconforming structure is damaged or
destroyed to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement
value, the structure may be repaired provided that:
         a.   The repairs will not create any new nonconformity or increase the
degree of any existing nonconformity.
         b.   A building permit is obtained for such repairs within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the date of damage or destruction, and such repairs are
completed within one year of issuance of the building permit.
      3.   The replacement value of the legal nonconforming structure shall be
established by:
         a.   The sale of the structure within the previous year, or if that is
not applicable;
         b.   An appraisal of the structure within the last two (2) years, or
if that is not available;
         c.   The amount for which the structure was insured prior to the date
of damage or destruction, or if that is not available;
         d.   An alternative method determined acceptable by the Zoning
Administrator.
   E.   Change Of Use: A legal nonconforming use shall not be changed to any
other use unless the use is allowed within the subject zoning district.
   F.   Discontinuation Or Abandonment Of Use: If a legal nonconforming use is
discontinued, or the structure that it occupies becomes vacant or remains
unoccupied for a continuous period of at least 30 days, such use shall be
deemed abandoned and shall not be reestablished regardless of the intent to
continue the use. Any subsequent use or occupancy of such land or structure
shall meet the requirements of the subject zoning district. The following
exceptions apply:
      1.   If the period of such discontinuance is caused by government action
or acts of God, it is not included in calculating the length of discontinuance.
      2.   If the property owner files notice in writing of the suspension of a
nonconforming use with the Zoning Administrator prior to the expiration of the
continuous period of at least thrity (30) days. The Zoning Administrator may
approve an extension of such time frame not to exceed thirty (30) days.
   G.   Amortization Of Nonconforming Uses In Residential Zoning Districts: Any
nonconforming use of land located in a residential zoning district which
lawfully existed at the time that this title became effective, shall be
discontinued within one (1) year after the Zoning Administrator has provided
written notice to the property owner. This section does not apply to
nonconforming uses that received approval of a use variance.
   H.   Requests For Extensions Of Nonconforming Uses In Residential Zoning
Districts: The owner or operator of a nonconforming use in a residential zoning
district may request a six (6) month extension of the amortization period. The
applicant shall submit a detailed narrative to the Zoning Administrator
explaining the request that includes documentary evidence such as: 1) the
amount of the owner's investment in the pre-existing, nonconforming use through
the effective date of this title; 2) the amount of such investment that has
been or will have been realized at the conclusion of the amortization period;
3) the life expectancy of the nonconforming use; and 4) the existence or
nonexistence of lease obligations, as well as any contingency clauses therein
permitting termination of such lease. The Zoning Administrator shall approve or
deny the request based upon the documentary evidence.
   I.   Requests For Extensions Of Nonconforming Uses In Residential Zoning
Districts Greater Than Six (6) Months: City Council may grant an extension for
the continued operation of a nonconforming use in a residential zoning
district. In order to secure an extension of time greater than six (6) months,
the owner or operator must submit to the Zoning Administrator a written request
for such extension at least sixty (60) days prior to the end of the
amortization period. No application for extension received after such time
shall be considered. This information shall be supported by relevant
documentary evidence such as: 1) the amount of the owner's investment in the
pre-existing, nonconforming use through the effective date of this title; 2)
the amount of such investment that has been or will have been realized at the
conclusion of the amortization period; 3) the life expectancy of the
nonconforming use; and 4) the existence or nonexistence of lease obligations,
as well as any contingency clauses therein permitting termination of such
lease. The Zoning Administrator shall notify an applicant of the time and place
of a public hearing to be held on such request before the Planning and Zoning
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a recommendation to
be transmitted to City Council who may approve or deny the request.
(Ord. 21-3, 1-18-2021; amd. Ord. 21-15, 4-5-2021)
11-16-4: NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES:
   A.   Applicability: A legal nonconforming structure is a principal or
accessory structure that at one time conformed to applicable zoning
regulations, but no longer conforms due to subsequent amendments to this title.
For the purposes of this chapter, legal nonconforming structures shall include
signs (see section
10-20-8: Nonconforming Signs), on-site development, off-street parking and
loading facilities, and landscape characteristics.
   B.   Ordinary Maintenance And Repair: Ordinary maintenance and repair may be
performed on any legal nonconforming structure provided that such activities
will not create any new nonconformity or increase the degree of any existing
nonconformity.
   C.   Structural Alterations, Enlargements, And Additions: Structural
alterations, enlargements, and additions shall not be performed on any legal
nonconforming structure, except in the following situations:
      1.   When the alteration, enlargement, or addition is required by law or
is necessary to restore the structure to a safe condition as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
      2.   When the alteration, enlargement, or addition is for the purpose of
creating a conforming structure.
      3.   When the alteration, enlargement, or addition will not create any
new nonconformity, extends no further than the existing non-conforming setback,
and does not increase the height of the existing structure.
   D.   Relocation: A legal nonconforming structure shall not be relocated on
the same lot or any other lot unless the relocation of such structure meets the
requirements of the zoning district to which the structure is relocated.
   E.   Damage Or Destruction:
      1.   In the event that a legal nonconforming structure is damaged or
destroyed to the extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement
value, then the structure may not be repaired unless it meets the requirements
of the zoning district in which the structure is located.
      2.   In the event that a legal nonconforming structure is damaged or
destroyed to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement
value, the structure may be repaired provided that:
         a.   The repairs will not create any new nonconformity or increase the
degree of any existing nonconformity.
         b.   A building permit is obtained for such repairs within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the date of damage or destruction, and such repairs are
completed within one year of issuance of the building permit.
      3.   The replacement value of the legal nonconforming structure shall be
established by:
         a.   The sale of the structure within the previous year, or if that is
not applicable;
         b.   An appraisal of the structure within the last two (2) years, or
if that is not available;
         c.   The amount for which the structure was insured prior to the date
of damage or destruction, or if that is not available;
         d.   An alternative method determined acceptable by the Zoning
Administrator.
   F.   Extension Of Walls For Nonconforming Single-Family And Two-Family
Dwellings: Where a single-family or two-family dwelling is a legal
nonconforming structure because of encroachment into the required setback, the
structure may be enlarged or extended vertically along the same plane as
defined by its existing perimeter walls, so long as the resulting structure
complies with the required side yard setbacks and does not increase the degree
of the existing nonconformity or otherwise violate this title.
   G.   Principal Single-Family And Two-Family Residential Structures Deemed
Conforming: Lawfully created principal single-family and two-family residential
structures, which also may include a legal nonconforming detached garage, that
do not meet the underlying zoning district requirements as of the effective
date of this title shall be allowed to be rebuilt in the same building
footprint if damaged or destroyed provided that:
      1.   It does not increase the degree of the nonconformity;
      2.   The nonconforming principal residence and/or detached garage is
reconstructed within one year of being damaged or destroyed.
(Ord. 21-3, 1-18-2021)
11-16-5: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
   A.   Applicability: A legal nonconforming lot of record is a lot of record
that at one time conformed to applicable zoning regulations, but no longer
conforms due to subsequent amendments to this title.
   B.   Contiguous Nonconforming Lots Of Record: If two (2) or more contiguous
lots of record are owned by a single party, or by related parties, and one or
more of the lots does not meet the requirements for lot area or lot width as
established by this title, then the lots of record shall be developed as a
single entity.
   C.   Nonconforming Residential Lots Of Record: Any lawfully created lot of
record as of the effective date of this title that is located in a Residential
District, that has no substantial structure upon it, and is legal nonconforming
may be used for a single-family detached dwelling without elimination of the
nonconformity provided the residence meets the underlying zoning district's
setback requirements.
   D.   Lots Or Parcels Deemed Conforming: Lots or parcels created as a result
of the following actions are deemed conforming for the purposes of this title:
      1.   When land area is acquired by a government agency for expansion of
right-of-way
      2.   When the action of waterways that forms the boundaries of a lot
reduce the lot area.
      3.   When property lines are established by a court order in order to
settle a boundary dispute between adjacent property owners.
(Ord. 21-3, 1-18-2021)
CHAPTER 17: PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Section
11-17-1: Purpose
11-17-2: Applicability
11-17-3: Noise
11-17-4: Vibration
11-17-5: Smoke; Maximum Emissions
11-17-6: Particulate Matter
11-17-7: Toxic Matter
11-17-8: Odor
11-17-9: Fire And Explosion
11-17-10: Glare
11-17-11: Heat
11-17-12: Radioactive Radiation
11-17-13: Administration And Enforcement
11-17-1: PURPOSE:
The requirements herein are intended to provide a basis for determining the
compatibility of land uses that may produce measurable adverse environmental
effects on their surroundings.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-2: APPLICABILITY:
The performance standards herein shall apply as follows:
 
Performance Standard For Applies To
Heavy industrial uses    Conditional uses in I-1
Other uses               Conditional uses in all districts except I-1
                         Permitted uses in all districts
Unspecified              Permitted uses in all districts
                         Conditional uses in all districts
 
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-3: NOISE:
   A.   Maximum Sound Levels: No operation or activity shall cause or create
noise above the sound pressure levels in tables 1 and 2 of this section at the
locations specified therein.
   B.   Measurement: A sound level meter and associated octave band analyzer
shall be employed to measure the intensity and frequency of sound. The flat
network slow meter response of the sound level meter shall be used.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
   C.   Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from noise performance
standards:
      1.   Noises of construction or maintenance activities from seven o’clock
(7:00) A.M. to seven o’clock (7:00) P.M.
      2.   Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure
relief valves.
      3.   Transient noises of moving sources such as transportation vehicles.
      4.   Noises associated with snow plowing, street sweeping, and mosquito
abatement.
      5.   Church bells, chimes and carillons.
      6.   Other noises not under the direct control of the property user.
      7.   Use of generators during periods of power loss and/or outage on
Residentially zoned property only.
(Ord. 12-1044)
   TABLE 1
   PERMITTED SOUND LEVELS
                                    Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level In
Preferred Center Frequency In Hertz Decibels At Boundaries Of Nearest
                                    Residentially Zoned Lot
                                    Maximum Permitted Sound Pressure Level In
Preferred Center Frequency In Hertz Decibels At Boundaries Of Nearest
                                    Residentially Zoned Lot
31.5                                75
63                                  74
125                                 69
250                                 64
500                                 58
1,000                               52
2,000                               47
4,000                               43
8,000                               40
 
Above figures for octave band analyzers calibrated with preferred frequencies
(American Standards Association S1.6-1960, Preferred Frequencies for Acoustical
Measurement).
Sound levels above shall be modified where applicable by the adjustments in
table 2 of this section.
   TABLE 2
   ADJUSTMENTS TO PERMITTED SOUND LEVELS
  Adjustment In Decibels
                                                         Adjustment In Decibels
Duration of noise in any 1 hour period (use 1 adjustment  
only):
 Under 12 minutes                                       Add 5 dB
 Under 3 minutes                                        Add 10 dB
 Under 1/2 minute                                       Add 15 dB
At boundaries of nearest Office or Commercial zoned lot  Add 5 dB
Noise is impulsive in character (e.g., hammering)        Subtract 5 dB
Noise is periodic in character (e.g., hum, screech)      Subtract 5 dB
Noise may be heard between hours of 7:00 P.M. and 7:00   Subtract 5 dB
A.M.
 
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-4: VIBRATION:
   A.   Maximum Vibration: Ground transmitted vibration shall not exceed the
maximum permitted particle velocities in table 3 of this section at the
locations specified therein.
   B.   Measurement: A seismograph or other three (3) component measuring
system capable of simultaneous measurement of vibration in three (3) mutually
perpendicular directions shall be used to measure vibration.
Particle velocity may be measured directly or computed by the following
formula:
PV = 6.28 x F x D
 
PV = Particle velocity in inches per second
F  = Vibration frequency in cycles per second
D  = Single amplitude displacement of the vibration in inches
 
The maximum particle velocity shall be the maximum vector sum of the three (3)
mutually perpendicular components recorded simultaneously.
   TABLE 3
   MAXIMUM GROUND TRANSMITTED VIBRATION
 
                 Maximum Permitted Particle Velocity1
Use              At Adjacent Lot Line At Nearest Residentially Zoned Lot
                                      Boundary2
Heavy industrial 0.2                  0.02
Other            0.1                  0.02
 
   Notes:
      1.    Where vibration is produced as discrete impulses (impact
vibrations) not exceeding 100 per minute, maximum permitted velocities may be
doubled.
      2.    Between 7:00 A.M. and 7:00 P.M., maximum permitted velocity at
Residentially zoned lot boundaries shall be reduced 50 percent.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-5: SMOKE; MAXIMUM EMISSIONS:
Emissions of smoke shall not exceed the maximum permitted smoke units, as
defined in section
11-3-1 of this title, and Ringelmann number ratings in table 4 of this section.
   TABLE 4
   MAXIMUM SMOKE EMISSIONS
 
                               During 1 Hour          All Other Times
                               Per 24-Hour Day1
                               Heavy Industrial Other Heavy Industrial Other
Maximum permitted smoke units3 32               16    16               8
per hour per stack
Highest Ringelmann number      32               22    2                1
permitted
 
Notes:
      1.    When blowing soot or cleaning fires.
      2.    For a maximum duration of 3 minutes.
      3.    The number of smoke units is the product of the Ringelmann number
and the number of minutes the smoke is visible.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-6: PARTICULATE MATTER:
   A.   Maximum Emissions:
      1.   Particulate matter is fine solid or liquid particles small enough to
be carried in the air, including products of combustion such as soot and fly
ash, industrial dust, and products of wind erosion.
      2.   The rate of emission of particulate matter from all sources within
the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed the values in table 5 of this
subsection, as adjusted by the factors in table 6 of this section.
   TABLE 5
   PARTICULATES STANDARDS
 
                 Maximum Pounds     Maximum Tonnage
Use              Per Acre Or Net    Per Acre Or Net
                 Site Area Per Hour Site Area Per Year
Heavy industrial 5                  10
Other            1                  5
 
   B.   Measurement: The emission rate in pounds per hour from any single stack
shall be determined by selecting the continuous four (4) hour period which will
result in the highest average emission rate.
   C.   Control Of Wind Erosion:
      1.   Emission of particulate matter from materials, products or surfaces
subject to wind erosion shall be minimized by paving, oiling, wetting,
covering, landscaping, fencing or other means.
      2.   This shall apply to vacant lots; unpaved roads; yards and storage
piles of bulk materials, such as coal, sand, cinders, slag and sulfur; and
similar sources of windborne particulates.
   TABLE 6
   ADJUSTMENTS TO PARTICULATES STANDARDS
User should interpolate for values not listed. Minus sign indicates value is to
be subtracted from particulate standard.
   HEIGHT OF EMISSION
 
Height Of Emission Above Grade In Feet Adjustment In Pounds/Hour/Acre
50                                     -0.01
100                                    -0.06
150                                    -0.1
200                                    -0.16
300                                    -0.3
400                                    -0.5
 
   VELOCITY OF EMISSION
 
Exit Velocity In Feet Per Second Adjustment In Pounds/Hour/Acre
0                                -
20                               -0.03
40                               -0.09
60                               -0.16
80                               -0.24
100                              -0.5
 
   TEMPERATURE OF EMISSION
Temperature In Degrees Fahrenheit Adjustment In Pounds/Hour/Acre
Temperature In Degrees Fahrenheit Adjustment In Pounds/Hour/Acre
200                               -
300                               -0.001
400                               -0.002
500                               -0.003
1,000                             -0.01
1,500                             -0.04
2,000                             -0.1
 
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-7: TOXIC MATTER:
   A.   Maximum Emissions: Release of any airborne toxic matter shall not
exceed the permitted standards in table 7 of this section at the locations
specified therein.
   TABLE 7
   PERMITTED EMISSION OF TOXIC MATTER
 
Use              Maximum Fraction Of Threshold Limit Location Where Applicable
                 Value1
Heavy industrial 1/30                                At district boundary
Other            1/30                                At lot lines
 
   Note:
      1.    Threshold limit value adopted by American Conference of Government
and Industrial Hygienists.
   B.   Measurement: Measurement of toxic matter shall be at ground level or
habitable elevation and shall be the average of any twenty four (24) hour
sampling period.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-8: ODOR:
   A.   Maximum Emissions: Odorous material released shall not exceed the Odor
Threshold Concentration at the following locations:
 
Heavy Industrial Uses                            Other Uses
At boundaries of nearest Residentially zoned lot At lot lines
 
   B.   Measurement:
      1.   Odor shall be measured by Odor Threshold Concentrations with the
American Society for Testing and Materials Method D1391-57, Standard Method for
Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres (Dilution Method), or its equivalent.
      2.   Odor shall be measured at ground level or habitable elevation.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-9: FIRE AND EXPLOSION:
   A.   Other Regulations Applicable: In addition to the requirements herein,
all materials regulated in this section shall be utilized, stored, manufactured
and handled in accordance with the City Fire Protection Code in title 10,
chapter 5 of this Code, and the standards of the National Fire Protection
Association.
   B.   Detonable Materials: Detonable materials are all materials or products
that decompose by detonation, including, among other materials:
      1.   All primary explosives, such as lead azide, lead styphnate,
fulminates and tetracene.
      2.   All high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and picric acid.
      3.   Propellants and components thereof, such as dry nitrocellulose,
black powder, boron hydrides, and hydrazine and its derivatives.
      4.   Pyrotechnics and fireworks, such as magnesium powder, potassium
chlorate and potassium nitrate.
      5.   Blasting explosives such as dynamite and nitroglycerine.
      6.   Unstable organic compounds such as acetylides, tetrazoles and
ozonides.
      7.   Strong unstable oxidizing agents such as perchloric acid,
perchlorates and hydrogen peroxide in concentrations greater than thirty five
percent (35%).
      8.   Nuclear fuels, fissionable materials and products, and reactor
elements such as Uranium 235 and Plutonium 239.
The storage, utilization, or manufacture of detonable materials shall be
permitted only as licensed by the City or as incidental to a principal use
subject to requirements of table 8 of this section.
   TABLE 8
   STANDARDS FOR DETONABLE MATERIALS
 
Storage, Utilization Or    Storage Or Utilization Of Manufacture Of Over 5
Manufacture Of 5 Pounds Or Over 5 Pounds             Pounds
Less
Permitted use              Conditional use           Prohibited
 
   C.   Flammable Solid Materials: The utilization, storage and manufacture of
flammable solid materials are permitted subject to the following restrictions:
 
Rating                            Restrictions
Incombustible to moderate burning None
                                  Only in completely enclosed buildings with
                                  minimum 2 hour fire resistive construction
Free to active burning to intense that are either:
burning                            Protected with an automatic fire
                                    extinguishing system; or
                                   Located at least 40 feet from all lot
                                    lines
 
   D.   Flammable Liquids And Gases: The storage, utilization and manufacture
of flammable liquids or gases that produces flammable or explosive vapors shall
be limited to the quantities specified in table 9 of this section.
   TABLE 9
   STANDARDS FOR FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND GASES
 
Open Cup           Maximum Gallons
Flash Point In     Above Ground            Below Ground
Degrees Fahrenheit Heavy Industrial Other  Heavy Industrial Other
Under 100          62,000           3,000  No maximum       100,000
100 - 139          100,000          10,000 No maximum       100,000
140 and over       200,000          20,000 No maximum       100,000
 
Storage of finished products in original sealed containers of fifty five (55)
gallons or less is exempt from above standards.
Maximum cubic feet of flammable gases at standard temperature and pressure
shall be thirty (30) times the gallonage figures above.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-10: GLARE:
No operation shall produce direct or indirect illumination greater than 0.5
foot-candles in any Residential District.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-11: HEAT:
No heat from operations or processes shall be sensed at any lot line to the
extent of raising the temperature of air or materials more than five degrees
Fahrenheit (5°F).
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-12: RADIOACTIVE RADIATION:
   A.   Prohibition: No operation shall be permitted that causes any individual
outside of the lot lines to be exposed to any radiation exceeding the lowest
concentration permitted for the general population by Federal and State laws
and regulations in effect as of the day of application for a Certificate of
Occupancy.
   B.   Storage: Radioactive materials shall be contained in a fireproof
container at or below ground level if they are stored, utilized or manufactured
in a quantity exceeding one hundred thousand (100,000) times the quantity
listed in section 3, paragraph b, of the Radiation Installation Registration
Law of the State of Illinois, or any amendment thereto.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-17-13: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The procedures herein are intended to enforce the performance standards herein,
to protect businesses from arbitrary enforcement, and to protect the public
from unnecessary enforcement costs.
   A.   New Uses:
      1.   An application for a conditional use permit or a building permit for
an industrial use within the I-1 Industrial District shall include a
certification by a licensed engineer, licensed architect, or scientific
laboratory that the use involved in the application is able to meet all
applicable performance standards to the extent that this can be judged based on
the submitted building plans and other information available prior to
construction.
      2.   This certification shall be accompanied by copies of all data or
information supplied by the applicant and used as the basis of the
certification. The Zoning Administrator may refer the certification and data to
the City Engineer for review.
      3.   The Zoning Administrator may also require such certification for a
land use in any other zoning district when in his or her judgment the use has
potential to exceed any performance standard herein. Such certification may
include all performance standards or only individual standards specified by the
Zoning Administrator.
   B.   Existing Uses:
      1.   In enforcing performance standards on existing uses, the Zoning
Administrator may issue a written notice of violation to an alleged violator.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator shall, before issuing such notice, make
technical determinations of violation when such determinations can be made
using equipment and trained personnel normally available to the City or
obtainable without extraordinary expense.
      3.   In other cases, however, technical complexity or extraordinary
expense may make it unreasonable for the City to maintain personnel or
equipment for making determinations of violation prior to issuing a notice of
violation. In such cases, a notice of violation may be issued when the Zoning
Administrator has other reason to believe there is probable violation.
      4.   The Zoning Administrator shall give notice of violation by any means
that ensures a signed receipt for such notice to the party responsible for the
alleged violation.
      5.   The notice shall describe the alleged violation and the results of
technical determinations or the other reasons why the Zoning Administrator
believes there is a violation. The notice shall require either an answer or
correction of the alleged violation to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator and within a time limit he or she shall specify in the notice.
      6.   The notice shall also state that failure to provide an answer or
correct the alleged violation within this time limit shall constitute admission
of a violation.
      7.   The notice shall further state that, if technical determinations
have not already been made, upon request of the alleged violator such
determinations will be made. If a violation is found as a result of such
determinations, the cost of the determinations will be assessed against the
properties or parties responsible in addition to any other penalties provided
for. If no violation is found, the City will pay the cost of the
determinations.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
CHAPTER 18: SURFACE MINING
Section
11-18-1: General Provisions
11-18-2: Conditional Use Permit
11-18-3: Bond Required
11-18-4: Reclamation Plan
11-18-5: Standards For Operations
11-18-6: Finished Site Conditions
11-18-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to recognize that surface
mining operations in urban areas are land uses with unique environmental
effects calling for special regulatory controls to ensure that:
      1.   Extraction and processing areas operate in a manner that is
compatible with the natural and manmade environment; and
      2.   Adverse impacts on nearby residential and institutional areas and on
property values are minimized; and
      3.   Mined areas are restored to productive use compatible with their
surroundings.
   B.   Applicability: Any surface extraction or processing of earth materials
shall be permitted only as a conditional use and only in those districts that
so provide. Earth materials shall include topsoil, earth, clay, gravels, sand,
stone and other minerals. Provisions of this chapter applicable to conditional
uses, such as a required public hearing, shall apply to surface mining
operations, except as otherwise provided herein.
   C.   Exemptions: Any operation legally begun prior to the date of adoption
of this chapter shall be exempt from all requirements of this chapter, as
applicable to the property being mined as of that date. Except that such
operation shall not be exempt from:
      1.   Meeting requirements herein concerning:
         a.   Hours of operation;
         b.   Spillage;
         c.   Fencing, landscaping and screening;
         d.   Safety;
         e.   Noise;
         f.   Maintenance of site; and
      2.   Meeting all requirements herein on any expansion or enlargement of
the operation onto additional property not being mined on the date of adoption;
and
      3.   Meeting such requirements on the original property as a prerequisite
to such expansion to the extent the City Council shall judge practical.
   D.   Compliance With State And Federal Regulations: In addition to the
requirements herein, all operations shall comply with the Illinois Surface-
Mined Land Conservation and Reclamation Act, the regulations of the Illinois
and U.S. Environmental Protection Agencies, and other applicable State and
Federal laws and regulations.
   E.   Abandonment Or Termination: A new conditional use permit shall be
required for any operation where the operator has not demonstrated an intent to
resume operations during a period of twelve (12) months after on site
extraction and processing operations have ceased.
   F.   Inspection: The Zoning Administrator shall inspect each operation for
compliance with the provisions herein at least semiannually.
   G.   Staged Reclamation Action: Reclamation according to the Reclamation
Plan shall be pursued and completed in stages as excavation progresses.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-18-2: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
   A.   Maximum Term Of Conditional Use Permit; Renewal: No conditional use
permit for an extraction operation shall be issued or renewed for a period to
exceed ten (10) years. All permits shall be renewable.
   B.   Contents Of Conditional Use Application: In addition to other
requirements herein for conditional use applications, all applications for
conditional use permits for extraction operations shall include the following:
      1.   A map or maps at a scale of one inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100')
showing:
         a.   Existing topography at two foot (2') contour intervals.
         b.   Locations of existing watercourses and drainage systems.
         c.   Location and extent of flood hazard areas.
         d.   Boundaries of the area to be excavated and of each phase thereof
if excavation is to proceed in phases.
         e.   Locations of structures, equipment and materials storage areas,
equipment repair areas and processing areas.
         f.   Locations of equipment used for grading, crushing, sorting and
other purposes.
         g.   Location, orientation and dimensions of proposed landscaping,
berming, screening, fencing and gates.
         h.   Location, dimensions and surface treatment of proposed entrance
and exit drives, on site haul roads, acceleration or deceleration lanes, and
parking areas.
         i.   Access routes between the property and the nearest arterial
street as designated on the City Comprehensive Plan.
         j.   Location, width and grade of all rights-of-way or easements on or
abutting the property.
         k.   Typical cross-sections showing extent of overburden, extent of
deposits of materials to be extracted, and water table.
         l.   North arrow, scale, date of preparation, and name of registered
civil engineer, landscape architect or surveyor that prepared the map.
      2.   Descriptions of:
         a.   Types of earth products to be mined.
         b.   Character and composition of vegetation and wildlife on land to
be affected.
         c.   Nature, depth and proposed disposition of overburden.
         d.   Estimated depth to which mining will occur.
         e.   Techniques of extracting and processing to be used.
         f.   Estimated type and volume of excavation.
         g.   Equipment to be used.
         h.   Practices to be used to minimize environmental effects, such as
noise, dust, vibration, and pollution of air and surface and underground water.
         i.   Recycling of water used for washing and grading and proposed
usage or drainage of excess water.
         j.   Proposed days and hours of excavation and processing.
         k.   Estimated dates of beginning and completion of all operations on
the site.
      3.   A Reclamation Plan meeting the requirements of this chapter.
      4.   A bond meeting the requirements of this chapter.
Upon written request of the applicant, application information concerning
subsections B2a and B2d of this section shall be held confidential.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-18-3: BOND REQUIRED:
To ensure completion of the reclamation of the site, a bond in a type and form
approved by the City Attorney shall be required from the operator in the amount
of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per acre, or such greater
amount as shall be established by the City Council. Such bond shall be
sufficient to cover reclamation over a three (3) year period. Prior to the end
of such period, the City Council shall review past work before releasing or
reducing the amount of the bond and shall establish the bonding requirement for
the next three (3) years.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-18-4: RECLAMATION PLAN:
The Reclamation Plan required hereunder shall include a map at a scale of one
inch to one hundred feet (1" = 100') showing the final condition of the site
after extraction and processing activities have been completed conforming with
the provisions on finished site conditions herein, including:
   A.   Locations of proposed watercourses, water features and drainage
systems.
   B.   Future structures, land uses, roadways and open spaces.
   C.   Staged schedule of reclamation actions by area detailing dates of
completion and reclamation methods and materials.
   D.   Future landscaping and ground cover.
   E.   Final grading.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-18-5: STANDARDS FOR OPERATIONS:
   A.   Water Table:
      1.   Maximum excavation depth shall not be below existing groundwater
except where the Reclamation Plan provides for a water feature or for refilling
of such excavation. Any such refilling shall be in conformance with applicable
State and Federal laws and regulations governing ground water pollution.
      2.   No extraction operation shall permanently and harmfully lower the
water table of surrounding inhabited properties.
      3.   Water pumped from the site for washing shall be retained in a pond
until the silt and clay settles and then recycled in the area affected.
   B.   Hours Of Operation: To reduce the harmful impact of noise on
surrounding properties, surface mining operations shall be conducted only
during the hours indicated below, except during periods of public emergency in
which materials excavated at the site are needed.
 
                               Sundays Or
                               Legal State Or    All Other Times
                               National Holidays
Operation of crushers          At no time        6:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
Washing gravel                 At no time        All hours (electric pumps
                                                 only)
All other operations including At no time        5:00 A.M. to 8:00 P.M.
loading and maintenance
 
   C.   Spillage: Trucks hauling excavated material shall be loaded or covered
so as to prevent spillage onto public streets. Any spillage on such streets
shall be removed by the operator at least once every twenty four (24) hours.
   D.   Fencing, Landscaping And Screening:
      1.   Notwithstanding other provisions of this title on screening, because
of the superior noise attenuating properties of berms as compared with fencing
or plantings, a barrier consisting of a planted earth berm with a minimum
height of ten feet (10') and fencing with a minimum fence height of four and
one-half feet (41/2') shall be installed prior to commencement of operations:
         a.   Along all lot lines, or, at the option of the operator.
         b.   Along such lot lines and phase area boundaries as are adjacent to
areas currently being excavated.
      2.   Such barrier shall be sufficient to:
         a.   Screen the operation from view from adjacent properties and
public streets, except where a significant change in topography makes this
impractical; and
         b.   Discourage trespass by the public, such as with the use of barbed
wire or thorny plantings; and
         c.   Attenuate noise coming from the site that can be heard on
surrounding properties or public streets; and
         d.   Serve as wind breaks to reduce airborne dust adjacent to the
site.
      3.   The required berm shall be planted with ground cover over its entire
surface, except for portions planted in trees, shrubs or flowers, no later than
the next growing season after its installation.
      4.   Where a lot line of a mining operation abuts the boundary of a
Residential District, the berm shall be a minimum of fifty feet (50') from that
boundary.
      5.   Trees a minimum of ten feet (10') high at time of planting and
spaced a maximum of twenty five feet (25') apart shall be planted along the top
of any berm or portion thereof located within five hundred feet (500') of
extraction activity.
      6.   Entrances and exits to the property shall be provided with gates
that shall be securely locked during hours of in operation.
      7.   Existing trees and ground cover within the required yards shall be
preserved wherever possible.
      8.   Weeds shall be cut or trimmed as necessary to present a reasonably
neat appearance, to prevent seeding on adjoining property, and to reduce the
hazard of grass fires.
   E.   Entrances:
      1.   A maximum of one entrance and one exit onto public streets shall be
provided.
      2.   Where possible, the entrance and exit shall avoid routing of
vehicles used in the operation over streets primarily serving residential
areas. Where necessary in the judgment of the City Council, paved acceleration
and deceleration lanes at least one hundred feet (100') in length shall be
provided on either side of an entrance or exit.
      3.   To minimize airborne dust and the deposit of dirt and gravel on
public streets, a drive into the site of not less than three hundred feet
(300') from the street right-of-way at each entrance or exit shall be either
paved or oiled or sprayed with calcium chloride or a similar product to create
a dust free surface.
   F.   Safety: All operations shall be conducted in a safe manner so as to
prevent harm to the public and damage to adjacent properties or adjacent public
streets.
   G.   Staged Removal Of Overburden: Overburden shall not be removed from more
land than is to be mined within one year. No overburden shall be removed from
additional land until ground cover in conformance with the Reclamation Plan is
installed on all land where excavation is complete and that is not being used
for material storage.
   H.   Yards: Notwithstanding other provisions of this title, the following
minimum distances shall be observed for surface mining operations:
 
Operation            Minimum          Measured From
                     Distance In Feet Operation To
Crushing below grade 400              Boundary of any Nonindustrial District or
                                      property line of any school or hospital
All other crushing   750              Boundary of any Nonindustrial District or
                                      property line of any school or hospital
                     100              Boundary of any Nonindustrial District or
All other operations                  property line of any school or hospital
                     50               All other property lines
 
   I.   Noise: Performance standards for noise herein applicable to heavy
industry shall apply to all operations. Operations producing the highest noise
levels, such as crushing machines or haul roads for truck movement, shall be
located as far from lot lines as practical.
   J.   Maintenance Of Site: The site shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
condition, free of junk, trash or unnecessary debris. Buildings shall be
maintained in good repair and appearance. Salvageable equipment stored in
nonoperating condition shall be screened or enclosed.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-18-6: FINISHED SITE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Removal Of Materials After Completion: Stockpiled materials and
structures and equipment needed for removal thereof shall be removed within two
(2) years after the completion of production in any area. All other structures,
except structures shown on the Reclamation Plan and fences, shall be removed
within one year after the completion of production in the area, as shall
stumps, boulders and other debris resulting from excavation and related
activities.
   B.   Replacement Of Topsoil: Areas not under water shall be covered with
arable topsoil at least six inches (6") deep or as deep as was present on the
land prior to excavation, whichever is less. Such topsoil shall contain at
least ten percent (10%) organic material, or the percentage present prior to
excavation, whichever is less.
   C.   Replacement Of Ground Cover: To avoid erosion, vegetative ground cover
in conformance with the Reclamation Plan shall be planted upon all areas on
which topsoil has been replaced.
   D.   Grading And Drainage:
      1.   After production is completed, sufficient drainage shall be provided
to avoid water pockets, undue erosion and increased runoff onto or erosion of
surrounding properties or public streets. To the extent possible, points of
drainage and drainage volume off the site shall be the same as they were before
the operation began.
      2.   All open excavations shall be backfilled with earth or other
suitable fill material approved by the City Engineer to the grades indicated on
the Reclamation Plan. No pits with side slopes greater than thirty degrees
(30°) shall remain on the site when finished unless such slopes are under
water.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
CHAPTER 19: VARIANCES
Section
11-19-1: Purpose
11-19-2: Approval Process
11-19-3: Minor Variances
11-19-4: Existing Variances
11-19-5: Approval Criteria For Variances
11-19-6: Approval Criteria For Use Variances
11-19-7: Conditions Or Restrictions
11-19-8: Revocation Of Variance
11-19-1: PURPOSE:
Because of special characteristics of particular properties in the City, the
literal application of the general provisions of this title may, in certain
instances, create hardships not intended by these regulations. The City Council
may accordingly grant variances from the literal application of the provisions
of this title based on findings of fact as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-19-2: APPROVAL PROCESS:
Variances shall be approved only in conformance with the approval process
provided in the filing procedures section of this title and the approval
criteria in section
11-19-5 of this chapter.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-19-3: MINOR VARIANCES:
   A.   Purpose And Scope: The purpose of minor variance procedures is to
reduce the time and expense to homeowners of obtaining approval of simple
variances that are likely to have minimal adverse impact in residential
neighborhoods.
   B.   Application: The fee owner, contract purchaser, or option holder of a
single family detached or attached dwelling or single family detached or
attached building lot that wishes to request a variance for that dwelling or
lot may apply under minor variance procedures.
   C.   Administrative Variation: Applications for minor variances may be
reviewed and approved administratively.
      1.   The Zoning Administrator will review, and may approve with
conditions, minor variance applications that meet the following standards:
         a.   A complete application has been submitted to the Zoning
Administrator.
         b.   A notice has been delivered via certified mail, return receipt
requested, to adjacent property owners that are abutting or across a public
right-of-way.
         c.   No written objections have been received. If any noticed property
owner files a written objection to the administrative variation within fifteen
(15) calendar days of receipt of such notice, the minor variance shall be
denied.
            (1)   If denied, the property owner may submit an application for
minor variance to be considered by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council. Applicants requesting a review by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and City Council shall follow all procedural requirements as provided for in
subsection
11-19-3D, Filling Submissions.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator may deny administrative variation requests
if he or she believes it will negatively impact property values or negatively
impact the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986; amd. Ord. 20-20, 5-4-2020; Ord. 21-3, 1-18-2021)
11-19-4: EXISTING VARIANCES:
Variances, as provided herein, shall be considered the same as variations
provided under State Statute. Lawful variations granted to a property prior to
the effective date of this title shall be considered lawful variances without
the need for approval of a variance hereunder. Except that where such a
variation is not needed under this title, variance status shall not be
applicable.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-19-5: APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR VARIANCES:
In recommending approval or conditional approval of a variance, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall transmit to the City Council written findings of
fact that all of the conditions below apply to the application. The City
Council shall not be bound by the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission. However, in granting approval, the City Council shall similarly
find that all of the following conditions apply:
   A.   Special Circumstances Not Found Elsewhere: Special circumstances, fully
described in the written findings, exist that are peculiar to the property for
which the variance is sought and that do not apply generally to other
properties in the same zoning district. And these circumstances are not of so
general or recurrent a nature as to make it reasonably practical to provide a
general regulation to cover them.
   B.   Circumstances Relate To The Property Only: Since a variance will affect
the character of its surroundings long after a property changes hands, the
special circumstances referenced herein relate only to the physical character
of the land or building(s) for which a variance is sought, such as dimensions,
topography or soil conditions. They do not concern any business or activity the
present or prospective owner or tenant carries on, or seeks to carry on
therein, nor to the personal, business or financial circumstances of such owner
or tenant or any other party with interest in the property.
   C.   Not Resulting From Applicant Action: The special circumstances that are
the basis for a variance have not resulted from any act of the applicant or of
any other party with interest in the property.
   D.   Unnecessary Hardship: For reasons fully set forth in the written
findings, the strict application of the provisions of this title would result
in unnecessary and undue hardship upon the applicant, as distinguished from
mere inconvenience.
   E.   Preserves Rights Conferred By District: A variance is necessary for the
applicant to preserve and enjoy a substantial property right possessed by other
properties in the same zoning district and does not confer a special privilege
ordinarily denied to other properties in the district.
   F.   Necessary For Use Of Property: The grant of a variance is necessary not
because it will increase the applicant’s economic return, although it may have
this effect, but because without a variance the applicant will be deprived of
any reasonable use or enjoyment of the property.
   G.   Not Alter Local Character: The granting of the variance will not alter
the essential character of the locality, nor substantially impair environmental
quality, property values or public safety or welfare in the vicinity.
   H.   Consistent With Title And Plan: The granting of a variance will be in
harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title and of the
Comprehensive Plan of the City, as viewed in light of any changed conditions
since their adoption.
   I.   Minimum Variance Recommended: The variance recommended by the Planning
and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Council is the minimum required
to provide the applicant with reasonable use and enjoyment of his property.
(Ord. 86-382, 12-22-1986)
11-19-6: APPROVAL CRITERIA FOR USE VARIANCES:
In recommending approval of a use variance, the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall transmit to the City Council written findings of fact that all of the
conditions below apply to the application. The City Council shall not be bound
by the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission. However, in
granting approval, the City Council shall similarly find that all of the
following conditions apply:
   A.   Practical Difficulties Or Particular Hardship: For reasons fully set
forth in the written findings, the strict application of the provisions of this
title relating to the use of the buildings or structures, or the use of the
land, would result in unnecessary and undue hardship upon the applicant, as
distinguished from mere inconvenience.
   B.   Reasonable Return: The property cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
this title for the pertinent zoning district.
   C.   Unique Circumstance: Special circumstances, fully described in the
written findings, exist that are peculiar to the property for which the use
variance is sought and that they do not apply generally to other properties in
the same zoning district.
   D.   Not Alter Local Character: The granting of the use variance will not
alter the essential character of the locality, nor substantially impair
environmental quality, property values or public safety or welfare in the
vicinity.
   E.   Consistent With Title And Comprehensive Plan: The granting of a use
variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this title
and of the Comprehensive Plan of the City.
(Ord. 94-614)
11-19-7: CONDITIONS OR RESTRICTIONS:
The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend, and the City Council, in
granting any variance, may impose such conditions or restrictions as appear
necessary to minimize possible detrimental effects of such variance upon other
properties in the subject zoning district or surrounding neighborhood.
(Ord. 94-614)
11-19-8: REVOCATION OF VARIANCE:
A variance may be revoked by the City Council if:
   A.   Noncompliance: Any conditions or restrictions are not complied with
within the time limit specified on the variance;
   B.   Compliance Not Maintained: After they are initially complied with,
compliance with such conditions or restrictions is not maintained at any time;
   C.   Variance Not Established: The variance is not established or a required
building permit is not obtained and building started, within one year of the
date the variance is issued; or
   D.   Use Variance Ceases To Exist: With respect to use variances, in the
event the use granted by the variance shall cease to exist for more than three
hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days.
(Ord. 94-614)
CHAPTER 20: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
Section
11-20-1: Purpose
11-20-2: Applicability
11-20-3: Procedure
11-20-4: Amendment To Approved Planned Unit Development
11-20-5: Standards For Planned Unit Developments
11-20-6: Provision Of Community Amenities
11-20-7: Expiration Of Approved Planned Unit Developments
11-20-1: PURPOSE:
Planned unit developments are a distinct category of conditional use permits
intended to allow flexibility in the application of the standards of this title
for significant development proposals that provide amenities to the community
beyond those required of conventional development applications. The planned
unit development process seeks to achieve the following specific purposes:
   A.   Encourage creativity, flexibility, sustainability, and environmental
sensitivity in the development of land and the design of structures.
   B.   Provide for the efficient use of land to facilitate a more effective
arrangement of land uses, structures, utilities, circulation systems, parking,
and other facilities.
   C.   Facilitate development that is consistent with City land use policies,
particularly in areas designated for potential redevelopment.
   D.   Encourage development that preserves and enhances the natural features,
environmental resources, watercourses, and topography of the site.
   E.   Facilitate the provision of public and private open space, recreational
facilities, and other amenities that will enhance the character of the site.
(Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
11-20-2: APPLICABILITY:
   A.   Conditional Use Permit Standards: A planned unit development shall be
granted in accordance with the procedures, standards, and requirements of this
section, Title 11, Chapter 6: District Regulations, and Title 11, Chapter 5
Conditional Uses. The ordinance granting or amending the planned unit
development as a conditional use may depart or deviate from the standards, and
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Zoning District Exceptions: Planned unit developments are subject to
the regulations of the zoning district in which they are located, unless
exceptions from these regulations are approved by the City Council and found to
be in accordance with section
11-20-5 (Standards for Planned Unit Developments).
   C.   Subdivision Plats And Building Permits: When applied for separately,
approval of a planned unit development is required prior to approval of a
subdivision plat in accordance with Title 12 - Chapter 3: Application
Requirements, Forms and Fees. However, a planned unit development and a
subdivision plat may be applied for and approved concurrently as determined by
the Zoning Administrator.
   D.   Existing Integrated Design District Developments Made Lawful. All
Integrated Design District (IDD) Developments approved prior to the adoption of
this chapter shall be considered Planned Unit Developments and remain lawful.
IDD Developments shall be allowed to be reestablished so long as the
development remains in compliance with the approved IDD Ordinance and
associated plans.
   E.   Pending Integrated Design District Development Applications: If an
application for an Integrated Design District Development has been applied for
prior to the effective date of this chapter, then said application shall follow
the most applicable planned unit development procedure outlined in section
11-20-3 (Procedure) as determined by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
11-20-3: PROCEDURE:
An application for a planned unit development shall follow a four-step
procedure, which includes a pre-application consultation, an optional concept
plan consultation, a preliminary plan, and a final plan. The applicant may
submit concurrent applications for the preliminary plan and final plan, in
which case the preliminary plan and the final plan shall be comprised of the
same document in accordance with subsection D (Final Plan). Requests for
concurrent review of applications for preliminary and final plan shall be
reviewed by the Zoning Administrator who may approve or deny the request based
on the scope of the project.
   A.   Pre-Application Consultation: The purpose of the pre-application
consultation is to allow the applicant to receive advice and assistance from
the Zoning Administrator and appropriate City staff prior to preparation of the
optional concept plan or preliminary plan.
      1.   Action By The Zoning Administrator:
         a.   Prior to filing a formal application for a planned unit
development, the applicant shall arrange a pre-application consultation with
the Zoning Administrator to discuss the proposed planned unit development.
         b.   The Zoning Administrator and appropriate City staff shall meet
with the applicant to discuss the proposed planned unit development and the
requirements for a planned unit development application.
         c.   The Zoning Administrator shall provide advice and assistance to
the applicant after determining the nature of the exceptions required from this
chapter and whether the proposal is consistent with the intent of the elements
of the Comprehensive Plan and the other land use policies of the City.
         d.   Any advice and assistance provided by the Zoning Administrator
and City staff shall not be binding upon the City Council or Planning and
Zoning Commission with respect to the formal planned unit development
application.
   B.   Optional Concept Plan Consultation: The purpose of the optional concept
plan consultation is to allow the applicant to obtain information and guidance
from the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council prior to preparation
of the preliminary plan.
      1.   Action By The Planning And Zoning Commission:
         a.   Prior to filing a formal application for a planned unit
development, the applicant may arrange a concept plan consultation with the
Planning and Zoning Commission to discuss the proposed planned unit
development.
         b.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall meet with the applicant
to discuss the proposed planned unit development and the requirements for a
planned unit development application.
         c.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall provide information and
guidance to the applicant after determining the nature of the exceptions
required from this chapter and whether the proposal is consistent with the
intent of the elements of the Comprehensive Plan and the other land use
policies of the City.
         d.   Any views expressed by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall
be deemed to be advisory and only the individual views of the member expressing
them. The views expressed shall not prejudice any rights of the applicant or
obligate the Planning and Zoning Commission to recommend approval or denial of
any formal application.
      2.   Action By The City Council:
         a.   Following a meeting with the Planning and Zoning Commission to
discuss a proposed planned unit development, the applicant may also arrange a
concept plan consultation with the City Council to discuss the proposed planned
unit development.
         b.   The City Council shall meet with the applicant to discuss the
proposed planned unit development and the requirements for a planned unit
development application.
         c.   The City Council shall provide information and guidance to the
applicant after determining the nature of the exceptions required from this
chapter and whether the proposal is consistent with the intent of the elements
of the Comprehensive Plan and the other land use policies of the City.
         d.   Any views expressed by the City Council during concept plan
consultation shall be deemed to be preliminary and only the individual views of
the member expressing them. The views expressed shall not prejudice any rights
of the applicant or obligate the City Council, or any member of it, to
recommend approval or denial of any formal application.
   C.   Preliminary Plan: The purpose of the preliminary plan is to allow the
applicant to obtain a preliminary recommendation from the Planning and Zoning
Commission and preliminary approval from the City Council prior to preparation
of the final plan.
      1.   Action By The Zoning Administrator:
         a.   Applications for a preliminary plan for a planned unit
development and a conditional use permit shall be filed concurrently with the
Zoning Administrator in accordance with Title 11, Chapter 4: Filing Procedures
and the requirements for a planned unit development application. Applications
shall not be filed prior to completion of the pre-application consultation.
         b.   Upon the Zoning Administrator's determination that the
application is complete, according to applicable requirements and City
policies, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a report for the Planning and
Zoning Commission based upon the standards of section
11-20-5 (Standards for Planned Unit Developments), section
11-15-5 (Approval Criteria for Conditional Use Permits) and schedule the
application for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      2.   Action By The Planning And Zoning Commission:
         a.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing
on a proposed preliminary plan for a planned unit development and a conditional
use permit in accordance with subsection
11-4-3F (Public Hearing) within sixty (60) days after receipt of a complete
application. The sixty (60) day period may be extended with the written consent
of the applicant. Notice for the public hearing shall be in accordance with
section
11-4-6 (Public Notice).
         b.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall evaluate the application
based upon the Zoning Administrator's report, the evidence presented at the
public hearing, and the standards of section
11-20-5 (Standards for Planned Unit Developments) and section
11-15-5 (Approval Criteria for Conditional Uses).
         c.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend approval,
approval with conditions, or denial of the application.
            (1)   In recommending approval of a preliminary plan for a planned
unit development and a conditional use permit, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may recommend conditions upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance, and operation of the planned unit development and
the conditional use as deemed necessary to protect the public interest.
            (2)   In recommending approval of a preliminary plan for a planned
unit development and a conditional use permit, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may recommend guarantees from the permittee as deemed necessary to
assure compliance with the stipulated conditions of approval.
         d.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall forward its
recommendation to the City Council within thirty (30) days after the close of
the public hearing.
      3.   Action By The City Council:
         a.   The City Council shall consider the application within sixty (60)
days after receiving the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
The sixty (60) day period may be extended with the written consent of the
applicant.
         b.   The City Council shall evaluate the application based upon the
Zoning Administrator's report, the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the evidence presented at the public hearing, and the standards of
section
11-20-5 (Standards for Planned Unit Developments) and section
11-15-5 (Approval Criteria for Conditional Uses).
         c.   The City Council shall take action in the form of approval,
approval with conditions, denial, or referral of the application back to the
Planning and Zoning Commission for further consideration. In approving a
preliminary plan for a planned unit development and a conditional use permit,
the City Council may:
            (1)   Identify conditions upon the establishment, location,
construction, maintenance, and operation of the planned unit development and
the conditional use as deemed necessary to protect the public interest, to be
imposed at such time as final plan approval of the planned unit development is
granted.
            (2)   Require guarantees from the permittee as deemed necessary to
assure compliance with the stipulated conditions.
         d.   Following approval of a preliminary plan for a planned unit
development and a conditional use permit, the applicant shall be entitled to
submit a final plan for the planned unit development.
   D.   Final Plan: The purpose of the final plan is to allow the applicant to
obtain final approval of the planned unit development from the City Council.
      1.   Action By The Zoning Administrator:
         a.   Applications for a final plan for a planned unit development
shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator in accordance with Title 11,
Chapter 4: Filing Procedures and the requirements for a planned unit
development application. Applications shall be filed within one year after
approval of the preliminary plan.
         b.   Upon the Zoning Administrator's determination that the
application is complete, according to applicable requirements and City
policies, the Zoning Administrator shall determine whether the final plan is in
conformance with the approved preliminary plan and any conditions and
guarantees deemed necessary by the City Council.
         c.   If the final plan is in substantial conformance with the approved
preliminary plan, the Zoning Administrator shall prepare a report for the City
Council recommending approval of the final plan and schedule the application
for consideration by the City Council.
         d.   If the final plan is not in substantial conformance with the
approved preliminary plan, the Zoning Administrator shall allow the applicant
to revise any parts of the application that are not in substantial conformance
with the preliminary plan prior to preparing the report, and shall allow the
applicant to resubmit the application as a final plan in accordance with the
requirements of this Section.
      2.   Action By The City Council:
         a.   The City Council shall consider the application within thirty
(30) days after receiving the report of the Zoning Administrator recommending
approval of the final plan. The thirty (30) day period may be extended with the
written consent of the applicant.
         b.   The City Council shall take action in the form of approval,
approval with conditions, or denial of the application.
         c.   Upon approval of the final plan by the City Council, the use of
land and the construction or modification of any buildings or structures on the
site will be governed by the approved final plan rather than by other
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
11-20-4: AMENDMENT TO APPROVED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
A final plan for an approved planned unit development may be amended in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
   A.   Major Amendments: Any change to an approved final plan that
substantially affects the essential design, composition, and character of the
planned unit development shall be considered a major amendment. Any amendment
that is not established as a minor amendment in subsection B (Minor Amendments)
shall also be considered a major amendment. The City Council shall make a
decision on a request for a major amendment after receiving a recommendation
from the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with subsection
11-20-3C (Preliminary Plan).
   B.   Minor Amendments: Any change to an approved final plan that minimally
affects the essential design, composition, and character of the planned unit
development shall be considered a minor amendment. The Zoning Administrator
shall make a decision on a request for a minor amendment in accordance with
subsection
11-20-3C (Preliminary Plan). The Zoning Administrator may determine that the
application shall be resubmitted as a major amendment in accordance with
subsection A (Major Amendments). Minor amendments shall include the following:
      1.   Any change in the proportion of land uses in the development by less
than ten (10) percentage points.
      2.   Any change in the number of off-street parking spaces provided
within the development by less than ten percent (10%).
      3.   Any change in the gross floor area of the development by less than
ten percent (10%).
      4.   Any change in the building height of the development by less than
ten percent (10%).
      5.   Any change in the proportion of the lot coverage of the development
by less than ten (10) percentage points.
      6.   Any change in the location or dimensions of walkways, driveways,
streets, parking facilities, and loading facilities within the development by
less than five feet (5').
(Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
11-20-5: STANDARDS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
The City Council, Planning and Zoning Commission, and Zoning Administrator
shall evaluate applications for planned unit developments with specific written
findings based on a balance of both the standards of this Section and the
approval criteria for conditional uses in accordance with section 11-15-5
(Approval Criteria for Conditional Uses).
   A.   The proposed planned unit development fulfills the objectives of the
Comprehensive Plan, and other land use policies of the City, through an
innovative and creative approach to the development of land.
   B.   The proposed planned unit development will provide walkways, driveways,
streets, parking facilities, loading facilities, exterior lighting, and traffic
control devices that adequately serve the uses within the development, promote
improved access to public transportation, and provide for safe motor vehicle,
bicycle, and pedestrian traffic to and from the site.
   C.   The proposed planned unit development will provide landscaping and
screening that enhances the City's character and livability, improves air and
water quality, reduces noise, provides buffers, and facilitates transitions
between different types of uses.
   D.   The proposed planned unit development will provide site design and
development that is based on sustainable principles to ensure that low impact
alternatives are integrated into the proposed project.
   E.   The proposed planned unit development will protect the community's
natural environment to the greatest extent practical, including existing
natural features, water courses, trees, and native vegetation.
   F.   The proposed planned unit development will be provided with underground
installation of utilities when feasible, including electricity, cable, and
telephone, as well as appropriate facilities for storm sewers, stormwater
retention, and stormwater detention.
(Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
11-20-6: PROVISION OF COMMUNITY AMENITIES:
Planned unit developments may be granted exceptions from zoning district
regulations if the applicant demonstrates that the development will provide
amenities to the City that are not required from conventional development
applications. The amenities to be considered by the City Council, Planning and
Zoning Commission, and Zoning Administrator shall be appropriate for the scale
of the planned unit development and may include, but are not limited to, the
following:
   A.   Establishment of community amenities, such as plazas, gardens, public
art features, outdoor seating areas, pedestrian facilities, and transit
facilities.
   B.   Establishment of open space amenities, such as playing fields,
playgrounds, swimming pools, and fitness facilities.
   C.   Enhancement of the community's natural environment, including existing
natural features, water courses, trees, and native vegetation.
   D.   Preservation and enhancement of the community's cultural resources and
historic places.
   E.   Provision of public infrastructure improvements that exceed the
requirements of the planned unit development, such as enhancements to rights-
of-way, stormwater management systems, and sewer systems.
   F.   Incorporation of sustainable development techniques, such as meeting
the requirements of LEED or LEED-equivalent rating systems.
   G.   Provision of residential dwelling units for affordable housing or
senior housing.
   H.   Provision of residential dwelling units with accessible features that
exceed the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
11-20-7: EXPIRATION OF APPROVED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS:
   A.   Preliminary Plan Expiration: Preliminary plan approval shall expire and
be revoked if a complete application for the final plan has not been filed
within one year after approval of the preliminary plan by the City Council. The
applicant may extend this one-year period by means of a written request filed
with the Zoning Administrator at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration
of the period, which shall be approved by the City Council.
   B.   Final Plan Expiration: Final plan approval shall expire and be revoked
if a building permit has not been filed within one year after approval of the
final plan by the City Council. The applicant may extend this one-year period
by means of a written request filed with the Zoning Administrator at least
thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the period, which shall be approved
by the City Council.
(Ord. 22-26, 4-5-2022)
CHAPTER 21: APPENDICES
11-21-1: Appendix A
11-21-1: APPENDIX A:
   CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3015.png]
 
   LOT COVERAGE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3013.png]
 
   BUFFERING/PARKING SCREENING STRIP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3011.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3009.png]
 
   FLAG LOT DIAGRAM
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3007.png]
 
   FLOODPLAIN - DEPICTION OF TERMINOLOGY
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3005.png]
 
* No buildings or structures permitted within this area, except those
encroachments into required yards, in accordance with section
11-14-4, table 1 of this title.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3003.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3001.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2999.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2999.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2997.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2995.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2993.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2991.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2989.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/edc2dfc2161bd6a0d2ed9677445e7c0fa2da710f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2987.png]
 
(Ord., 12-22-1986)
TITLE 12: SUBDIVISION CONTROL AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
12-1-1: Title
12-1-2: Policy
12-1-3: Purposes
12-1-4: Jurisdiction And Approval
12-1-5: Compliance With Technical Specifications Manual
12-1-6: Interpretation, Conflict And Separability
12-1-7: Amendments
12-1-8: Variances
12-1-9: Violation And Penalties
12-1-1: TITLE:
These regulations shall officially be known as, and may be cited and referenced
to as the SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MCHENRY
(hereinafter “these regulations” or “this title”).
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-1-2: POLICY:
   A.   It shall be the policy of the City to consider the subdivision of land
and the subsequent development of the subdivided parcel as subject to the
control of the City pursuant to the Comprehensive Plan and Official Map for the
orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the City.
   B.   Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used
safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood
or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until adequate public
facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for
drainage, water, sewerage and capital improvements, such as schools, parks and
transportation facilities.
   C.   The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be
properly related to the proposals shown in the Comprehensive Plan and the
capital budget and program of the City, and it is intended that these
regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions
and standards contained in the Building Codes, Zoning Ordinance, Comprehensive
Plan, and the capital budget and program of the City.
   D.   Land that has been subdivided prior to the effective date of this title
should, whenever possible, be brought into conformance with this title to
further the purposes identified in section
12-1-3 of this chapter.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-1-3: PURPOSES:
These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
   A.   Protect and provide for the public health, safety and general welfare
of the community.
   B.   Guide the future growth and development of the City in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan.
   C.   Provide for adequate light, air and privacy, to secure safety from
fire, flood and other danger, and to prevent the overcrowding of the land and
undue congestion of population.
   D.   Protect the character and the social and economic stability of all
parts of the City and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of
the community.
   E.   Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City and the
value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
   F.   Guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate
and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds,
recreation, and other public requirements and facilities.
   G.   Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivisions and resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use
of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided
land.
   H.   Ensure public facilities and services are available concurrent with
development, and that they will have a sufficient capacity to serve the
proposed subdivision or development and that the community will be required to
bear no more than its fair share of the cost of providing the facilities and
services through requiring the subdivider or developer to pay fees, furnish
land or cash in lieu of land, or establish mitigation measures to ensure the
development provides its fair share of capital facilities needs generated by
the development.
   I.   Prevent the pollution of air, streams and ponds; assure the adequacy of
drainage facilities; safeguard the water table; and encourage the wise use and
management of natural resources throughout the City in order to preserve the
integrity, stability and beauty of the City and the value of land.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-1-4: JURISDICTION AND APPROVAL:
   A.   Applicability: These regulations apply to all subdivision and
development of land, as defined in section
12-2-2 of this title, located within the corporate limits of the City, and
outside the corporate limits as provided by State law.
   B.   Approval Required: No subdivision shall be filed for record, nor any
public or private improvement made related to any subdivision or development,
until after approval thereof pursuant to this title.
   C.   Recording Required: No lot, tract or parcel of land within any proposed
subdivision shall be conveyed until such subdivision has been approved and
recorded pursuant to this title.
   D.   Permits, Certificates; Excavation Of Land: No building permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land,
created before or after the effective date of this title, which is not in
conformity with this title, and no excavation of land or construction of any
public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in
conformity with this title, even if such improvement does not entail the
subdivision of land.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-1-5: COMPLIANCE WITH TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS MANUAL:
The subdivider or developer shall comply with the general principles of design
and minimum requirements set forth in all codes, ordinances, regulations and
written administrative policies and orders of the City, as amended from time to
time, establishing standards and specifications for construction, including,
without limitation, construction of public improvements as part of a
subdivision or development.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-1-6: INTERPRETATION, CONFLICT AND SEPARABILITY:
   A.   Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, this title
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
health, safety and general welfare.
   B.   Conflict:
      1.   These regulations are not intended to repeal or impair any existing
easement, covenant, private agreement or permits previously adopted or issued
pursuant to the ordinances or resolutions of the City, or other requirements of
law; provided, that where the conditions imposed by this title upon the
development and use of land are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easements, covenants or private agreements, the
requirements of this title shall govern.
      2.   Where the conditions imposed by this title upon the development and
use of land are either more restrictive or less restrictive than the comparable
conditions imposed by any other ordinances or resolutions of the City, or any
other law, ordinance, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are
more restrictive or which impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
   C.   Separability: If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any
provision of this title to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect any other
provisions of this title. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge
invalid any application of any provision of this title to a particular parcel
of land, such judgment shall not affect the application of said provision to
any other parcel of land.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-1-7: AMENDMENTS:
For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare,
the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council may from time to time
propose amendments to this title, which shall then be approved or disapproved
by the City Council.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-1-8: VARIANCES:
Variances from the provisions of this title may be authorized by the City
Council, after recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, in
accordance with the provisions of this section, if it finds an extraordinary
hardship or practical difficulty that results from strict compliance with this
title and/or the purpose of this title may be served to a greater extent by an
alternative proposal.
   A.   Statement Of Justification: In applying for a variance from this title,
the subdivider or developer shall demonstrate in writing that:
      1.   The granting of the variance is in keeping with the overall purpose
and intent of this title, and will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or general welfare; and
      2.   The conditions on which the request is based are unique to the
property for which the relief is sought and are not applicable generally to
other property; and
      3.   The granting of the variance will alleviate a practical difficulty
or particular hardship due to the physical surroundings, shape or topographic
conditions of the specific property involved; and
      4.   The granting of the variance will not negatively affect adjacent
properties.
   B.   Conditions Of Approval: In approving a variance, the City Council may
require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the
purposes described in section
12-1-3 of this chapter, and may require the posting of a construction guarantee
to ensure compliance with the conditions imposed.
   C.   Limitations On Variances: No variance granted pursuant to this section
shall relieve a subdivider or developer from complying with all other
requirements of law. Nothing provided in this section shall be construed or
applied as authority of the City Council to vary any requirements of law other
than the provisions of this title.
   D.   Review Procedure: An application for a variance shall be submitted in
writing, and shall state fully the grounds for the application and all of the
facts relied upon by the applicant. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City
Council may review applications for variances concurrently with the related
subdivision or development application, except as otherwise provided by the
City Council on a case by case basis.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-1-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Penalty: Any person, corporation, firm, or partnership found guilty of
violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined according to the Fines
and Penalties found in Title 15, Chapter 1: Fines and Penalties, and be
responsible for the City's cost of prosecution, including reasonable attorney
fees. Each day that a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
   B.   Additional Remedies: Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken
in law or in equity to prevent any violation of this title, to prevent unlawful
construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation
and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. These
remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above, and may include
stopping all work, or any portion of any work, being conducted on any property
subject to this title, to revoke any permit or authorization issued by the City
for development on any such property, to discontinue processing and
consideration of any pending application for any such permit or authorization,
and to refuse to accept for processing and consideration any future application
for any such permit or authorization.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004; amd. Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
Section
12-2-1: Usage
12-2-2: Definitions
12-2-1: USAGE:
   A.   For the purpose of this title, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms
and words shall be used, interpreted, and defined as herein set forth, except
when the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   B.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense, and
words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular.
   C.   The word “shall” is mandatory, and not discretionary.
   D.   The word “may” is permissive.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this title shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALLEY: A public right-of-way primarily designed to serve as a secondary access
to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is on some
other street.
APPLICANT: The owner of the land proposed to be subdivided or developed, or his
representatives who shall have express written authority to act on behalf of
the owner.
APPROACH: That portion of the driveway located between the street pavement or
curb and the outside edge of the sidewalk, or property line.
BEDROOM: Any private room in a dwelling unit suitable for regular use for
sleeping purposes, and having a closet. Bedrooms include rooms designated on
development floor plans as dens, studios, offices or libraries, but excluding
living rooms, family rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, bathrooms, laundry rooms,
and mudrooms. Any room designated as other than a bedroom having a closet, but
in the judgment of the Director of Public Works would normally be usable for
sleeping purposes, shall be considered a bedroom.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or
boundary lines of municipalities.
BUILDING: Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, chattel or moveable property of any kind.
CERTIFY: Whenever this title requires that any agency or official certify the
existence of some fact or circumstance, the City by administrative rule may
require that such certification be made in any manner, oral or written, which
provides reasonable assurance of the accuracy of the certification.
CITY: The City of McHenry, Illinois.
CITY COUNCIL: The Corporate Authorities of the City of McHenry, Illinois.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: A development design technique that concentrates buildings
in specific areas on a site to allow the remaining land to be used for
recreation, common open space and preservation of environmentally sensitive
features.
COMMON OWNERSHIP: Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity,
partnership or unincorporated association; or ownership by different
corporations, firms, entities, partnerships or unincorporated associations, in
which a stockbroker, partner or associate, or a member of his family, owns an
interest in each corporation, firm, entity, partnership or unincorporated
association.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The composite of the functional and geographic elements of
the official plan of the City and environs or any segment thereof, in the form
of plans, maps, charts, text of reports, implementing ordinances and including
the Official Map.
CONDOMINIUM: A unit available for sale in fee simple contained in a multi-
occupancy project subject to covenants and restrictions placing control over
the common facilities in an elected board.
CUL-DE-SAC: A local street with only one outlet that terminates in a vehicular
turnaround and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient
reversal of traffic movement.
DESIGN STANDARDS, MINIMUM: All codes, ordinances, regulations and written
administrative policies and orders of the City, as amended from time to time,
establishing standards and specifications for construction, including, without
limitation, construction of public or private improvements as part of a
subdivision or development.
DEVELOPER: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or improved, or its
representative, who is responsible for any undertaking that requires review
and/or approval under these regulations. See definition of subdivider.
DEVELOPMENT: The construction of a new building or structure having a total
floor area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet, other than one single-
family dwelling unit; expansion by more than twenty five percent (25%) of an
existing structure to which this title would apply if the structure were being
constructed new; or activity that results in either more than three thousand
(3,000) square feet of additional impervious area or more than one acre of
hydrologically disturbed area; any of which may not be included within the
definition of SUBDIVISION, as defined in this section.
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS: The City of McHenry Director of Public Works, or his
or her duly authorized designee.
DRIVEWAY: The paved area providing vehicular access from a street, alley or
public way, to an open or enclosed parking area on private property.
DRIVEWAY APRON: The area of the driveway located in the public right-of-way,
between the public walk or property line, and the paved surface of the streets.
EASEMENT: A strip of privately owned land occupied or intended to be occupied
by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for any
other similar public use.
ENGINEERING PLANS: The complete maps, drawings and analysis governing the
specific location, design and construction of public or private improvements to
be installed in accordance with the requirements of this title and of the City
as a condition of the approval of a subdivision or development.
FLARE: The difference in width of a driveway approach at the outer edge of the
sidewalk or the property line if no sidewalk exists, and the street pavement or
curb.
HYDROLOGICALLY DISTURBED: An area where the land surface has been cleared,
compacted or otherwise modified that changes stormwater runoff, volumes, rates
or direction.
IMPROVEMENT, PUBLIC: Any facility necessary, in the determination of the City,
to provide a parcel with access to a public right-of-way or with utility
service of any kind, including, but not limited to, water, sanitary sewage
treatment or disposal, stormwater control or drainage, or other necessary
public service, such as a street, alley, drainage ditch, sidewalk, landscaping,
off street parking area, or lot improvement.
LOT: A tract, plot or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended
as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership, or possession, or for building development.
OFFICIAL MAP: The map established by the City showing streets, highways, parks,
drainage systems laid out, adopted and established by law and any amendments or
additions thereto resulting from the City’s actions or approval of subdivision
plats.
OWNER: The record owners of the fee or a vendee in possession, including any
person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any
other legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in
the land sought to be subdivided under the definition of common ownership.
PARKING LOT: A paved open area that is accessory to a main use on the property
where operable vehicles are kept when not in use.
PARKWAY: A strip of land within the right-of-way between the street pavement or
curb and the outside edge of the sidewalk, or property line.
PERSON: Any individual or group of individuals, or any corporation, general or
limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated association, or governmental
or quasi-governmental organization.
PERSONNEL, RETAINED: Any engineer, attorney, planner, economist or other
technical, professional or other expert paid and retained by the City to assist
or advise the City, directly or indirectly, in planning, reviewing, evaluating,
advising, approving, inspecting or accepting any development, subdivision and/
or subdivision improvement.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): A development constructed on a tract under
common ownership planned and developed as an integral unit and consisting of a
combination of residential and/or nonresidential uses on the land.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The City of McHenry Planning and Zoning
Commission.
REQUIREMENTS OF LAW: All applicable Federal, State of Illinois, and City laws,
statutes, codes, ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, and written
administrative policies of the City, including, without limitation, the City
Technical Specifications Manual.
RESUBDIVISION: The further division of lots or relocation of lot lines of any
lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, not including those exception set forth in the Plat Act.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: Any publicly dedicated strip of land owned, occupied or intended
to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission
line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade
trees, or for any other special use.
SALE OR LEASE: Any immediate or future transfer of ownership, or any possessory
interest in land, including contract of sale, lease, devise, interstate
succession, or other transfer of an interest in a subdivision or part thereof,
whether by metes and bounds or lot and block description.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: An area having special flood, mudslide or mudflow,
or flood related erosion hazards, which is shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map
or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map issued by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.
STREET: A public or private right-of-way that affords a primary means of
vehicular access to abutting properties, however designated.
SUBDIVIDE: The act or process of creating a subdivision.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person who: a) having an interest in land, causes it, directly
or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision; or b) directly or indirectly,
sells, leases or develops, or offers to sell, lease or develop, or advertises
to sell, lease or develop, an interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a
subdivision; or c) engages directly or through an agent in the business of
selling, leasing, developing or offering for sale, lease or development a
subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel site, unit or plat in a subdivision;
or d) is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct or indirect
common control with any of the forgoing.
SUBDIVISION: The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land which
creates two (2) or more parcels of land, any of which is less than five (5)
acres in area, not including those exceptions set forth in the Plat Act.
TOWNHOME: A dwelling unit that is attached to one or more other dwelling units
on the same lot and that has an individual private ground level entrance to the
outside and no portion of which is located above any other unit or portion
thereof.
WETLAND: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater
at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004; amd. Ord. 08-968; Ord. 12-1059; 2019
Code)
CHAPTER 3: APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS, FORMS AND FEES
Section
12-3-1: Development Applications
12-3-2: Preliminary Plat
12-3-3: Final Plat
12-3-4: Fees And Deposits
12-3-1: DEVELOPMENT APPLICATIONS:
An application for approval of a development shall be filed in writing with the
City, on a form provided by the City, and shall include without limitation the
following:
   A.   Deposit: Payment of a retained personnel fee deposit, as provided in
section
12-3-4 of this chapter.
   B.   Site Development Permit, Building Permit Information: All information,
plans and specifications required for issuance of a site development permit
and/or building permit for the proposed development.
   C.   Soils Map, Analysis Report: A soils map and analysis report for the
proposed development, prepared by the McHenry County Soil and Water
Conservation District, which shall be of sufficient scope to locate, identify
and describe soil conditions and all potential ground absorption, runoff and
flooding deficiencies.
   D.   Identification Of Wetland Or Special Flood Hazard Areas: Documentation
providing evidence that the property to be developed has been inspected by a
qualified professional to determine whether or not a wetland or special flood
hazard area is present.
   E.   Other Agency Applications: Copies of all other applications to other
agencies having jurisdiction over the development.
   F.   Engineering Plans: Six (6) copies of final engineering plans for the
construction of all public and private improvements in conformity with the
requirements of these regulations.
   G.   Other Information: Such other information as the Director of Public
Works, Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council may require at any time,
which, in the exercise of their discretion, is appropriate in light of all of
the circumstances affecting the application and will not be contrary to the
purposes and intent of this title.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-3-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   Preliminary Plat Applications: An application for approval of a
preliminary plat shall be filed in writing with the City, shall have the form
and content provided in subsection B of this section, and shall include,
without limitation, the following:
      1.   Payment of an application fee and retained personnel fee deposit, as
provided in section
12-3-4 of this chapter.
      2.   A title commitment for an owner’s title insurance policy issued by a
title company licensed to do business in Illinois in the amount of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) covering title of the real estate being subdivided
and covering a date not more than fourteen (14) days prior to the date the
preliminary plat has been filed with the City showing title in the intended
subdivider or developer and all encumbrances and other matters of record.
      3.   A soils map and analysis report for the proposed subdivision,
prepared by the McHenry County Soil and Water Conservation District, which
shall be of sufficient scope to locate, identify and describe soil conditions
and all potential ground absorption, runoff and flooding deficiencies.
      4.   Documentation providing evidence that the property to be subdivided
has been inspected by a qualified professional to determine whether or not a
wetland or special flood hazard area is present.
      5.   Copies of all other applications to other agencies having
jurisdiction over the subdivision.
      6.   A draft of protective covenants, whereby the subdivider proposes to
regulate land use or continued maintenance within the subdivision, or otherwise
regulates the proposed development.
      7.   Six (6) copies of preliminary engineering plans and studies for the
construction of all public improvements in conformity with the requirements of
this title.
      8.   Twenty five (25) paper prints, not exceeding twenty four inches by
thirty six inches (24" x 36") in size.
   B.   Form And Content Of Preliminary Plat: A preliminary plat shall include
or be accompanied by the following:
      1.   The proposed name of the subdivision.
      2.   Preparation date, including succeeding revision dates.
      3.   The north point.
      4.   Graphic scale. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and not more than one inch equals
twenty feet (1" = 20').
      5.   The name and address of the owner, subdivider or developer, and the
engineer or surveyor who prepared the plat.
      6.   The location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter section,
section, township and range, or by other legal description.
      7.   A small scale drawing of the section(s) in which the subdivision
lies, oriented in the same manner as the plat, and showing the location of the
subdivision, major roads, impacted schools, existing or proposed parks, and the
nearest bodies of water.
      8.   The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision.
      9.   Location and names of all adjacent subdivisions.
      10.   Name and address of all owners of unsubdivided property adjacent to
the subdivision.
      11.   The existing and proposed zoning of the subdivision, and the
existing zoning of all adjacent property.
      12.   Location, widths, and names of all existing and platted streets,
alleys or other public ways and easements, railroad and utility rights-of-way,
parks, cemeteries, watercourses, drainage ditches, permanent buildings, bridges
and other pertinent data as determined by the City, within three hundred feet
(300') of the proposed subdivision, or property owned or controlled by the
subdivider or developer.
      13.   Location and species of existing trees measuring ten inches (10")
or more in diameter, as measured six inches (6") above grade.
      14.   The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of
the survey, and the approximate high and low water elevations. All elevations
shall be references to USGS datum.
      15.   If the subdivision borders on a lake or stream, the distances and
bearings of a meander line established not less than twenty feet (20') outside
the 100-year floodplain line of the lake or stream.
      16.   Special flood hazard boundary lines and areas.
      17.   Layout, width, name and approximate grade of all proposed streets
and rights-of-way.
      18.   Direction and distance to nearest water and sewer mains, and the
size and capacity of those mains.
      19.   Dimensions and areas of lots.
      20.   Building setback lines with the lot widths.
      21.   Point of curvature, point of tangency, radii, length and central
angle for all horizontal curves.
      22.   Location and area of property proposed to be dedicated for public
use or to be reserved by covenant for use of all property owners in the
subdivision with the conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservation.
      23.   Existing topography of the property and within twenty five feet
(25') of the property, with contour intervals shown for at least every two feet
(2'), with reference to USGS datum, or at more frequent intervals for land of
unusual topography.
      24.   A table with the following information: total acreage of
subdivision; total number of lots; acreage of public lands to be dedicated
other than streets; and the buildable area of each lot.
      25.   Indication of proposed phases within the subdivision and the order
of site development.
      26.   The following certificates, in a form provided by the City:
         a.   Mayor and City Clerk.
         b.   Surface Water Drainage.
         c.   Roadway Access, State and/or County, if necessary.
         d.   McHenry County Health Department, if necessary.
      27.   Such other information as the Director of Public Works, Planning
and Zoning Commission or City Council may require at any time, which, in the
exercise of their discretion, is appropriate in light of all of the
circumstances affecting the application and will not be contrary to the
purposes and intent of this title.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-3-3: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   Final Plat Applications: An application for approval of a final plat
shall be filed in writing with the City, shall have the form and content
provided in subsection B of this section, and shall include, without limitation
the following:
      1.   A copy of the approved preliminary plat.
      2.   Payment of an application fee and retained personnel fee deposit, as
provided in section
12-3-4 of this chapter.
      3.   Copies of all other applications to other agencies having
jurisdiction over the subdivision.
      4.   Copy of covenants, conditions and restrictions, ready for recording,
whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use or continued maintenance
within the subdivision, or otherwise regulate the proposed development.
      5.   One copy of the final plat in an electronic format compatible with
the City’s computer system, one copy of the final plat on Mylar and twenty five
(25) paper prints, not exceeding twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x
36") in size.
      6.   Proper written consent from the surveyor who prepared the final plat
authorizing the City to record the plat with the McHenry County Recorder’s
Office.
      7.   Six (6) copies of final engineering plans, prepared by and bearing
the seal of a professional engineer registered in Illinois, for the
construction of all public improvements in conformity with the requirements of
this title.
   B.   Form And Content Of Final Plat: A final plat shall include or be
accompanied by the following:
      1.   The name of the subdivision. A letter from the McHenry County
Recorder of Deeds that certifies that the proposed subdivision name does not
duplicate the name of any subdivision of record within the County shall be
provided.
      2.   Preparation date, including succeeding revision dates.
      3.   The north point.
      4.   Graphic scale. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than
one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') and not more than one inch equals
twenty feet (1" = 20').
      5.   The location of the subdivision by government lot, quarter section,
section, township and range, or by other legal description.
      6.   The exact location of the subdivision indicated by true angles and
distances to the nearest established street lines and a corner or corners
established in the U.S. public land survey.
      7.   The exact length and bearing of the exterior boundaries of the
subdivision.
      8.   The exact location, widths and names of all existing or proposed
streets, alleys, easements or other public ways.
      9.   All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions.
      10.   Building setback lines with the lot widths.
      11.   Point of curvature, point of tangency, radii, length and central
angle for all horizontal curves.
      12.   An accurate survey and legal description of property proposed to be
dedicated for public use or to be reserved by covenant for use of all property
owners in the subdivision with the purpose or purposes indicated therein, and
with the conditions, if any, of such dedication or reservation.
      13.   Special flood hazard boundary lines and areas.
      14.   Language granting necessary easements to the City and to
appropriate utility companies for rights-of-way and for public services and
utilities, in a form provided by the City. Evidence shall be furnished to the
City that the individual utility companies or the organization responsible for
furnishing the service involved has reviewed such easements and any easement
provisions to be incorporated on the plat or in deeds.
      15.   The following certificates, in a form provided by the City (except
as otherwise required by law, certification on final plats of subdivisions
located in unincorporated areas subject to this title shall be those required
by the McHenry County subdivision regulations, except when this title is more
restrictive, the applicable certifications contained herein shall also be
required):
         a.   Certification by an Illinois registered land surveyor to the
effect that the plat represents a survey made by him or her, that the monuments
or markers shown thereon exist as located, and that all dimensional details are
correct, in a form provided by the City.
         b.   Notarized certification, by all property owners and by any
mortgage holder of record, of the adoption of the plat and the dedication of
street, easement and other public areas, in a form provided by the City.
         c.   Surface Water Drainage.
         d.   Roadway Access, State and/or County, if necessary.
         e.   McHenry County Health Department, if necessary.
         f.   School District.
         g.   City Engineer.
         h.   City Collector.
         i.   City Clerk.
         j.   Planning and Zoning Commission Chairperson.
         k.   County Clerk.
         l.   Agreement and Notice of Developer Contributions and Land
Donation.
      16.   Such other information as the Director of Public Works, Planning
and Zoning Commission or City Council may require at any time, which, in the
exercise of their discretion, is appropriate in light of all of the
circumstances affecting the application and will not be contrary to the
purposes and intent of this title.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-3-4: FEES AND DEPOSITS:
   A.   Application Fees: The following fee shall be paid upon filing a plat of
subdivision with the City:
 
Preliminary plat $450.00
Final plat       $450.00 for the first 2 acres; plus $10.00 for each additional
                 acre; plus a maintenance fee of $3,000.00 per cul-de-sac
Variance         $450.00
 
   B.   Retained Personnel Fees And Expenses: A subdivider or developer shall
deposit, pay and reimburse the City for any and all administrative expenses and
costs, and for any and all fees, salaries or compensation incurred and charged
to the City by retained personnel in connection with planning, reviewing,
evaluating, advising, approving, recording, inspecting or accepting any
development, preliminary or final plat, engineering plans, or subdivision
improvements.
      1.   a. The following amount shall be deposited into a specified account
with the City upon filing an application for preliminary plat, final plat or
development, which shall be used toward administrative and retained personnel
expenses and costs:
 
0 - 4 acres $900.00 per acre
5 - 9 acres 700.00 per acre
10+ acres   500.00 per acre
 
         b.   The following amount shall be deposited into a specific account
with the City upon filing an application for a variance to the ordinance: Five
hundred dollars ($500.00).
         c.   In the event a subdivider or developer fails to maintain a
positive balance in their account or fails to reimburse the City for services
performed in conjunction with a subdivision or development within fourteen (14)
days notice by the City, the City shall suspend all planning, reviewing,
evaluating, approving, recording and inspection services for said subdivision
or development. Such activities shall resume upon notice by the Finance
Department that all monies owed to the City have been paid and there is a
positive account balance in the subdivider or developer’s retained personnel
account.
      2.   During the course of construction and at such times as the Director
of Public Works deems necessary, within customary and good practices of
engineering and construction, inspection of the public improvement shall be
made to ensure compliance with the engineering plans as approved. The
subdivider or developer shall pay the actual costs of inspections. This fee
shall be the actual cost to the City of inspectors, engineers and other parties
necessary to ensure satisfactory completion of the work.
      3.   City shall place all required monies into a specified account,
bearing interest and held in the name of the City. The City shall retain any
interest that may be earned in connection with said deposit.
      4.   Any statement or bill submitted to the City by retained personnel
shall identify the specific charges and fees incurred, a copy of which shall be
retained by the City and made available for inspection by the subdivider or
developer.
      5.   At any time the balance of the specified account falls below one-
fourth (1/4) of the original amount deposited, the City shall require a sum of
money that, in addition to the balance in said specified account, shall equal
the amount originally required, or such lesser amount thereof that the City
Council might, in such cases, determine.
      6.   All proceedings in connection with such subdivision or development
shall be stayed until said subsequent requests for payment are deposited in
said specified account.
      7.   Any requirement for payment not deposited within six (6) months of
the date of said request shall, at the discretion of the City Council and upon
written notice to the subdivider or developer, terminate and render null and
void any prior approvals granted by the City for said development or plat.
      8.   The City Council may, for good cause shown in writing by the
subdivider or developer, grant continuances for said deposits.
      9.   The City Council may, at its discretion and by resolution, waive the
requirements of this section.
      10.   Upon receipt of the final statement or bill of the retained
personnel, or within sixty (60) days of the final development approval, or
approval and recording of the final plat and acceptance of public improvements,
any balance remaining in the specified account, excluding any interest, shall
be returned and repaid to the subdivider or developer.
(Ord. 07-907)
CHAPTER 4: DEVELOPMENT AND SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCESS
Section
12-4-1: Development Review
12-4-2: Preliminary Plat Review
12-4-3: Submission Of Preliminary And Final Plats For Simultaneous Review
12-4-4: Final Plat Review
12-4-5: Vacation Of Plats
12-4-1: DEVELOPMENT REVIEW:
   A.   Director Of Public Works Review: The Director of Public Works shall
review an application for approval of a development for compliance with all
requirements of law, and to determine whether subdivision approvals, public
improvements or land dedications are required for such development.
   B.   Effect Of Development Approval: Approval by the Director of Public
Works of a development shall not entitle the developer to any other approval or
issuance of any permit until after all of the standards and procedures for such
other approval or issuance of such permit have been satisfied.
   C.   Building Permits: No building permit shall be issued for any work
within a development until after the Director of Public Works has approved
final engineering plans for all public and private improvements.
   D.   Occupancy Certificates: No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for
any building or structure until after all public and private improvements are
completed, approved, and when appropriate, dedicated to and accepted by the
City.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-4-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT REVIEW:
   A.   Filing; Deadline; Director Of Public Works Review:
      1.   An application for approval of a preliminary plat shall be filed
with the Director of Public Works, in complete and proper form, at least thirty
(30) days prior to the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission at which
it is to be considered.
      2.   The Director of Public Works shall review the preliminary plat for
completeness, for compliance with the requirements of law, including, without
limitation, the application requirements established in section
12-4-3 of this chapter, and for technical accuracy. The Director of Public
Works shall notify the subdivider either that the application has been accepted
for processing or that it may not be processed because of deficiencies or
inaccuracies. If the Director of Public Works determines that the plat should
be accepted for processing, then the plat shall be referred to all appropriate
staff members and committees for review.
   B.   Action By Planning And Zoning Commission:
      1.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public meeting to
review the preliminary plat. Within forty five (45) days after the conclusion
of the public meeting, but not more than ninety (90) days after the date of an
accepted application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend
approval, approval with conditions or modifications, or disapproval, and shall
submit such recommendation to the City Council.
      2.   A recommendation for disapproval shall specify the reasons for
disapproval and the aspects of the preliminary plat that fail to comply with
this title or the requirements of law. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
recommend approval of a plat subject to certain conditions or modifications as
are deemed necessary in the interests and needs of the community. The failure
of the Planning and Zoning Commission to act within the time period specified,
or such further time to which the subdivider may agree, shall be deemed to be a
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission to disapprove the
preliminary plat.
   C.   Action By City Council: The City Council shall approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the preliminary plat within thirty (30) days after
its first regular meeting following the action by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. If the City Council disapproves the preliminary plat, the Director
of Public Works shall notify the subdivider in writing of the reasons for
disapproval. The failure of the City Council to act within the time period
specified, or such further time to which the subdivider may agree, shall be
deemed to be a decision of the City Council to disapprove the preliminary plat.
   D.   Effect Of Approval: Approval of a preliminary plat by the City Council
is tentative only involving merely the general acceptability of the proposed
subdivision layout. Such tentative approval shall be considered permission to
the subdivider to submit the final plat and final engineering plans for the
proposed subdivision.
   E.   Limitation On Preliminary Plat Approval: The approval of a preliminary
plat by the City Council shall be effective for a period of twelve (12) months
from the date of approval, at the end of which time the subdivider shall have
submitted a final plat for approval or a written request for an extension to
this period. If the City Council has not granted an extension and a final plat
is not submitted within this period, the preliminary plat shall be null and
void, and the subdivider shall resubmit a preliminary plat for review by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council, in accordance with this title.
   F.   Subdivision Phasing: The approval of a preliminary plat by the City
Council may provide for the division of the subdivision into two (2) or more
sections for final plat approval, and may impose such conditions upon the
filing of the sections, as it may deem necessary to assure the orderly
development of the subdivision. If phasing is approved, specific approval of a
variance to section
12-4-5 of this chapter that provides a modified period of approval shall be
required.
   G.   Minor Amendments To Preliminary Plat: At any time after preliminary
plat approval and before submission of a final plat, the subdivider may request
that the Director of Public Works approve a minor amendment to the approved
plat or conditional approval. If, in the judgment of the Director of Public
Works, the proposed amendment will not substantially alter the overall layout
or design of the subdivision, said amendment shall be approved. The Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider all other amendments in
accordance with the same procedure for preliminary plat approval.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-4-3: SUBMISSION OF PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS FOR SIMULTANEOUS REVIEW:
The Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement for the preliminary and
final plats of subdivision to be reviewed sequentially and separately and may
permit the simultaneous review of the preliminary and final plats provided,
however the Planning & Zoning Commission may overrule such decision of the
Zoning Administrator and require full compliance with the review procedures in
this section, if it deems, in its opinion, to be necessary for a full
understanding of the proposed development and its impact upon surrounding areas
and the City of McHenry.
(Ord. 21-38, 7-19-2021)
12-4-4: FINAL PLAT REVIEW:
   A.   Filing; Deadline; Director Of Public Works Review:
      1.   An application for approval of a final plat shall be filed with the
Director of Public Works, in complete and proper form, at least fifteen (15)
days prior to the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission at which it is
to be considered.
      2.   The Director of Public Works shall review the final plat for
completeness, for compliance with the requirements of law, including, without
limitation, the application requirements established in section
12-4-3 of this chapter, for compliance with the approved preliminary plat and
any modifications or conditions imposed on the preliminary plat, and for
technical accuracy. The Director of Public Works shall notify the subdivider
either that the application has been accepted for processing or that it may not
be processed because of deficiencies or inaccuracies. If the Director of Public
Works determines that the plat should be accepted for processing, then the plat
shall be referred to all appropriate staff members and committees for review.
   B.   Action By Planning And Zoning Commission:
      1.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public meeting to
review the final plat. Within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the
public meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend approval,
approval with conditions or modifications, or disapproval, and shall submit
such recommendation to the City Council.
      2.   A recommendation for disapproval shall specify the reasons for
disapproval and the aspects of the final plat that fail to comply with this
title or the requirements of law. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
recommend approval of a plat subject to certain conditions or modifications as
are deemed necessary in the interests and needs of the community. Failure of
the Planning and Zoning Commission to act within the time period specified, or
such further time to which the subdivider may agree, shall be deemed to be a
recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission to disapprove the final
plat.
   C.   Action By City Council: The City Council shall approve or disapprove
the final plat within sixty (60) days following the receipt of an accepted
application, or within sixty (60) days following the receipt of the last
required document, plat, agreement, or other item, whichever is later, or such
further time to which the subdivider may agree. If the City Council disapproves
the final plat, the Director of Public Works shall notify the subdivider in
writing of the reasons for disapproval. The failure of the City Council to act
within the time period specified, or such further time to which the subdivider
may agree, shall be deemed to be a decision of the City Council to disapprove
the final plat.
   D.   Approval Of Final Engineering Plans Required: Except as specifically
authorized by a variance approved by the City Council, no final plat shall be
approved by the City Council until after the final engineering plans for the
subdivision have been approved in accordance with this title.
   E.   Effect Of Approval: The approval of a final plat by the City Council
shall not entitle the subdivider to any other approval or issuance of any
permit until after all of the standards and procedures have been complied with
for such other approval or issuance of a permit.
   F.   Signing Of The Plat: When a subdivision improvement guarantee is
required, the City shall not endorse the final plat until after the Director of
Public Works has approved the security, and all conditions of the approval have
been satisfied.
   G.   Recordation Of Plat: The final plat shall be presented to the City with
all necessary endorsements within six (6) months after the date of approval by
the City Council. It shall be the responsibility of the City to file the final
plat with the County Recorder’s Office within seven (7) days after the final
endorsement is affixed to the plat.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-4-5: VACATION OF PLATS:
An application for approval of the vacation of a plat, or part thereof, shall
be filed with the Director of Public Works, and shall comply with all of the
provisions of this title applicable to the submission and approval of a final
plat. The plat of vacation shall be prepared in accordance with the
requirements of 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/6, as amended, and shall
have the form and content provided by this title for a final plat.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
CHAPTER 5: SUBDIVISION LAYOUT AND DESIGN
Section
12-5-1: Compliance Required
12-5-2: Preservation Of Natural Features
12-5-3: Streets
12-5-4: Block And Lot Layout
12-5-5: Monuments
12-5-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
In addition to the requirements established in this title, all subdivisions
shall comply with all requirements of law, including, without limitation, the
following:
   A.   All applicable statutory provisions.
   B.   The Zoning Ordinance, Building Codes, and all other applicable laws and
ordinances of the City.
   C.   The Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, and Master Plan for Public
Utilities of the City, including streets, public sites, environmental features
and parks shown on the Official Map.
   D.   Applicable laws, rules and regulations of the State and duly
constituted agencies thereof.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-5-2: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL FEATURES:
Every subdivision shall be designed to preserve to the fullest extent possible
all natural features of the land, such as natural ridges, large trees and
watercourses, which add to the attractiveness and environmental value of the
land and the proposed subdivision.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-5-3: STREETS:
   A.   Scope: Streets shall be designed and constructed to conform to this
title and the Official Comprehensive Plan adopted by the City Council. They
shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to
topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety, and their appropriate
relation to proposed uses of the land to be served. Generally, all streets
shall be dedicated to public use, and arterial streets, in all cases, shall be
dedicated to public use. All public streets shall be completely improved to the
full width of the right-of-way. All street improvements shall be extended to
the boundaries of the subdivision or development.
   B.   General Street Layout And Design: No subdivision or development shall
be approved unless the area to be subdivided has frontage on and access from an
existing street, or a street shown upon a plat approved by the City and
recorded with the McHenry County Recorder of Deeds. Such existing or proposed
street must be improved as required by this title, the City Technical
Specifications Manual, and other requirements of law, or its improvement
secured by a construction guarantee as required under this title.
      1.   The arrangement of streets shall either:
         a.   Provide for the continuation of existing, planned or platted
streets in surrounding area; or
         b.   Conform to a plan for the adjacent area adapted to meet a
particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance
or conformance to existing streets impracticable.
      2.   Local streets shall be so designed to discourage through traffic
movements and excessive vehicular traffic, be designed to discourage excessive
speeds and minimize vehicle-pedestrian conflict points, and should not rely on
extensive traffic regulations in order to function efficiently and safely.
      3.   Where a parcel abuts or contains an existing arterial or collector
street, as shown on the Comprehensive Plan or Official Map, the Planning and
Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council may require frontage
roads, double frontage lots with screen planting contained in a nonaccess
reservation not less than ten feet (10') wide along the rear property line, or
such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential
properties and to separate through and local traffic.
      4.   When any parcel or part of a parcel is adjacent to only one side of
an existing right-of-way, which is less than the required width required by the
development standards or the Official Map, the applicant shall dedicate
additional right-of-way to meet the specifications of these development
standards.
      5.   Half streets and private streets, alleys or thoroughfares are not
permitted.
      6.   Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangements of
streets in new subdivisions shall be extended to the boundary line of the tract
to make provision for the future projection of streets into adjacent areas.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-5-4: BLOCK AND LOT LAYOUT:
   A.   Maximum Length: The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks shall be
appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but
block length in residential areas shall not exceed one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500'), nor have less than sufficient width to provide for two (2) tiers
of lots of appropriate depth between streets.
   B.   Pedestrian Easements: Pedestrian easements, not less than ten feet
(10') wide, may be required by the City Council through the center of blocks
more than nine hundred feet (900') in length where deemed necessary to provide
circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation
or other community facilities.
   C.   Lot Areas, Dimensions: Lot areas and dimensions shall conform to the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. Lots lying outside the corporate limits
of the City shall conform to the requirements of the zoning district most
closely related to the current or proposed use of the property, as provided in
the Comprehensive Plan and Official Map.
   D.   Commercial, Industrial Lots: Depth and width of lots reserved or laid
out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for off
street loading and parking facilities, as required by the Zoning Ordinance.
   E.   Double, Reverse Frontage Lots: Double frontage and reversed frontage
lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of
residential development from arterial streets or conflicting land uses, or to
overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
   F.   Extra Depth For Residential Lots: Residential lots abutting arterial
and collector streets shall be platted with extra depth to provide greater
setback distances between the buildings and such trafficways. Vehicular access
to arterial and collector streets from such lots shall be prohibited.
   G.   Maximum Lot Depth: Excessive depth in relation to width shall be
avoided. A proportion of two and one-half (2-1/2) to one shall normally be
considered as a desirable maximum for lot widths of one hundred feet (100') or
more.
   H.   Determining Minimum Lot Area: In determining the minimum lot area under
this title and to meet the Zoning Ordinance requirements, both of the following
conditions must be met:
      1.   Ninety percent (90%) of the minimum lot area shall be at least two
feet (2') above the approximate high water elevation of any lake or stream
affecting the area; and
      2.   Eighty percent (80%) of the minimum lot area shall be at least three
feet (3') above the highest ground water level as estimated by the subdivider
or his agent from soil boring test data, and as verified by the Director of
Public Works.
   I.   Corner Lots: Corner lots for residential use shall have extra width to
permit full front building setbacks on both streets as provided by the Zoning
Ordinance.
   J.   Right Angle Lots Avoided: Lots at right angles to each other should be
avoided.
   K.   Side Lot Lines: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles
or radial to the street lines.
   L.   Follow Boundary Lines: Lots shall follow Municipal boundary lines
whenever possible.
   M.   Reserve Strips: Reserve strips controlling access to public utilities,
streets or other properties shall be prohibited.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-5-5: MONUMENTS:
Permanent monuments shall be placed in the subdivision as required by this
title and as approved by an Illinois registered land surveyor.
   A.   Location: Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at
street intersections, angle points of curve and block corners.
   B.   External Boundaries Of Subdivision: The external boundaries of a
subdivision shall be monumented in the field by concrete, not less than thirty
inches (30") length, not less than six inches (6") square or five inches (5")
in diameter, marked on top with an iron rod or other durable material securely
embedded; or by iron rods not less than thirty inches (30") in length and two
inches (2") in diameter.
   C.   Preservation Of Official Benchmarks: All U.S., State, County or other
official benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the
subdivision shall be preserved in precise location.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
CHAPTER 6: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
Section
12-6-1: Improvements Required
12-6-2: Permit Required
12-6-3: Engineering Plans Required
12-6-4: Review Of Engineering Plan
12-6-5: Streets
12-6-6: Sidewalks
12-6-7: Bikeways
12-6-8: Streetlighting
12-6-9: Water Service
12-6-10: Sanitary Sewer Service
12-6-11: Stormwater Drainage
12-6-12: Landscaping
12-6-13: Public Utilities Underground
12-6-14: Easements
12-6-15: Overall Design
12-6-16: Model Homes
12-6-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
Every subdivision or development shall be improved with public improvements as
set forth in this title and with all such other improvements as may be
necessary to serve the subdivision or development, as determined by the City.
All such improvements shall be designed and constructed by the subdivider or
developer in accordance with this title, the Technical Specifications Manual,
and other requirements of law, as approved by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No construction work of any kind, including grading, shall be performed on any
proposed street, sewer, water main or other public improvement without all
applicable permits and approvals having first been obtained from the City.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-3: ENGINEERING PLANS REQUIRED:
The subdivider or developer shall submit six (6) copies of complete engineering
plans, prepared by and bearing the seal of a professional engineer registered
in Illinois, for the construction of all public or private improvements. The
engineering plans shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of law,
including, without limitation, the City Technical Specifications Manual, this
title, and all applicable standards of other agencies with jurisdiction.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-4: REVIEW OF ENGINEERING PLAN:
   A.   Submission Of Preliminary Engineering Plans And Studies: Preliminary
engineering plans and studies shall be submitted with the application for
approval of a preliminary plat requiring or proposing public improvements.
These plans shall be accompanied by payment of all fees and deposits required
by this title. No preliminary plat shall be approved unless the City determines
that public facilities will be adequate to support and service the area of the
proposed subdivision. The applicant shall submit sufficient information and
data to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public facilities by
possible uses of said subdivision. Public facilities and services to be
examined for adequacy will include stormwater management, including
accommodations for off site drainage, roads, sanitary sewerage and water
service.
   B.   Preliminary Engineering Plan Review: The City shall review all
preliminary engineering plans and studies to determine if they are in
conformance with the requirements of law. Such review shall be completed within
forty five (45) days after submission of complete plans and payment of all
required fees and deposits. The City may approve the plans, may approve the
plans subject to modifications or conditions, or may disapprove the plans in
writing delivered to the subdivider stating the reasons for such disapproval.
The failure of the City to act within the time period specified, or such
further time to which the subdivider may agree, shall be deemed to be a
decision to disapprove the plans. The City shall not approve a preliminary plat
until after the approval of the preliminary engineering plans and studies.
   C.   Submission Of Final Engineering Plans: In the case of a subdivision,
final engineering plans may be submitted only after approval of a preliminary
plat, and not later than the time of filing of an application for approval of
the final plat. In the case of a development, final engineering plans must be
submitted not later than the time of filing of an application for approval of a
building permit. These plans shall be accompanied by payment of all fees and
deposits required by this title.
   D.   Final Engineering Plan Review: The City shall review all final
engineering plans to determine if they are in conformance with the requirements
of law, and in the case of a subdivision, in substantial compliance with the
approved preliminary plat. Such review shall be completed within forty five
(45) days after submission of complete plans and payment of all required fees
and deposits. The City may approve the plans, may approve the plans subject to
modifications or conditions, or may disapprove the plans in writing delivered
to the subdivider or developer stating the reasons for such disapproval. The
failure of the City to act within the time period specified, or such further
time to which the subdivider or developer may agree, shall be deemed to be a
decision to disapprove the plans.
   E.   Record (As Built) Drawings:
      1.   After completion of all public improvements and prior to final
acceptance of said improvements, the subdivider or developer shall provide to
the City record ("as built") drawings of the engineering plans revised to
reflect all improvements as constructed, and shall include all easements. All
elements of the approved plans that have been revised from the approved final
engineering plans shall be noted as revisions on the final engineering plans
and signed and sealed by a professional engineer registered in Illinois. The
presentation of these plans shall be a condition of final acceptance of the
improvements and release of the construction guarantee assuring their
completion.
      2.   Electronic format of the as built drawings of the development and
all public improvements shall also be submitted to the City. These plans shall
also be tied to NAVD 1988 Vertical Datum. These plans shall be delivered in
AutoCad 2000 (or latest version) format and shall be tied into Illinois State
Plane Coordinate System (NAD 83, 1997 revision) through established IDOT
monumentation. The City will supply the developer with the nearest location of
this monumentation for tie-in.
      3.   For all projects involving extensions to sanitary sewer mains, there
shall be submitted two (2) copies of reproducible mylar drawings, maximum size
two feet by three feet (2' x 3') of the "as built" plans, showing the actual
locations and grades of sewers and manholes and the locations of the service
connection to the main and terminus of the service. One copy shall be submitted
to the City Engineer and one copy shall be submitted to the Director of Public
Works.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-5: STREETS:
   A.   Street Classifications And Definitions:
      1.   Major Arterial: Major arterial routes serve the primary centers of
activity within the City, the highest traffic volume corridors and the longest
trip desires. They are roadways that display inter- City continuity, regional
importance and that provide reasonably continuous routes through the City.
Major arterials are facilities that carry traffic volumes greater than twelve
thousand (12,000) vehicles per day (vpd), and are usually under the
jurisdiction of the State or County governments.
      2.   Secondary Arterial: Secondary arterial routes interconnect and
augment the major arterials. They accommodate trips of moderate length, provide
slightly less mobility then the major arterials but provide more emphasis on
land access. Secondary arterials can also be those facilities that serve major
traffic flows between various districts within the City. Secondary arterials
are facilities that carry between five thousand (5,000) and twelve thousand
(12,000) vpd, and are typically under the jurisdiction of the County, Township
or the City.
      3.   Collector Street: Collector streets provide both land access service
and traffic circulation within residential neighborhoods and commercial and
industrial areas. Collectors differ from arterials in that these roadways may
penetrate residential neighborhoods, distributing trips from the arterials
through the area to their ultimate destination. Collector streets are
facilities that which carry between one thousand (1,000) and five thousand
(5,000) vpd, and are typically under the jurisdiction of the City. Facilities
within the collector street classification are further classified by the
primary land use area that they serve (industrial collector, commercial
collector or residential collector).
      4.   Local Street: Local streets are all those facilities not in one of
the higher classifications. They primarily permit direct access to abutting
lands and provide connections to the higher order facilities. Service to
through traffic movements should be deliberately discouraged on these roads.
Local streets are facilities that carry less than one thousand (1,000) vpd and
are under the jurisdiction of the City. Facilities within the local street
classification are further classified by the primary land use area that they
serve (local industrial, local commercial, local residential or cul-de- sac).
   B.   Geometric Standards For Streets And Rights-Of-Way: All streets shall be
designed in accordance with tables 1 and 2 of this subsection.
   TABLE 1
   ROADWAY DESIGN STANDARDS
 Arterials1      Collector1                        Local
 Major Secondary Residential Industrial Commercial Residential Industrial
           Arterials1               Collector1                        Local
           Major      Secondary     Residential Industrial Commercial Residential Industrial
Right-of-  120' -     80' - 100'    66'         80'        80'        60'         60'
way width  150'
Roadway
width
(back to   69'        37' - 61'     34'         34'        34'        28'         34'
back:
curb)
           40 mph (55 35 mph (55
Design     mph in     mph in open   30 mph      30 mph     30 mph     30 mph      30 mph
speed3     open       areas)
           areas)
Sidewalk   5'         5'            4'          5'         5'         4'          5'
width
Number of
traffic    4          2 - 4         2           2          2          2           2
lanes
           Continuous Continuous 4'
           16'         
Median               Painted widen 12' at major intersections only   None
           Barrier    to 12' at
                      intersections
           Full
           access
           points at
Access     1/4 mile   20 per mile   Only when local street access is
location   spacing    (maximum 15   not available                     As needed
criteria             per mile)
           All others
           rt. in/rt.
           out
Parking    Not        Not allowed   1 side      None       None       1 side      None
           allowed
Bikeway                             10' off roadway
facilities 10' off    10' off                                        Not separately
(where     roadway1   roadway       4' on-street2                     designated
indicated)
           B-6.24     B-6.12
Curb type  (or 4'     (or 4'        M-6.12      B-6.12     B-6.12     M-6.12      B-6.12
           shoulders) shoulders)
Signal     1/2 mile   1/4 mile      At arterial only                  None
spacing2
 
Notes:
      1.    State and County jurisdictions may have other requirements.
      2.    Under the IDOT jurisdiction.
      3.    Speed limits shown are AASHTO design standards final speed limit
will be determined by speed studies.
   TABLE 2
   MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN
 
            Right-Of-  Street Width Radius Of  Maximum  Minimum  Clear Minimum
Street      Way Width  To Back Of   Horizontal Gradient Gradient Sight
                       Curb         Curves                       Distance
Arterials   See note 1 See note 1   400'       5%       0.6%     300'
Collector
and         80'        See note 1   300'       5%       0.6%     200'
industrial
Minor and   140'       90'          150'       7%       0.6%     200'
cul- de-sac
 
Note:
      1.   See table 1 of this subsection.
   C.   Intersections And Offsets:
      1.   Streets shall intersect at ninety degrees (90°) whenever possible.
No two (2) streets shall intersect at an angle of less than seventy five
degrees (75°). An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection
and should be at right angles for a minimum of one hundred feet (100')
therefrom.
      2.   No more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any one point.
      3.   Proposed intersections along one side of an existing street shall,
whenever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite
side of such street. Street or driveway jogs with centerline offsets of less
than one hundred fifty feet (150') shall not be permitted and jogs with
centerline offsets of less than two hundred twenty five feet (225') between
minor and collector or arterial streets shall be discouraged, except where the
intersected street or driveway has separate dual drives without median breaks
at either intersection.
      4.   Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access to
residential property abutting an arterial street either by providing: a) a
marginal access street; or b) by backing lots to the thoroughfare and providing
access by a collector, minor or cul-de-sac street one lot depth removed and
with a no access strip easement not less than ten feet (10') wide along the
rear lot line. These standards are established for the purpose of providing
protection for the residential properties and to provide for traffic safety and
the efficient use of the major street for its intended function of
accommodating through traffic.
      5.   Deceleration and left turn lanes shall be provided for access from
all arterial or collector streets onto all streets, including, without
limitation, Federal, State, County or Township highways. When an existing lot’s
only access is from an arterial street, the intersection of a proposed driveway
with the arterial street shall require the installation of acceleration/
deceleration lanes along the arterial street to provide for vehicular safety.
      6.   A clear minimum sight distance shall be provided for all
intersections in accordance with subsection B, table 2 of this section.
   D.   Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs may be permitted in subdivisions where land
availability, site planning or traffic control purposes determine a through
street is not practicable. A maintenance fee, in accordance with subsection
12-3-4A of this title, shall be required for each cul-de-sac in a subdivision.
      1.   The maximum length of a cul-de-sac shall be six hundred feet (600'),
as measured along its centerline from the center of the cul-de-sac circle to
the nearest right-of-way of the intersecting street.
      2.   Cul-de-sacs shall have a concentric teardrop shape with a minimum
right-of-way of one hundred forty feet (140') in diameter.
      3.   The center of the cul-de-sac shall have a minimum pavement diameter
of ninety feet (90').
   E.   Pavement And Design Specifications: All pavements shall be designed in
accordance with the City Technical Specifications Manual. The Director of
Public Works may, as a result of traffic analysis, soil analysis or State or
County requirements, require standards for a street that are more strict than
those established in the City Technical Specifications Manual.
   F.   Curbs And Gutters: PCC curbs and gutters shall be provided on all new
streets, and on existing streets within or adjacent to the subdivision in
accordance with the City Technical Specifications Manual.
   G.   Street Names: New street names shall not duplicate or be deceptively
similar to the names of existing streets, but streets that are continuations of
others already in existence shall bear the name of the existing streets.
Streets shall have one word names to avoid confusion.
   H.   Signs, Street Name And Traffic Control: Street name and traffic control
signs shall be installed by the City, at the sole cost of the subdivider, at
each intersection in accordance with the City Technical Specifications Manual.
   I.   State Or County Approvals: Any construction within or changes to
rights-of-way under the jurisdiction of the State, County or Township shall
require the approval of that jurisdiction in addition to City Council approval
before any construction is allowed to begin.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-6: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all streets within all new
subdivisions or developments. Sidewalks may also be required in other locations
when the City Council, in its sole discretion, determines that such sidewalks
are necessary for public safety or convenience. All sidewalks shall be
constructed in accordance with the City Technical Specifications Manual. The
Plat Office may, in his sole discretion, require payment of a fee in lieu of
sidewalk construction, when it is determined that the construction of sidewalks
within a subdivision or development is impractical or unnecessary. Said fee
shall be based on the linear footage of the sidewalk that would normally be
required times the construction cost to install such sidewalk, as established
from time to time by the City.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-7: BIKEWAYS:
All subdivisions and developments shall provide for bikeways as indicated in
the City Comprehensive Plan, Official Map, or as otherwise determined by the
City Council when considered appropriate for public safety or convenience.
Bikeways may be substituted for sidewalks in locations approved by the Director
of Public Works. All bikeways shall be constructed in accordance with the City
Technical Specifications Manual.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-8: STREETLIGHTING:
Streetlighting shall be provided in every subdivision and development, and
shall be constructed in accordance with the City Technical Specifications
Manual.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-9: WATER SERVICE:
   A.   Service Required: A complete water supply and distribution system,
including all piping, valves, fire hydrants and other appurtenances, shall be
provided for all new subdivisions or developments. In the case of any
buildings, residential, commercial or industrial, constructed prior to the
adoption of this title and served by a private well, the following shall apply:
Any building located within the City limits, the property line of which
building is located within two hundred feet (200') of a water distribution
line, shall have its water piping system connected to the said water
distribution line. Any parcel and/or building located outside the City shall be
required to annex into the City prior to connecting onto the City water
distribution system, and any and all expenses incurred to extend said water
distribution system would be totally at the property owner’s expense.
   B.   System Standards: Before commencing the water distribution system
layout, the developer shall confer with the City Engineer to determine the
required size for any water distribution lines traversing the subdivision or
lot to fit the City’s available capacities of off site downstream existing
facilities with the estimated increment of flow caused by the subdivision,
proposed development and any future off site development.
      1.   In no case shall the size of any water main be less than eight
inches (8") in diameter for residential or twelve inches (12") in diameter for
nonresidential developments.
      2.   Water mains shall extend to the extremities of streets, easements or
property lines that are served by the mains and shall be arranged to avoid dead
ends. All water distribution system piping shall be constructed within public
rights-of-way or within approved easements dedicated for public utilities.
Whenever feasible, the developer is required to design looped water mains.
      3.   Shutoff valves shall be provided at each branch main connection and
elsewhere, as determined by the Director of Public Works, to permit adequate
sectionalizing for maintenance and repair purposes.
      4.   A building service connection shall be provided for each lot and
principal building and shall extend to a point within one foot (1') of the
property line of the property being served. Such building service connection
shall be installed prior to installation of any pavement over the area of such
connection.
      5.   All attached and detached single-family dwelling units shall be
served directly by separate water piping connected to the City’s water
distribution system and not to be of common service as specified in the
Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois,
latest edition.
   C.   Design And Construction: Every water supply and distribution system
shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of law,
including, without limitation, the City Technical Specifications Manual and
Master Plan for Public Utilities, and in such a manner as to provide each lot
and principal building with a separate service connection.
   D.   Fire Hydrants:
      1.   Fire hydrants shall be installed throughout all additions to the
water system in accordance with the City Technical Specifications Manual. In no
case shall the spacing of required fire hydrants be greater than three hundred
feet (300').
      2.   The removal of water from any fire hydrant shall not be permitted
unless otherwise approved by the Director of Public Works.
   E.   Unauthorized Use: No part of the water distribution system shall be
used or disturbed by any unauthorized person unless the Director of Public
Works grants permission. This includes the operation of fire hydrants and valve
connections, or disconnections to any part of the water distribution system.
Any unauthorized person tampering with the water distribution system will be
prosecuted.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-10: SANITARY SEWER SERVICE:
   A.   Service Required: A complete sanitary sewerage system, including a
service connection for each lot and sewerage treatment plant capacity or
disposal facilities, shall be provided for all new subdivisions or
developments. In the case of any buildings, residential, commercial or
industrial, constructed prior to the adoption of the development standards and
served by a septic system, the following shall apply:
Any building located within the City, the property line of which building is
located within two hundred feet (200') of a sanitary sewer main line, shall
have its sanitary sewer facilities connected to the said sanitary sewer main
line. Any parcel and/or building located outside the City shall be required to
annex into the City prior to connecting onto the City sewerage system, and any
and all expenses incurred to extend said sewer system would be totally at the
property owner’s expense. The City Engineer and Director of Public Works have
the authority to require the installation of inspection manholes for new and
existing facilities.
   B.   System Standards: Before commencing the sewer layout, the developer
shall confer with the City Engineer to determine the required size and grades
for any trunk sewers traversing the subdivision or lot to fit the City’s
available capacities of off site downstream existing facilities with the
estimated increment of flow caused by the subdivision, proposed development,
and any future off site development.
      1.   Sewer mains shall be sized in accordance with the City Technical
Specifications Manual and in accordance with the capacity requirements of the
City’s sanitary sewerage transmission system as determined by the Director of
Public Works, but shall not be less than eight inches (8") in diameter.
      2.   Sanitary sewers shall be extended to the far edge of the development
and at other locations indicated by the City Engineer. All sanitary sewers
shall be constructed within public rights-of-way or within approved easements
dedicated for public utilities.
      3.   Sewer mains, with separate building service stubs for each lot and
principal building, shall be installed prior to construction of street
improvements.
      4.   Building service stubs shall be sized according to the requirements
of the use being served, as determined by the Director of Public Works;
provided, however, that service stubs shall not be less than six inches (6") in
diameter. Building service stubs shall extend to a point within one foot (1')
of the property line of the property being served.
      5.   All attached and detached single-family dwelling units shall be
served by separate sanitary sewers to be directly connected to the City
sewerage system and not to be of common service. Multi-family dwellings will be
permitted to be served by one common service.
   C.   Design And Construction: Every sanitary sewer system shall be designed
and constructed in accordance with the requirements of law, including, without
limitation, the City Technical Specifications Manual and Master Plan for Public
Utilities.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-11: STORMWATER DRAINAGE:
   A.   Service Required: A stormwater runoff control and detention system,
designed and constructed in accordance with the requirements of law, including,
without limitation, the City Technical Specifications Manual, the Master Plan
for Public Utilities, and the McHenry County Stormwater Ordinance, shall be
provided in all new subdivisions or developments to serve adequately the area
being platted or developed.
   B.   System Standards:
      1.   All subdivisions and development shall include provisions for the
construction of storm sewers and appurtenances. The storm sewer system shall be
separate and independent of the sanitary sewer system.
      2.   Existing drainage channels shall be used whenever possible.
      3.   The design of the drainage system shall consider and show:
         a.   Storm drainage area of which the subdivision is a part.
         b.   Calculations as to volume and frequency of water to be handled.
         c.   Grades that may result in erosion or ponding and therefore
require storm sewers.
         d.   Existing watercourses.
         e.   A plan of subdivision grading to prevent the ponding of
stormwater.
      4.   If it is contemplated that the elevation of the land or the flow of
surface water from such land will be changed as a result of any portion of a
subdivision or development, then a study or studies that show topographically
and by profile such proposed changes in elevation and the flow of surface water
from such land shall be required.
      5.   Detention facilities shall be required for all subdivisions and
developments, and shall be designed for a 100-year rain fall occurrence with a
release rate as determined by the Director of Public Works based on the City
Technical Specifications Manual, Master Plan for Public Utilities and on
downstream conditions.
      6.   Stormwater inlets shall be placed in street gutters at all street
intersections and elsewhere as determined by the Director of Public Works based
on an analysis of the terrain.
      7.   Building service stubs shall be installed to receive subsoil drain
pump discharge from each building and shall connect to a storm sewer within the
drainage system of the subdivision or development.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-12: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Zoning Compliance: All property within a development or subdivision
shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of the City Zoning
Ordinance, and shall comply with all other requirements of law regarding tree
protection and preservation.
   B.   Parkways And Open Space: All parkways within public rights-of-way, and
all public open spaces shall be graded and seeded or sodded in a manner
approved by the Director of Public Works prior to conveyance to the City.
Topsoil in parkways shall be graded to meet the back of curb height. Grass
shall be at least ninety five percent (95%) established, as determined by the
Director of Public Works, prior to final approval or acceptance.
   C.   Street Trees: Trees shall be planted in the right-of-way along both
sides of all streets in and adjacent to all subdivisions. The selection,
placement and installation of trees shall be in accordance with the City
Technical Specifications Manual.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-13: PUBLIC UTILITIES UNDERGROUND:
All new subdivisions shall be provided with a complete system of underground
public utilities, including, without limitation, telephone, gas, electric and
cable television. Existing or relocated aboveground utility structures located
within or along the perimeter of a new subdivision shall be buried.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-14: EASEMENTS:
Utility easements and cable television easements shall be provided at the rear
of all residential lots and along the side lot line where required by the
Director of Public Works. Such utility easement shall be at least ten feet
(10') wide and normally centered upon the rear or side lot line. Evidence shall
be furnished that the individual utility companies or the organization
responsible for furnishing the service involved has reviewed such easements and
any easement provisions to be incorporated on the plat or in deeds. (Ord. 04-
841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-15: OVERSIZE DESIGN:
The City Council, at their sole discretion, may require any subdivision
improvements to be larger than necessary to serve the immediate subdivision
adequately, where required in the planning for utilities, as evidenced by the
Master Plan for Public Utilities. The City Council may enter into an agreement
to repay the subdivider the construction cost resulting from the increased
size.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-6-16: MODEL HOMES:
Following the City’s acceptance of the required construction guarantee and
recordation of a final plat, the subdivider may be permitted, at the
subdivider’s sole risk, to construct, maintain and occupy model units in one or
more product lines being offered in said subdivision. The models may contain a
sales office, however, only sales of homes in the particular subdivision shall
be permitted. Model construction shall comply with all requirements of law,
including the City’s Zoning Ordinance and Building Codes, and in no instance
shall a building permit be issued where a gravel road base does not exist
across the frontage for which the building permit is requested. All required
public improvements, except the final lift of bituminous asphalt surface on
roads and landscaping, shall be completed and approved by the City before an
occupancy permit may be issued.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
CHAPTER 7: CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEES
Section
12-7-1: Statement Of Estimated Costs Of Improvements
12-7-2: Construction Guarantees And Reductions
12-7-3: Acceptance
12-7-4: Guarantee Of Performance
12-7-5: Interest And Costs
12-7-6: City Lien Rights
12-7-7: Insurance
12-7-1: STATEMENT OF ESTIMATED COSTS OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider or developer shall submit to the City a detailed statement
prepared by a professional engineer registered in Illinois giving an estimate
of the total cost of the construction or installation of all required and
proposed public improvements. Such estimate shall be submitted at least thirty
(30) days prior to the submittal of the required construction guarantee, and be
accompanied by photocopies of all contracts relating to the required
improvements that have been entered into by the subdivider or developer. Such
estimate shall be based on the prevailing construction costs and shall be
subject to approval by the Director of Public Works.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-7-2: CONSTRUCTION GUARANTEES AND REDUCTIONS:
   A.   Types Of Guarantees: The construction and installation of public
improvements shall not be permitted or initiated until the subdivider or
developer has filed with the City a construction guarantee secured by one of
the following, all on forms approved by the City Attorney:
      1.   An irrevocable letter of credit issued by a Federally insured bank
or savings and loan association; or
      2.   A surety bond issued by a good and sufficient surety company having
a rating of “superior”, as assigned by A.M. Best Company; or
      3.   A letter of commitment issued by a good and sufficient surety
company having a rating of “superior”, as assigned by A.M. Best Company, or
other such guarantee as allowed by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-39-3, as
amended.
   B.   Amount: The construction guarantee shall be in the amount of one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the cost of the required improvements as
estimated by the subdivider or developer’s engineer, and as approved by the
Director of Public Works.
   C.   Scope Of Guarantee: The construction guarantee shall assure the City of
the satisfactory installation of the required improvements in accordance with
the approved engineering plans and good engineering and construction practices.
   D.   Demand; Draw: Where the required improvements have not been installed
either within the time required or in accordance with the approved engineering
plans, the City may demand and draw the guarantee amount for use in matters
relating to insuring the satisfactory construction of said improvements,
including attorney fees, engineering and consulting fees, and court costs, if
any, incurred in connection with the enforcement of the provisions of this
title.
   E.   Reduction: In accordance with the provisions of this title, the amount
of the construction guarantee may be reduced only once, after satisfactory
completion of at least fifty percent (50%) of the public improvements, as
determined by the Director of Public Works. The City may reduce the amount of
the required construction guarantee at its sole and absolute discretion.
   F.   Release: The total amount of a construction guarantee may be released
only after the subdivider or developer has installed all of the required
improvements, and the City has accepted them in accordance with this title.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-7-3: ACCEPTANCE:
The approval of the final plat by the City shall constitute acceptance of the
dedication of any public street, open space or other public area. Public
improvements shall be accepted only by formal resolution of the Mayor and City
Council, upon the recommendation of the Director of Public Works. No
construction guarantee shall be reduced or released until all public
improvements shall have been constructed and installed in accordance with the
approved engineering plans and good engineering and construction practices, and
the subdivider or developer has provided the following:
   A.   Application: A written application for reduction supported by the
project engineer’s certificate that he has regularly inspected the improvements
made during the progress of the construction and that the improvements have
been constructed and installed in accordance with the approved engineering
plans and good engineering and construction practices.
   B.   Contractors’ Statement: A sworn contractors’ statement from each prime
contractor and final lien waivers to assure the City’s protection against
mechanics’ lien claims.
   C.   Bill Of Sale: A bill of sale transferring title to the public
improvement to the City.
   D.   As Built Plans: “As built” or record plans as required by this title.
   E.   Guarantee: A guarantee of performance as required by this title.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-7-4: GUARANTEE OF PERFORMANCE:
   A.   Required: The subdivider or developer shall guarantee the prompt and
satisfactory correction of all defects and deficiencies in any public
improvement, including, without limitation, landscaping installed on public
property or within a public right-of-way or easement, that occur or become
evident within two (2) years after acceptance of the public improvements by the
City.
   B.   Amount; Term: A guarantee running to the City in the amount of twenty
percent (20%) of the cost of the improvements for a period of two (2) years
after the acceptance of the improvements by the Mayor and City Council, as
required by this title, shall be provided in the form of a cash deposit, or in
an approved form as provided by this title for the construction guarantee.
   C.   Correction, Repair, Replacement: If any such defect or deficiency
occurs or becomes evident during such period, the subdivider or developer shall
complete or cause to be completed any required correction, repair or
replacement within ten (10) days after written demand from the City, weather
permitting. If any public improvement is corrected, repaired or replaced
pursuant to such a demand, then the guarantee provided in this section shall be
extended as to such correction, repair or replacement, for one year after the
date of the correction, repair or replacement.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-7-5: INTEREST AND COSTS:
No interest shall be paid to the subdivider or developer on any construction
security held by the City. The subdivider or developer shall bear the full cost
of securing and maintaining all construction securities required by these
regulations.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-7-6: CITY LIEN RIGHTS:
If any money, property or other consideration due from the subdivider or
developer to the City is not either recovered from the guarantees required by
this title or paid or conveyed to the City pursuant to the City’s demand
therefor, then such money, or the City’s reasonable estimate of the value of
such property or other consideration, together with interest and costs of
collection, including attorney fees and administrative expenses, shall become a
lien upon all portions of the subdivision or development in which the
subdivider or developer retains any legal, equitable or contractual interest,
and the City shall have the right to collect such amount or value, and the
right to enforce such lien in the same manner as in statutory mortgage
foreclosure proceedings. Such lien shall be subordinate to any first mortgage
placed upon the subdivision or development; provided, however, that such
subordination shall apply only to charges that have become due and payable
prior to a sale or transfer of the subdivision or development pursuant to a
decree of foreclosure or any other proceeding in lieu of foreclosure. Such sale
or transfer shall not relieve the subdivision or development from liability for
any charges thereafter becoming due, nor from the lien of any subsequent
charge.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-7-7: INSURANCE:
The construction and installation of required subdivision improvements shall
not be permitted or initiated until certificates of insurance showing the
following coverage, as required by this title and other requirements of law,
have been filed with the City. Each certificate shall provide that coverage
shall not be terminated or reduced without thirty (30) days’ advance written
notice to the City. The required insurance shall include the City and the City
Engineer as an additional named insured, and include coverage for their
respective officers and employees.
   A.   Comprehensive General Liability Insurance: The subdivider or
developer’s contractor shall provide and maintain comprehensive general
liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
occurrence and in the aggregate for bodily injury, sickness, disease or death
of any person, which will protect the City and each of its officers, employees,
agents and consultants from claims which may arise out of or result from the
performance of work by anyone directly or indirectly employed by the contractor
or subcontractor, or by anyone for whose acts the contractor may be liable.
   B.   Workers’ Compensation: The subdivider or developer’s contractor shall
provide and maintain workers’ compensation coverage in accordance with the
requirements of law, and in an amount not less than five hundred thousand
dollars ($500,000.00).
   C.   Automobile Liability: The subdivider or developer’s contractor shall
provide and maintain bodily injury and property damage coverage (combined
single limit) in accordance with the requirements of law, and in an amount not
less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). This coverage shall include
hired and nonowned automobiles.
   D.   Umbrella Liability: The subdivider or developer’s contractor shall
provide and maintain umbrella liability coverage in an amount not less than
three million dollars ($3,000,000.00). This coverage shall include, without
limitation, excess coverage for the general liability, workers’ compensation,
and automobile liability policies.
   E.   Property Insurance: Coverage shall be provided and maintained in the
amount of the estimated cost of improvements on a replacement cost basis.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
CHAPTER 8: DEVELOPER DONATIONS
Section
12-8-1: Purpose
12-8-2: Applicability
12-8-3: Imposition Of Donations
12-8-4: Donations Based On Projected Population
12-8-5: Park Land Donation Criteria
12-8-6: School Land Donation Criteria
12-8-7: Cash In Lieu Of Land; Combination Of Land And Cash
12-8-8: Reservation Of Additional Land
12-8-9: Fire Protection District Donation
12-8-10: Public Library District Donation
12-8-11: Updating Of Fair Market Value And Required Donations
12-8-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is intended to assure the provision of public facilities needed to
serve new development by requiring each new development to pay its fair share
of the costs of such improvements as a condition of approval, and to mitigate
the adverse impacts from inadequate community facilities by providing a means
of allocating the costs of needed services and facilities among new
developments in proportion to the demand for such facilities created by each
new development.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-8-2: APPLICABILITY:
Unless otherwise provided for in an annexation agreement with the City, as a
condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, planned unit development
or building permit, each subdivider shall dedicate land and/or make cash
donations in lieu of land for park and school sites and cash donations for
library and fire protection services to serve the immediate and future needs of
the residents of the development, in accordance with the criteria and formulas
as hereinafter set forth.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-8-3: IMPOSITION OF DONATIONS:
Developer donations shall be imposed as a condition of approval for all new
subdivisions.
   A.   When Due: Within the corporate boundaries of the City, developer
donations shall be imposed at the time of final plat approval in the case of a
land donation, or issuance of a building permit in the case of a cash donation.
If not sooner paid, however, one-half (1/2) of said cash donations shall be due
and payable eighteen (18) months after approval of the final plat, and the
remaining amount of said cash donations shall be due and payable thirty six
(36) months after approval of the final plat.
   B.   Final Plat Approval Received: For a subdivision within the corporate
boundaries of the City that has received final plat approval prior to the
effective date of this title, and for which no replatting or approval is
necessary prior to issuance of a building permit, developer donations shall be
imposed at the time of issuance of a building permit.
   C.   Outside City Limits: For a subdivision outside the corporate boundaries
of the City that is subject to subdivision approval by the City, the Governing
Body of any governmental entity which would be entitled to land and/or cash
donations pursuant to this section may request that the City vary the terms of
this section by allowing such governmental entity to make its own agreement
and/or waiver as to any or all of the donations required in this section with
the subdivider of such land. The request shall be made in writing by a
resolution adopted by the Governing Board of such governmental entity. In such
event, the City may, by motion, condition subdivision approval upon compliance
with the provisions of this section as modified by the variance or waiver.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-8-4: DONATIONS BASED ON PROJECTED POPULATION:
   A.   Scope: The ultimate density of a proposed subdivision shall bear
directly upon the amount of land required for donation for park and school
purposes. The projected population shall be computed in accordance with
subsection B, table 1 of this section, which is generally indicative of current
and short range projected trends in family size by age groups. Subsection B,
table 1 of this section is based on the Table of Estimated Ultimate School
Population Per Dwelling Unit, published for 1996 by Illinois School Consulting
Service/Associated Municipal Consultants, Inc., Naperville, Illinois.
   B.   Table 1: Table 1 of this subsection shall be used for all population
estimates unless a subdivider files a written objection to the City's data,
together with their own demographic study showing the estimated population to
be generated by the subdivision. In such event, the final determination of the
density formula to be used in such calculations shall be made by the City on
the basis of the foregoing data, data submitted by the subdivider and from
other relevant sources. It is recognized that the population density, age
distribution and local conditions change over time and that table 1 of this
subsection is subject to periodic review and amendment, if necessary.
   TABLE 1
   1996 TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE SCHOOL POPULATION PER DWELLING UNIT
                  Elementary Jr. High Total      High
        Preschool Grades K - Grades 6 Grades K - School
Type Of 0 - 4     5          - 8      8          Grades 9 - Adults    Total
Unit    Years     5 - 10     11 - 13  5 - 13     12         18+ Years Per Unit
                  Years      Years    Years      14 - 17
                                                 Years
                       Elementary Jr. High Total    High
             Preschool Grades K - Grades 6 Grades K School
Type Of Unit 0 - 4     5          - 8      - 8      Grades 9 Adults    Total
             Years     5 - 10     11 - 13  5 - 13   - 12     18+ Years Per Unit
                       Years      Years    Years    14 - 17
                                                    Years
Detached
single-                                                           
family:
 2 bedroom  0.113     0.136      0.048    0.184    0.020    1.700     2.017
 3 bedroom  0.292     0.369      0.173    0.542    0.184    1.881     2.899
 4 bedroom  0.418     0.530      0.298    0.828    0.360    2.158     3.764
 5 bedroom  0.283     0.345      0.248    0.593    0.300    2.594     3.770
Attached
single-                                                           
family:
 1 bedroom  0.000     0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000    1.193     1.193
 2 bedroom  0.064     0.088      0.048    0.136    0.038    1.752     1.990
 3 bedroom  0.212     0.234      0.058    0.292    0.059    1.829     2.392
 4 bedroom  0.323     0.322      0.154    0.476    0.173    2.173     3.145
Apartments:                                                       
 Efficiency 0.000     0.000      0.000    0.000    0.000    1.294     1.294
 1 bedroom  0.000     0.002      0.001    0.003    0.001    1.754     1.758
 2 bedroom  0.047     0.086      0.042    0.128    0.046    1.693     1.914
 3 bedroom  0.052     0.234      0.123    0.357    0.118    2.526     3.053
 
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-8-5: PARK LAND DONATION CRITERIA:
   A.   Required Land Donation: The amount of land to be donated for park sites
for a particular subdivision shall be a direct function of the ultimate
population to be generated by the subdivision. The City has determined that the
land donation requirement shall be one and one-half (1.5) acres of park land
per one hundred (100) ultimate population.
   B.   Credit For Private Park Areas:
      1.   When a subdivision includes private open space for park and
recreation areas and facilities, it may have the effect of reducing the demand
for local public recreational services. Depending on the size of the
subdivision, a portion of the park land donation may, at the sole option of the
City, be provided as private, in lieu of dedicated public park land. The extent
of the required public park land shall be determined by the City, and based on
the needs of the current and future residents in the general area.
      2.   In general, a substitution of private park land in lieu of public
park land requires a higher degree of improvement and the installation of
recreational equipment or improvements by the subdivider. The City must approve
detailed plans of such areas, including specifications of facilities to be
installed, and the subdivider must guarantee that these areas will be
permanently maintained for such use before any credit is given for private park
land.
   C.   Improvements: Prior to conveyance, all sites shall be final graded and
seeded in accordance with the City Technical Specifications Manual. The slope,
topography and geology of the dedicated site must be suitable for active park
and recreation purposes.
   D.   Location Of Land To Be Donated: The City shall determine the location
of park land to be donated for a particular subdivision. This determination
shall be based on the availability of land, the suitability of the land for
park and recreation purposes, the location of the land relative to population
concentrations, the proximity of the land to other park sites, and park and
open space locations identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
   E.   Minimum Size And Quality Of Donated Land: The minimum size of any land
to be dedicated for park and recreation purposes shall be ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, with no exterior boundary dimension less than one hundred feet
(100'), except as may be approved by the City because of special circumstances.
Stormwater detention or retention areas shall not qualify as land suitable for
donation for park and recreation purposes, except as may be approved by the
City after the suitability of such land for park and recreation purposes as a
secondary use is clearly demonstrated.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-8-6: SCHOOL LAND DONATION CRITERIA:
   A.   Required Land Donation: The amount of land required to be donated for
school sites for a particular subdivision shall be a direct function of the
ultimate number of students to be generated by the subdivision. The land
donation requirement shall be determined in accordance with the following
equation:
Estimated number of children to be served in each school classification.
(Calculated in accordance with subsection
12-8-4B, table 1 of this chapter.)
Divided by
Maximum number of students that can be served in each school classification.
(Calculated in accordance with subsection B of this section.)
Multiplied by
Minimum acreage for each school site in each school classification. (Calculated
in accordance with subsection B of this section.)
   B.   School Classifications And Size Of School Sites: School classifications
and the required minimum size of new school sites shall be determined in
accordance with the following standards:
 
School Classification By Grade Level Maximum Students Minimum Acreage
Elementary (K - 5)                   450              20
Junior high (6 - 8)                  600              35
High school (9 - 12)                 1,500            90
 
   C.   Location Of Land To Be Donated: The location of each school site shall
be determined by the City, as guided by the Comprehensive Plan and standards
adopted by the affected school district.
   D.   Minimum Quality Of Donated Land: Stormwater detention or retention
areas shall not qualify as land suitable for donation for a school site, except
as may be approved by the City after the suitability of such land for a school
site as a secondary use is clearly demonstrated.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-8-7: CASH IN LIEU OF LAND; COMBINATION OF LAND AND CASH:
   A.   Criteria For Requiring Cash Donation: When a subdivision is small and
the resulting land donation is too small to be practical or when the available
land is otherwise inappropriate for a park or school site, the City shall
require the subdivider to pay a cash donation in lieu of the required land
donation, or a combination of a land donation and cash donation.
   B.   Calculation Of Cash Donation: The cash donation shall be based on the
“fair market value” of the required land donation, as specified herein.
   C.   Fair Market Value: Based on a study of real estate transactions in the
planning jurisdiction of the City, the City has determined that the fair market
value of improved land within the planning jurisdiction of the City is eighty
thousand dollars ($80,000.00) per acre. The fair market value is for vacant
land that is zoned Residential, subdivided, fully improved with public sanitary
and water service, and is otherwise capable of being used for residential
development. This fair market value shall be regularly reviewed, and amended if
necessary, to ensure its accuracy, and shall be used in making any calculation
of the cash donation in lieu of land donation as specified herein, unless a
timely objection is provided.
   D.   Method Of Calculating Number Of Bedrooms; Supplementary Payments:
      1.   In those situations where a cash donation is due upon issuance of a
building permit, such donation shall be calculated pursuant to subsection
12-8-4B, table 1 of this chapter, on the basis of the type of residential unit
to be constructed and the number of bedrooms specified.
      2.   In those situations where a cash donation is due prior to issuance
of a building permit, such cash donation shall be calculated pursuant to
subsection
12-8-4B, table 1 of this chapter, on the basis that detached single-family
dwellings will contain a minimum of three (3) bedrooms, and that apartments,
townhouses, row houses and quadriplexes will contain a minimum of two (2)
bedrooms; provided, however, that if later an application for building permit
is made showing more than the aforesaid number of bedrooms per dwelling unit,
the applicant for such building permit shall then pay a supplementary cash
donation to the City to make up the difference between the amount previously
paid and the amount required for the actual number of bedrooms to be
constructed in such residential dwelling unit.
   E.   Objections To Fair Market Value: In the event of any written objection
to the fair market value, the applicant shall submit an appraisal showing the
fair market value of improved land in the area of the subdivision or
development, or other evidence thereof. The final determination of such fair
market value shall be made by the City Council, based upon information
submitted by the applicant and from other relevant sources.
   F.   Disposition Of Cash Donations:
      1.   Cash donations in lieu of park land dedications shall be held in
trust by the City, in a special segregated fund, solely for the acquisition or
development of park and recreational land and facilities to serve the immediate
or future needs of the residents.
      2.   Cash donations in lieu of school site donations shall be held in
trust solely for the acquisition of land for a school site to serve the
immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or development.
         a.   Sixty five percent (65%) of the cash donations shall be remitted
to the grade school district affected by said subdivision or development, and
thirty five percent (35%) shall be remitted to the affected high school
district.
         b.   The City shall remit the cash donations to the affected school
district not less frequently than annually, who shall hold such contributions
in a special segregated fund.
   G.   Refund Of Cash Donations: If any portion of a cash donation is not
expended for the purposes set forth herein within twenty (20) years after the
date of receipt of such donation by the City, then that donation shall be
refunded, upon written application, to the subdivider who made such donation,
or its successor or assign.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004; amd. Ord. MC-19-1213, 12-2-2019)
12-8-8: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND:
When the Comprehensive Plan or other applicable standard or policy of the City
requires a park or school site in a particular subdivision that is larger than
the subdivider is required to donate, then the land needed in excess of the
required donation shall be reserved by the subdivider for subsequent purchase
by the City or other public body designated by the City; provided, that such
acquisition is initiated within one year after the date of approval of the
final plat.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-8-9: FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICT DONATION:
   A.   Required: In order to help defray the cost of providing fire protection
for residents of new subdivisions during the construction process, and before
tax revenues are generated by such subdivisions, a cash donation as indicated
in section
10-1-5 of this Code shall be due and payable to the City upon issuance of a
building permit.
   B.   Held In Trust; Remittance: Cash donations for fire protection services
shall be held in trust to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents
of that subdivision or development. The City shall remit the cash donations to
the affected district not less frequently than annually, who shall hold such
contributions in a special segregated fund.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-8-10: PUBLIC LIBRARY DISTRICT DONATION:
   A.   Required: In order to help defray the cost of providing library
services for residents of new subdivisions during the construction process, and
before tax revenues are generated by such subdivisions, a cash donation as
indicated in section
10-1-5 of this Code shall be due and payable to the City upon issuance of a
building permit.
   B.   Held In Trust; Remittance: Cash donations for library services shall be
held in trust to serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that
subdivision or development. The City shall remit the cash donations to the
affected district not less frequently than annually, who shall hold such
contributions in a special segregated fund.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-8-11: UPDATING OF FAIR MARKET VALUE AND REQUIRED DONATIONS:
   A.   Regular Review: It is recognized that the population density, age
distribution, land values, the cost of providing park, school, library and fire
protection services, construction costs and other local conditions change over
time. Therefore, the specific formula for the dedication of land, or cash
donations in lieu of thereof, shall be regularly reviewed, and amended if
necessary, and the required contribution for library and fire protection
services and the fair market value of land in the planning jurisdiction of the
City shall be regularly updated.
   B.   Price Index: The "fair market value" and cash contribution amounts to
the fire protection and public library districts as required in this title
shall be amended on May 1 of each year by the percentage change in the Chicago
Area Consumer Price Index for the previous year. For the purposes of this
subsection, the price index to be used for comparative purposes shall be that
index published for the Annual Average Chicago Area CPI-U, as published by the
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
CHAPTER 9: DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING LOTS
Section
12-9-1: Improvements Required
12-9-2: Permit Required
12-9-3: Plans Required
12-9-4: Supervision; Inspections
12-9-5: State Or County Approval Required In Certain Cases
12-9-6: Specifications Generally
12-9-7: Non-Residential Driveways And Parking Lots
12-9-8: Residential Driveways And Parking Lots
12-9-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
Every subdivision or development shall be improved with private improvements as
set forth in this title and with all such other improvements as may be
necessary to serve the subdivision or development, as determined by the City.
All such improvements shall be designed and constructed by the developer or
property owner in accordance with this title, the Technical Specifications
Manual, and any other requirements of law, as approved by the City
Administrator or their designee.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-9-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Required: No person shall hereafter construct, build or expand any
driveway or parking lot without first having obtained a permit to do so from
the City. No such permit shall be issued except in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Application: Application for a driveway or parking lot permit must be
made in writing upon forms furnished by the City. Said application shall
contain the name and address of the person making the application, the name of
the contractor or person who is to construct said driveway, the proposed
location and dimensions of such driveway, specifications for the construction
of such driveway or parking lot, and any other such information as may be
required by the City.
   C.   Insurance: Before issuance of any driveway or parking lot permit the
contractor shall file with the City Clerk a certificate of public liability
insurance coverage, in an amount as may be specified from time to time by the
City Administrator, conditioned that the insurer shall save nameless, defend
and indemnify the City against or on account of accidents, damages or claims
arising out of or during the construction of any driveway laid by the said
contractor.
   D.   Permit Fee: Before a permit is issued for any driveway or parking lot
construction, the contractor or owner shall pay to the City Clerk a permit fee
as per section
10-1-4 of this Code.
   E.   Cash Deposit: In addition to the fee for permit, the contractor shall
deposit with the City Clerk for each new driveway to be constructed cash in the
amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). The City may deduct
from this cash deposit the cost of repair or replacement for any damage done to
the public right-of-way by the contractor or owner in prosecution of the work
for which permit has been issued, if after ten (10) days’ notice, the
contractor fails to repair or replace the damaged public right-of-way. Such
deposit, or the balance thereof in the event of deduction for damage to public
right-of-way, shall be returned to the contractor or owner upon inspection and
approval of the work by the City.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-9-3: PLANS REQUIRED:
The developer or builder shall submit four (4) copies of plans for the
construction of the driveway or parking lot. The plans shall be prepared in
accordance with the requirements of law, including, without limitation, the
City Technical Specifications Manual, this title and all applicable standards
of other agencies with jurisdiction.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-9-4: SUPERVISION; INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Scope: All such work performed on private property shall be done under
the jurisdiction of the City Administrator or designee and in accordance with
the ordinances of the City. Inspections by the City shall be required prior to
paving and upon completion.
   B.   Proof Rolling Inspection: A proof roll inspection shall be passed prior
to installing pavement on all multi-family and nonresidential private driveways
and parking lots. Proof rolling must be performed using a fifty thousand
(50,000) pounds’ gross weight tandem dump truck. Areas found weak (exhibit any
pumping) and those areas which are frail (leaving tire tracks) shall be
repaired at the developer’s or property owner’s expense.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-9-5: STATE OR COUNTY APPROVAL REQUIRED IN CERTAIN CASES:
In no event shall a permit be issued for the construction, building,
establishment or maintenance of driveways accessing State of Illinois highways,
including, but limited to, Illinois Routes 120 and 31, or on any County
maintained road, unless approval shall first have been obtained, by the
applicant, from the State or County, as applicable.
(Ord. 04-841, 1-19-2004, eff. 2-1-2004)
12-9-6: SPECIFICATIONS GENERALLY:
The following general specifications are applicable to all driveways and
parking lots. Plans and specifications must conform to the following minimum
requirements before a permit for the construction of any driveway will be
issued. All improvements shall be in conformity with the uniform specifications
which shall be laid down or approved from time to time by the City Council, and
all completed work shall be accepted by the City only upon approval of the City
Administrator or their designee.
   A.   That portion of any driveway that will occupy the space reserved for
sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and
specifications for sidewalks specified in this chapter. The grade of such
sidewalk portion shall be established by the City Administrator or their
designee.
   B.   Where a driveway is constructed across an existing sidewalk, said
sidewalk shall be removed and replaced with Portland cement concrete for the
full width of the driveway and for a distance of at least twelve inches (12")
on both sides of the driveway. This portion of sidewalk shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards and specifications for sidewalks specified in
this chapter.
   C.   All driveways shall be graded between the gutter and the sidewalk so
that it will not be necessary to change the established grade of either and
will not elevate or depress any portion of either. No part of said driveway
shall extend beyond the back of curb. Where elevations or depressions are
necessary in the parkway strip between the curb and walk, said parkway shall be
created on both sides of the driveway to a distance sufficient to create a
gradual ascent or descent.
   D.   Combined curb and gutter and separate curbing shall be removed entirely
for the full width of the driveway opening at the curb line or may be saw cut
where the cutting method has been previously approved by the City Administrator
or their designee. If an existing joint in the curb is within five feet (5') of
the end of the driveway opening, the existing curbing, etc. to said joint shall
be removed, otherwise said combined curb and gutter or separate curbing shall
be cut, making a neat edge truly at right angles to the edge of the pavement
and truly vertical. Integral curbing, which is that type placed with the
pavement and molded as an integral part of it, must be removed for the full
depth of the top of the curb to the bottom of the pavement or may be saw cut
where the cutting method has been previously approved by the City Administrator
or their designee. The edges must be cut as above-described. No combined curb
and gutter, straight curb or integral curb shall be removed within five feet
(5') of a public sidewalk.
   E.   Where driveways cross open ditches in the parkways, culverts shall be
installed. Said culvert shall be of such size and shall be constructed of such
material as determined by the City Administrator or their designee, depending
on the existing conditions. In no instance shall the size of opening be less
than that obtained by a twelve inch (12") inch diameter pipe. The length of
culvert shall be determined by the following method: For ditch depth of two
feet (2') or less, the culvert shall not extend less than five feet (5') beyond
both edges of the driveway where it crosses the ditch. For each additional foot
depth of ditch, add two feet (2') to the above figure, except that no culvert
shall be less than twenty feet (20') long and except that where headwalls are
constructed at the ends of the culvert, the length shall be as determined by
the City Administrator or their designee.
   F.   Where an existing catch basin is in the area of the proposed driveway,
the frame and grate shall be removed and replaced with a type frame and grate
specified in this chapter.
   G.   All driveways constructed over, across or upon any public street or
public parkway in the City shall be kept and maintained at all times in
accordance with the provisions herein. Any contractor or owner constructing or
repairing a driveway shall maintain suitable barricades to prevent injury to
persons or vehicles throughout the course of construction.
   H.   Any expansion or extension of an existing driveway or parking lot shall
be surfaced with the same materials as the original, except that no expansion
of an existing gravel driveway or parking area shall be permitted.
(Ord. MC-12-1059)
12-9-7: NON-RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING LOTS:
The following specifications are applicable to all non-residential driveway and
parking lot construction.
   A.   Driveways and parking lots for non-residential uses shall be designed
by a qualified person and be constructed having a concrete, asphalt, or paver
brick surface meeting the following minimum requirements.
      1.   Portland cement concrete shall be at least six inches thick, with an
ultimate minimum compressive strength of four thousand (4,000) p.s.i., and
shall have a base of compacted crushed stone at least four inches thick.
      2.   The asphalt in asphalt-surfaced driveways shall be at least four
inches (4") thick without any loose material on top, and shall have a base of
compacted crushed stone at least four inches (4") thick.
      3.   Brick paver surfaced driveways shall be installed per the
manufacturers installation instructions and have a minimum of two inches (2")
of sand over a base of compacted crushed stone at least six inches (6") thick.
   B.   A driveway approach shall be constructed entirely of Portland cement
concrete at least six inches (6") thick with a base of compacted crushed stone
at least four inches (4") thick. Wire mesh or re-bar shall not be permitted. A
one-half inch bituminous pre-molded expansion joint with low transmission unit
shall be placed between the edge of such pavement or curb and the approach and
also between the approach and sidewalk.
   C.   Expansions of existing driveways and parking lots shall be surfaced
with the same material as the original driveway.
   D.   The width of driveways for non-residential uses shall not exceed twelve
feet (12') per lane of traffic, up to a maximum of thirty six feet (36'),
measured at the outer or street edge of the sidewalk. The width of the driveway
opening at the curb line shall not exceed the width of the driveway at the
inner or property edge, plus fifty feet (50') , nor be less than the width of
the driveway at the inner or property edge of the sidewalk, plus twenty five
feet (25'). In no instance shall the radius be less than ten feet (10') at the
curb corners and this only when the driveway is flared. In no instance shall
the radius be more than twenty five feet (25') when the driveway is at right
angles to the street line.
   E.   The centerline of a driveway must be approximately at right angles to
the curb line or edge of pavement in the public street, for a distance of at
least ten feet (10') from said curb line or pavement edge.
   F.   Only one driveway shall be permitted, however, a single parcel or
contiguous parcels under the same ownership having at least one hundred feet
(100') of frontage on any one street, measured in a straight line from side lot
line to side lot line at the front building line, may have a second driveway.
Where two (2) driveways are provided for the same property, a separation of not
less than ten feet (10') at the outer or street side of the sidewalk shall be
provided.
(Ord. MC-12-1059)
12-9-8: RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS AND PARKING LOTS:
The following specifications are applicable to all residential driveway
construction.
   A.   Driveways for residential uses shall be constructed having either a
concrete, asphalt or brick paver, with the entire surface being the same
material.
      1.   Concrete surfaced driveways shall be of Portland cement concrete at
least four inches (4") thick, with an ultimate minimum compressive strength of
four thousand (4,000) psi (per square inch), and shall have a base of compacted
crushed stone at least four inches (4") thick.
      2.   The asphalt in asphalt-surfaced driveways shall be at least two
inches (2") thick without any loose material on top, and shall have a base of
compacted crushed stone at least six inches (6") thick.
      3.   Brick paver surfaced driveways shall be installed per the
manufacturers installation instructions and have a minimum of two inches (2")
of sand over a base of compacted crushed stone at least six inches (6") thick.
   B.   A driveway approach shall be constructed as follows:
      1.   Where a driveway abuts a street having a concrete pavement or
concrete curb and gutter with sidewalk, the approach shall be constructed
entirely of Portland cement concrete at least six inches (6") thick with a base
of compacted crushed stone at least four inches (4") thick. Wire mesh or re-bar
shall not be permitted. A one-half inch bituminous pre-molded expansion joint
with low transmission unit shall be placed between the edge of such pavement or
cub and the approach and also between the approach and the sidewalk.
      2.   Where a driveway abuts a street with curb and gutter and no
sidewalk, the approach may be constructed of concrete, as specified above, or
asphalt at least four inches (4") thick, with a base of compacted crushed stone
at least four inches (4") thick, and a depressed curb and gutter.
      3.   Where a driveway abuts a street without a curb and gutter, the
approach may be constructed of concrete, as specified above, or asphalt at
least four inches (4") thick, with a base of compacted crushed stone at least
four inches (4") thick.
   C.   Expansions of existing driveways shall be surfaced with the same
material as the original driveway except in the following instances.
      1.   An expansion of an existing crushed gravel driveway shall not be
allowed unless the entire driveway is surfaced with a material approved by this
section.
      2.   A walking border on either or both sides of that portion of a
driveway extending from the sidewalk or property line onto private property may
have a surface different than the original driveway, provided that such border
does not exceed eighteen inches (18") in width.
      3.   An expansion of an existing driveway is permitted to start at the
intersection of the street edge of the public walk and driveway apron,
provided:
         a.   The angle of the extension towards the property is no less than
forty five (45) degrees to the public walk.
         b.   The public walk in the area of the driveway is installed in
compliance with section
12-9-6B for the entire square affected by the extension.
   D.   The width of driveways for residential uses shall be no less than nine
feet (9') nor more than twenty feet (20') wide at the outer or street edge of
the sidewalk, except that:
      1.   A driveway width of up to twenty five feet (25') at the outer or
street edge of the sidewalk shall be allowed, but only when serving a garage or
garages having a minimum of three (3) vehicle stalls.
      2.   A driveway width of up to thirty feet (30') at the outer or street
edge of the sidewalk shall be allowed, but only when serving a garage or
garages having a minimum of four (4) vehicle stalls.
      3.   The width of the driveway at the curb line or road edge shall not
exceed the width of the driveway at the street edge of the sidewalk, plus four
(4) feet (two foot flare on each side).
   E.   The centerline of all driveways shall be approximately at right angles
to the curb line curb line or edge of pavement in the public street, for a
distance of at least ten feet (10') from said curb to the pavement edge.
   F.   Only one (1) driveway shall be permitted, however, a single parcel or
contiguous parcels under the same ownership having at least one hundred feet
(100') of frontage on any one street, measured in a straight line from side lot
line to side lot line at the front building line, may have a second driveway.
Where two (2) driveways are provided for the same property:
      1.   A separation of not less than fifty feet (50') at the outer or
street side of the sidewalk, or property line where no sidewalk exists, shall
be provided.
      2.   A setback of not less than five feet (5') from a side lot line shall
be provided.
(Ord. MC-12-1059)
TITLE 13: FLOOD CONTROL
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
13-1-1: Purpose
13-1-2: Definitions
13-1-3: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
13-1-4: Disclaimer Of Liability
13-1-5: Enforcement
13-1-6: Penalty
13-1-1: PURPOSE:
This title is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this City by the
Illinois Municipal Code. The purpose of this title is to maintain this City’s
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential
losses due to periodic flooding, including loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface
waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources. This title is adopted in order
to accomplish the following specific purposes:
   A.   Meet the requirements of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams Act;
   B.   Assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage
hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
   C.   Protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   D.   Protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   E.   Lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects, repairs
to flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and relief
operations;
   F.   Make Federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in the
City by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program;
   G.   Comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood Insurance
Program codified as 44 CFR 59 - 79, as amended;
   H.   Protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water
resources;
   I.   Preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses and
floodplains in order to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water
quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide
recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community
and economic development.
(1987 Code § 8-1.0)
13-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this title, the following definitions are adopted:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A nonhabitable structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
ACT: An act in relation to the regulation of the rivers, lakes and streams of
the State of Illinois.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and
will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are
as specified in this title.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location
is as defined in chapter 3 of this title.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A walled and roofed structure, including gas or liquid storage tank,
that is principally aboveground, including manufactured homes, prefabricated
buildings, and gas or liquid storage tanks. This term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers installed on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, rip-rapping or other armoring, widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form
of channel modification typically involving a significant change in the channel
cross section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.,
straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction
approval by IDNR/OWR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) of a
proposed change to the floodway map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to
this title, gives assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use
is constructed according to permitted plans, the floodway map can be changed,
as previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood elevations, flood
insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective
Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as built plans
are submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes
through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface
elevation.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples
of critical facilities where flood protection is recommended include: sewage
treatment plants, water treatment plants and pumping stations.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion
of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on
the FEMA/FIRM Map, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year
frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to
the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%)
increase in velocities.
   A.   The floodways are designated for on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate
Map of McHenry County prepared by FEMA and dated November 16, 2006. When two
(2) floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive floodway limit
shall prevail.
   B.   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated McHenry County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City that may be annexed into
the City are designated for the Fox River, Boone Creek and Lakeland Park
Drainage Ditch on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA and
dated November 16, 2006.
   C.   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the designated
floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map and located
on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where interpretation
is needed to determine the exact location of the designated floodway boundary,
IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   Any manmade change to real estate, including:
      1.   Construction, reconstruction, repair or placement of a building or
any addition to a building.
      2.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the travel trailer or
recreational vehicle is on site for less than one hundred eighty (180) days, it
must be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
      3.   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, storage of equipment or materials, or similar projects.
      4.   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site.
      5.   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction.
      6.   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams; or
culverts, channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving
or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of
materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste.
      7.   Any other activity of man that might change the direction, height or
velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation removal.
      8.   Substantial improvement of an existing building.
   B.   Development does not include routine maintenance of existing buildings
and facilities such as reroofing or resurfacing of roads when there is no
increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing and similar agricultural practices
that do not involve filling, grading or construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been
elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave
action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this title per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes, including State, Federal or local units of
government.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed before April 1,
1990.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59 -
79, as amended.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway. See definition of designated floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): A map prepared by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency that depicts the Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA) within a
community. This map includes insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or
may not depict floodways.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the
SFHA.
FLOODPLAIN: That land typically adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. Floodplains may also include detached special flood hazard areas,
ponding areas, etc. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard
area (SFHA).
   A.   The floodplains are those lands within the jurisdiction of the City
that are subject to inundation by the base flood or 100-year frequency flood.
The SFHAs of the City are generally identified as such on panel numbers
17111C0205J, 17111C0206J, 17111C0207J, 17111C0208J, 17111C0209J, 17111C0217J,
17111C0220J, 17111C0226J, 17111C0230J of the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate
Map prepared for McHenry County by the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
dated November 16, 2006.
   B.   The SFHAs of those parts of unincorporated McHenry County that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City or that may be annexed
into the City are generally identified as such on panel number 17111CIND0A of
the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared for McHenry County by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and dated November 16, 2006.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: See definition of designated floodway.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, unknown localized
conditions, wave actions and unpredictable effects, such as those caused by ice
or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
   A.   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
   B.   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
   C.   Individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency;
   D.   Individually listed on a Local Inventory of Historic Places that has
been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analysis which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
IDNR/OWR: Illinois Department of Transportation, Division of Water Resources.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific
structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways, as shown on an effective
FIRM.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirements of this title.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle. Generally,
manufactured homes must meet the same requirements as stick built or
conventional housing. Because they are usually residential buildings, they must
be elevated so that the lowest floor is above the base flood elevation (BFE).
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects which
floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety and
welfare. Examples of mitigation include excavation of compensatory storage,
soil erosion and sedimentation control, and channel restoration. Mitigation may
also include those activities taken to reduce a structure’s susceptibility to
flooding.
NAVD 88: National American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course of cross section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is re-
established. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Structures for which the start of construction commenced on
or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a
community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after April
1, 1990.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER: All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers and streams which in their natural condition were capable
of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or discharge
their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the borders of the
State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs, backwaters and submerged
lands that are open to the main channel or body of water directly accessible
thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing
and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public
agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   A.   Built on a single chassis;
   B.   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   C.   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
truck; and
   D.   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
REGIONAL PERMITS: Offered for preapproved projects which are considered minor
projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR part 3708 rules for Northeastern
Illinois designated floodways. A complete listing of the terms and conditions
for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois
under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the State of
Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering Act.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result
in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty five
percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff
without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.
RIVERINE SFHA: Any SFHA subject to flooding from a river, creek, intermittent
stream, ditch, on- stream lake system or any other identified channel. The term
does not include areas subject to flooding from lakes, ponding areas, areas of
sheet flow, or other areas not subject to overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): See definition of FLOODPLAIN.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement, and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was
within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
STATEWIDE PERMITS: Offered for preapproved projects that are considered minor
projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR part 3700 rules. A complete
listing of the Statewide permits and permit requirements can be obtained from
the IDNR/OWR website.
STRUCTURE: See definition of BUILDING.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage subsequent to the adoption of this title equals
or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and
materials must be included in this determination. For term repetitive loss
buildings, see definition of repetitive loss.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   A.   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a
structure, taking place subsequent to the adoption of this title in which the
cumulative percentage of improvement equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair started.
   B.   Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building
commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building. This term includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss
or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
   C.   The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing
State or local Health, Sanitary or Safety Code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a “historic structure” listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places;
provided, that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued
designation as a historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a
narrow cross section to a wide cross section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certification or
other evidence of compliance is presumed to be in violation until such time as
that documentation is provided.
(1987 Code § 8-2)
13-1-3: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   This title is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where this title and other
ordinance, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
   B.   This title is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution
which was adopted to meet the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, but
is not intended to repeal the resolution which the City passed in order to
establish initial eligibility for the program.
(1987 Code § 8-14.0)
13-1-4: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
   A.   Degree Of Protection: The degree of flood protection required by this
title is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
available information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural
causes.
   B.   Development Not Free From Flooding: This title does not imply that
development, either inside or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding
or damage.
   C.   Liability: This title does not create liability on the part of the
City, or any officer or employee thereof, for any flood damage that results
from reliance on this title or any administrative decision made lawfully
thereunder.
(1987 Code § 18-12.0)
13-1-5: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: The Building Officer shall inform the owner that
any such violation is considered a wilful act to increase flood damages and
therefor may cause coverage by a Standard Flood Insurance Policy to be
suspended.
   B.   Stop Work Order: The Building Officer is authorized to issue an order
requiring suspension of the subject development. The stop work order shall be
in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the
action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop work
order. The stop work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
   C.   Hearing For Permanent Suspension, Revocation:
      1.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the City Council. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state:
         a.   The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or
revocation; and
         b.   The time and place of hearing.
(1987 Code § 8-13.1)
      2.   At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on their behalf.
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
      3.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the City Council shall determine
whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
(1987 Code § 8-13.1)
13-1-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Injunction: If such owner fails after ten (10) days notice to correct
the violation, the City may make application to the Circuit Court of McHenry
County, Illinois for an injunction requiring conformance with this title, or
make such other order as the Court deems necessary to secure compliance with
this title.
   B.   Fine: Any person who violates this title shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense.
   C.   Separate Offense: A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
   D.   Record Notice: The City shall record a notice of violation on the title
to the property.
(1987 Code § 8-13.0)
   E.   Other Action: Nothing herein shall prevent the City from taking such
other lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
(1987 Code § 8-13.3)
CHAPTER 2: ADMINISTRATION; PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
Section
13-2-1: Administration
13-2-2: Duties Of Building Officer
13-2-1: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Enforcement Official: The Building Officer shall be responsible for
fulfilling all of the duties listed in section
13-2-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Criteria: To fulfill those duties, the Building Officer first should
use the criteria listed in chapter 3, "Base Flood Elevation", of this title, to
determine whether the development site is located within a floodplain. Once it
has been determined that a site is located within a floodplain, the Building
Officer must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe, a
designated floodway, or within a SFHA or floodplain on which no floodway has
been identified. If the site is within a flood fringe, the Building Officer
shall require that the minimum requirements of chapter 4 of this title be met.
If the site is within a floodway, the Building Officer shall require that the
minimum requirements of chapter 5 of this title be met. If the site is located
within a SFHA or floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and
approved, the Building Officer shall require that the minimum requirements of
chapter 6 of this title be met.
   C.   Applicable General Requirements: In addition, the general requirements
of chapter 7 of this title shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of chapter 4, 5 or 6 of this title. The Building Officer shall
assure that all subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of chapter 8
of this title.
   D.   Variances: If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Building
Officer shall review the requirements of chapter 9 of this title to make sure
they are met. In addition, the Building Officer shall complete all notification
requirements.
   E.   Violations; Penalty: In order to assure that property owners obtain
permits as required in this title, the Building Officer may take any and all
actions as outlined in sections
13-1-5 and 13-1-6 of this title.
(1987 Code § 8-3.0)
13-2-2: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICER:
The Building Officer shall be responsible for the general administration and
enforcement of this title, which shall include the following:
   A.   Determining Floodplain Designation:
      1.   Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a
special flood hazard area (SFHA). If they are in a SFHA, determine whether they
are in a floodway, flood fringe or a floodplain on which a detailed study has
not been conducted and which drains more than one square mile.
      2.   Check whether the development is potentially within an extended SFHA
(with a drainage area less than 1 square mile), indicating that the development
would have adverse impacts regarding storage, conveyance or inundation, which
would be the basis for the applicant being required to delineate the floodplain
and floodway and be subject to the remaining provisions of this title.
   B.   Professional Engineer Review: If the development site is within a
floodway or in a floodplain on which a detailed study has not been conducted
and which drains more than one square mile, the permit shall be referred to a
registered professional engineer (PE) under the employ or contract of the City
for review to ensure that the development meets the requirements of chapter 5
or 6 of this title. In the case of an appropriate use, the PE shall state in
writing that the development meets the requirements of chapter 6 of this title.
   C.   Dam Safety Requirements:
      1.   Dams are classified as to their size and their hazard damage
potential in the event of failure. The construction or major modification of
all Class I (high hazard) and Class II (moderate hazard) dams requires an IDNR/
OWR dam safety permit. Some Class III (low hazard) dams require an IDNR/OWR dam
safety permit, depending on the drainage area to the dam, the height of the dam
and the impounding capacity behind the dam. Most off channel detention basins
that have an embankment are nonjurisdictional Class III dams. It is not
required that IDNR/OWR sign off on all nonjurisdictional Class III dams.
      2.   A consulting engineer with dam safety knowledge can estimate a
hazard classification and determine if an IDNR/OWR dam safety permit is
required. A permit application submittal must be made to IDNR/OWR for the
construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams. Regulated dams may
include weirs, restrictive culverts or impoundment structures.
   D.   Other Permit Requirements: Ensure that any and all required Federal,
State and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
   E.   Plan Review And Permit Issuance: Ensure that all development activities
within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the City meet the requirements of this
title and issue a floodplain development permit in accordance with the
provisions of this title and other regulations of this community when the
development meets the conditions of this title.
   F.   Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during and
after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
they comply with the provisions of this title. Schedule on an annual basis an
inspection of the floodplain and document the results of the inspection.
   G.   Damage Determinations: Make damage determinations of all damaged
buildings in the SFHA after a flood to determine substantially damaged
structures which must comply with chapter 7 of this title.
   H.   Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain in the permit files
including:
      1.   An Elevation Certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of a residential or nonresidential building subject
to chapter 7 of this title; and/or
      2.   The elevation to which a nonresidential building has been
floodproofed, using a Floodproofing Certificate, for all buildings subject to
chapter 7 of this title.
   I.   Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request base designated floodway maps, copies of Federal or State
permit documents, variance documentation, Conditional Letter of Map Revision,
Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Amendment, and as built elevation and
floodproofing and/or elevation certificates for all buildings constructed
subject to this title.
   J.   State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by the IDNR, for all development projects subject to chapters 5 and 6 of this
title, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to the City.
However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the City and shall
require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
      1.   Organizations which are exempt from this title, as per the Illinois
Compiled Statutes;
      2.   IDNR/OWR projects, dams or impoundment structures, as defined in
section
13-1-2 of this title, and all other State, Federal or local unit of government
projects, including projects of the City and County, except for those projects
meeting the requirements of subsection
13-5-11 of this title.
      3.   An engineer’s determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per subsection
13-5-7E of this title.
      4.   An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due to subsection
13-5-7D of this title;
      5.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in subsections
13-5-7A, B and H of this title;
      6.   Permit issuance of structures within, under or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
      7.   Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles.
   K.   Cooperation With Other Agencies: Cooperate with State and Federal
floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency
flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this title. Submit
data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a designated map within six
(6) months whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the base flood
elevation or result in a change in the floodplain map. Submit reports as
required for the National Flood Insurance Program. Notify FEMA of any proposed
amendments to this title.
   L.   Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary
to administer and enforce the provisions of this title, subject however to the
review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any ordinance changes.
(1987 Code § 8-4.0)
CHAPTER 3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION
Section
13-3-1: Base Flood Or Frequency Flood Elevation
13-3-1: BASE FLOOD OR FREQUENCY FLOOD ELEVATION:
This title’s protection standard is based on the Flood Insurance Study for the
City. If a base flood elevation or 100-year frequency flood elevation is not
available for a particular site, then the protection standard shall be
according to the best existing data available from Federal, State or other
sources. When a party disagrees with the best available data, they shall submit
a detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review and consideration prior to any
development of the site.
   A.   Fox River, Boone Creek, Lakeland Park: The base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of Fox River, Boone Creek and the
Lakeland Park drainage ditch, shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood
profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of the City prepared by FEMA and dated
November 16, 2006, and such amendments to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.
   B.   Unincorporated Areas Within Extra Territorial Jurisdiction: The base
flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the SFHAs of those parts of
unincorporated McHenry County that are within the extra territorial
jurisdiction of the City, or that may be annexed into the City shall be as
delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study of
McHenry County prepared by FEMA and dated November 16, 2006, and such
amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from time to
time.
   C.   AH Or AO Zones: The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
for each SFHA delineated as an AH Zone or AO Zone shall be that elevation (or
depth) delineated on the Flood Insurance Rate Map of McHenry County.
   D.   Remaining A Zones: The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
for each of the remaining SFHAs delineated as an A Zone on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map of McHenry County shall be according to the best existing data
available from Federal, State or other sources. Should no other data exist, an
engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine base flood
elevations.
   E.   Riverine: When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation
exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a riverine
SFHA shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II, HEC-RAS or a
dynamic model such as HIP.
   F.   Flood Flows Used: The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be
obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-I, TR-20 or HIP, or by
techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States
Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges.
   G.   Nonriverine: For a nonriverine SFHA, the base flood elevation shall be
the historic flood of record plus three feet (3'), unless calculated by a
detailed engineering study.
   H.   Unmapped Extended SFHA: For an unmapped extended SFHA (with drainage
area less than 1 square mile) which has been identified by the Building Officer
pursuant to section
13-2-2 of this title, the base flood elevation shall be determined by the
applicant utilizing a method as approved in this section.
(1987 Code § 8-5.0)
CHAPTER 4: FLOOD FRINGE AREAS
Section
13-4-1: Scope
13-4-2: Development Permit
13-4-3: Application For Permit
13-4-4: Elevation Comparison
13-4-5: Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control Plan
13-4-6: Local, State And Federal Permits
13-4-7: Preventing Increased Damages
13-4-8: Letter Of Map Revision
13-4-9: Compensatory Storage
13-4-10: Construction Of The Lowest Floor Below The Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
13-4-1: SCOPE:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation and compensatory storage, and other applicable provisions of
this title are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the
capacity of drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the
flood fringe shall meet the requirements of this chapter, along with the
requirements of chapter 7 of this title.
(1987 Code § 8-6.0)
13-4-2: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by State law
shall commence any development in the SFHA without first obtaining a
development permit from the Building Officer.
(1987 Code § 8-6.1)
13-4-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Building Officer. The application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site,
drawn to scale, showing property line dimensions and legal description of the
property and sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or land surveyor;
existing grade elevations using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the location and
dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings. For all proposed
buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and lowest
adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development will
be subject to the requirements of chapter 7 of this title.
(1987 Code § 8-6.2)
13-4-4: ELEVATION COMPARISON:
Upon receipt of a development permit application, the Building Officer shall
compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
Any development located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base
flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance Rate Map and which has not been
filled after the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map without a
permit as required by this title is not in the SFHA and, therefor, not subject
to the requirements of this title. Conversely, any development located on land
shown to be below the base flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but
show on the current Flood Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of
this title. The Building Officer shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate
Map identification.
(1987 Code § 8-6.3)
13-4-5: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN:
A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas shall be
submitted. This plan shall include a description for the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post construction maintenance.
(1987 Code § 8-6.4)
13-4-6: LOCAL, STATE AND FEDERAL PERMITS:
The Building Officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant,
copies of all other local, State and Federal permits, approvals or waivers that
may be required for this type of activity. The Building Officer shall not issue
a permit unless all other local, State and Federal permits have been obtained.
(1987 Code § 8-6.5)
13-4-7: PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES:
No development in the flood fringe shall create a threat to public health and
safety.
(1987 Code § 8-6.6)
13-4-8: LETTER OF MAP REVISION:
If fill is being used to elevate the site above the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit sufficient data and
obtain a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) from FEMA for the purpose of removing
the site from the floodplain.
(1987 Code § 8-6.7)
13-4-9: COMPENSATORY STORAGE:
Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the volume of space
which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure below the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by
a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least
equal to one and one-half (1-1/2) times the volume of storage lost due to the
fill or structure. In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation
shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All
floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage
lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced above the
proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall be constructed to
drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
(1987 Code § 8-6.8)
13-4-10: CONSTRUCTION OF THE LOWEST FLOOR BELOW THE BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE):
A person who has obtained a Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill that removes a
site in the flood fringe from the floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate
the site above the BFE, may apply for a permit from the City to construct the
lowest floor of a residential building below the BFE in the flood fringe. The
Building Officer shall not issue such a permit unless the applicant has
complied with all the criteria set forth in the following subsections.
   A.   Compensatory Storage: Compensatory storage shall be provided per
section
13-4-9 of this chapter.
   B.   Elevation Of Lowest Opening: The elevation of the lowest opening in the
basement wall (i.e., window wells, accessways) shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation (FPE).
   C.   Lowest Adjacent Grade To Foundation: The lowest adjacent grade to the
foundation shall be at or above the FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet
(10') beyond the outside face of the structure. However, if site conditions are
such that this requirement cannot be met, the Building Officer may waive the
ten foot (10') minimum setback if an Illinois Registered Professional Engineer
certifies that an alternative method to protect the building from damage due to
hydrostatic pressures has been met. The certifications shall be in the form of
a detailed soils and structural design analysis, which shall be submitted to
the Building Officer for review. The Building Officer may require such
additional documentation as necessary to prove that the proposed shorter
setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe. In no case shall the
setback distance be less than four feet (4').
   D.   Perimeter Grade: The grade around the perimeter of the structure,
measured at a distance of twenty feet (20') from the structure, shall be above
the BFE. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
obtained, the Building Officer may waive the twenty foot (20') minimum setback
distance if an Illinois Registered Professional Engineer certifies that an
alternative method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic
pressures have been met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design
proving that a shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe
from flooding, shall be submitted to the City for review. In no case shall the
setback distance be less than four feet (4').
   E.   Compacted Fill: The ground around the building shall be compacted fill
that meets all requirements of this subsection and is at least five feet (5')
thick under the basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be
interpreted to require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as
part of a LOMR-F, if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar
classification and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC
or ML according to ASTM standard D-2487, Classification of Soils for
Engineering Purposes.
   F.   Fill Material: The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic;
that is, the soil must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities
must be in the same direction.
   G.   Design, Certification, Inspection: All fill material and compaction
shall be designed, certified and inspected by an Illinois Registered
Professional Engineer, as warranted by the site conditions.
   H.   Basement Floor Elevation: The basement floor shall be at an elevation
that is no more than five (5) below the BFE.
   I.   Drainage Layer: There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the
floor slab, and minimum of one-quarter (1/4) horsepower sump pump with a backup
power supply shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated
at four (4) times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE
and away from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or
uplift of the floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.
   J.   Backflow Prevention: The drainage system shall be equipped with a
positive means of preventing backflow.
   K.   Foundation Elements: All foundation elements shall be designed to
withstand hydrostatic pressure in accordance with accepted engineering
practices.
   L.   Exceptions: If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements
set forth in the preceding subsections, the Building Officer may allow the
construction of a basement below the BFE only if the applicant demonstrates
that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines and requirements set
forth in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably safe from flooding.
In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is reasonably safe from
flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed engineering analysis of the
proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered basement study shall be
completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-
01, with the analysis of the fill being prepared by an Illinois Registered
Professional Engineer.
   M.   Excavation Depth: In order to provide the required compensatory storage
on site, in no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards
of the lot exceed eighteen inches (18"), as measured from the previously
existing natural grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater
depth of excavation, if necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to
drain freely and openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of
mechanical means to drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted.
(1987 Code § 8-6.9)
CHAPTER 5: IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS
Section
13-5-1: Scope
13-5-2: Development Permit
13-5-3: Application For Permit
13-5-4: Local, State And Federal Permits
13-5-5: Preventing Increased Damages; List Of Appropriate Uses
13-5-6: Nonappropriate Uses
13-5-7: Engineering And Mitigation Criteria
13-5-8: Development Activities In Delegated Communities Requiring State Review
13-5-9: Other Permits
13-5-10: Permits For Dams
13-5-11: Activities Not Requiring Registered Professional Engineer Review
13-5-1: SCOPE:
This chapter applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification
or building modification within a designated floodway. The designated floodway
for the Fox River, Boone Creek and the Lakeland Park drainage ditch shall be as
delineated on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of McHenry County and
referenced in section
13-1-2 of this title. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which
meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the
minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development
shall also meet the requirements of chapter 7 of this title.
(1987 Code § 8-7.0)
13-5-2: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation or governmental body not exempted by State law
shall commence any development in a floodway without first obtaining a
development permit from the Building Officer and IDNR/OWR.
(1987 Code § 8-7.1)
13-5-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Application for a development permit shall be made on a form provided by the
Building Officer. The application shall include the following information:
   A.   Name and address of applicant;
   B.   Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to
scale, on the designated floodway map, indicating whether it is proposed to be
in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
   C.   Name of stream or body of water affected;
   D.   Description of proposed activity;
   E.   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
   F.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
   G.   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
   H.   Signature of applicant or the applicant’s agent;
   I.   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other authorized
officer shall sign the application form;
   J.   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form;
(1987 Code § 8-7.2)
   K.   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign the name
of the trustee by them as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall be filed
with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by name and
address and defining the respective interests therein;
(Ord. 19-1186, 2-18-2019)
   L.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a
minimum:
      1.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
      2.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions, including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
location of any channels and any existing or future access roads, distance
between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is near a commercially navigable body of water), designated
floodway limit, floodplain limit, specifications and dimensions of any proposed
channel modifications, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow,
and a graphic or numerical scale;
      3.   Cross section views of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions, including principal dimensions of the
work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal water
elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical);
      4.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas.
This plan shall include a description for the sequence of grading activities
and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post construction maintenance;
      5.   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the designated floodway location;
   M.   Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approval letters
that may be required for this type of development;
   N.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing
that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of sections
13-5-5 and
13-5-7 of this chapter;
   O.   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until IDNR/OWR has indicted
conditional approval of the designated floodway map change. No structures may
be built until a Letter of Map Revision has been approved by FEMA;
   P.   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings of the
site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing ground
elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed excavation or
filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a registered
professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land surveyor; the
location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to buildings; and the
elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed buildings
subject to the requirements of chapter 7 of this title;
   Q.   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the applicant
shall submit the following information:
      1.   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
      2.   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations or
methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
      3.   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in this chapter would have on the physical and
biological conditions of the body of water affected;
      4.   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in subsection
13-5-7D1 of this chapter would have on the physical and biological conditions
of the body of water affected; and
      5.   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering
cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected.
(1987 Code § 8-7.2)
13-5-4: LOCAL, STATE AND FEDERAL PERMITS:
The Building Officer shall be responsible for obtaining from the applicant
copies of all other local, State and Federal permits and approvals that may be
required for this type of activity. The Building Officer shall not issue the
development permit unless all required Federal and State permits have been
obtained. A registered professional engineer, under the employ or contract of
the City, shall review and approve applications reviewed under this chapter.
(1987 Code § 8-7.3)
13-5-5: PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES; LIST OF APPROPRIATE USES:
   A.   Scope: The only development in a floodway which will be allowed are
appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation, and
which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood
heights or velocity, or be a threat to public health and safety and welfare, or
impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of the floodway or
channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this title. Only those appropriate uses listed in 17 Illinois
Administrative Code part 3708 will be allowed.
   B.   Approved Appropriate Uses: The approved appropriate uses are as
follows:
      1.   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
      2.   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring access
to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities and
facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
      3.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
      4.   Underground and overhead utilities;
      5.   Recreational facilities, such as playing fields and trail systems,
including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any 1
direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including open
air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block flood
flows nor reduce floodway storage;
      6.   Detached garages, storage sheds or other nonhabitable accessory
structures that will not block flood flows, nor reduce floodway storage;
      7.   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto;
      8.   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where either:
         a.   The depth of flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will
not exceed 1.0 foot; or
         b.   The applicant of a short term recreational use facility parking
lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and
accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank
flooding events;
      9.   Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a positive
nonerosion slope toward a watercourse;
      10.   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures, including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing
structure, and, which are not considered substantial improvements to the
structure;
      11.   The replacement, reconstruction or repair of a damaged building;
provided, that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building
was damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the
damage occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood
protection elevation;
      12.   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows, including, but not limited to,
fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios and second story additions. If the
building is improved to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before
the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will
be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
(1987 Code § 8-7.4)
13-5-6: NONAPPROPRIATE USES:
Appropriate uses do not include the construction or placement of any new
structures, fill, building additions, building on stilts, excavation or channel
modifications done to accommodate otherwise nonappropriate uses in the
floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence) and storage of materials, except as specifically defined above as an
appropriate use.
(1987 Code § 8-7.4a)
13-5-7: ENGINEERING AND MITIGATION CRITERIA:
Within the designated floodway, the construction of an appropriate use will be
considered permissible; provided, that the proposed project meets the following
engineering and mitigation criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting
plans, calculations and data by a registered professional engineer and provided
that any structure meets the protection requirements of chapter 7 of this
title:
   A.   Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase Flood Stages
Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings, on
stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
      1.   Designated floodway conveyance, “K” + (1.486/n)(AR2/3) where “n” is
Manning’s roughness factor, “A” is the effective flow area of the cross
section, and “R” is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See Ven Te
Chow, Open Channel Hydraulics, McGraw-Hill, New York 1959.)
      2.   The same Manning’s “n” value shall be used for both existing and
proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a Federal,
State or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative
land cover.
      3.   Transition sections shall be provided and used in calculations of
effective designated floodway conveyance. The following expansion and
contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant’s engineer can prove to
IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt
transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
         a.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section,
the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream’s length.
         b.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section,
the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot
(1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream’s length.
         c.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream
length shall be used.
         d.   Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections with
rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated floodway
delineation on adjacent properties.
         e.   All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
   B.   Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream
Flooding:
      1.   Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated floodway
storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures
placed and the impact of any related flood control projects.
      2.   Compensatory storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at
least one and one-half (1.5) times the volume of floodplain storage lost.
      3.   Artificially created storage lost due to a reduction in head loss
behind a bridge shall not be required to be replaced.
      4.   The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed between
the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood elevation.
All designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year flood elevation
shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All designated
floodway storage lost above the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be
replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All such excavations shall
be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
      5.   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of
the proposed construction, the applicant’s engineer shall demonstrate through a
determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the
compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
      6.   There shall be no reduction in floodway surface area as a result of
a floodway modification, unless such modification is necessary to reduce at
existing structure.
   C.   Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream
Erosion Or Flood Heights:
      1.   For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts or on stream
structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in the average
channel or designated floodway velocities or stage, for all flood events up to
and including the 100-year frequency event.
      2.   In the case of bridges or culverts or on stream structures built for
the purpose of backing up water in the stream during normal or flood flows,
velocities may be increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and
sedimentation will be avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
   D.   Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway
Approaches: The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than 0.1 foot when compared to the existing conditions for
all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event; or the
upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the channel banks (or
within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the
design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded
flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase upstream flood
stages greater than 0.1 feet, the developer must contact IDNR/OWR to obtain a
permit for a dam or waiver.
      1.   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be calculated
using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for tailwater
conditions for the flood study specified in chapter 3 of this title. Bridges
and culverts must be analyzed using any commonly accepted FEMA approved
hydraulic models.
      2.   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection B of
this section.
      3.   Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection C of this
section.
      4.   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used for
recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
      5.   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge
showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by section
13-5-5 of this chapter.
      6.   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed per subsection H of this section.
   E.   Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts And
Approach Roads:
      1.   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed with no more than 0.1 foot increase in
backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies up to and
including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a source of
flood damage.
      2.   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a source
of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain, the
applicant’s engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
      3.   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing is a
source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in accordance
with 17 Illinois Administrative Code part 3708 (Floodway Construction in
Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued.
   F.   On Stream Structures Built For Purpose Of Backing Up Water:
      1.   Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 feet when
compared to the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency event, shall be contained within the channel banks (or
within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the
design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded
flood easements.
      2.   A permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be
obtained from IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up
water in the stream during normal or flood flow.
      3.   All dams and impoundment structures, as defined in section
13-1-2 of this title, shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Illinois
Administrative Code part 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the
proposed activity involves a modification of the channel or floodway to
accommodate an impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
         a.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by
providing flood control, public recreation or regional stormwater detention;
         b.   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous fish
species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their cycle, such as
for spawning;
         c.   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded water
quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual bank
slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a presedimentation basin;
         d.   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants.
If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control;
         e.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
chapter.
   G.   Flood Proofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial
Structures: If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for
floodproofing activities.
   H.   Excavation In The Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the design
of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and replacement
of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for lost conveyance
for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be provided for the
excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless
an applicant’s engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations
or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be used with the same
efficiency:
      1.   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider section, the
water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream’s length;
      2.   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow section, the
water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of one foot (1')
horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream’s length; and
      3.   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction, a
minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of stream
length shall be used;
      4.   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream and
downstream of the transition sections.
   I.   Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel
modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
      1.   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which would
accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the body
of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank stabilization,
floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from the
floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment of a
stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is acceptable if
the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish
and wildlife habitat.
      2.   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and not significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values.
      3.   The activity has been planned and designed and will be constructed
in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of
the body of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
         a.   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match
as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross section,
slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified,
restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated into
channel modification design, where practical;
         b.   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both the
upstream and downstream ends of the project designed such that they will
prevent erosion;
         c.   One sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible.
Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side of
the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects
of the vegetation;
         d.   Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that which
is essential for construction of the channel;
         e.   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper
than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Native
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or rip-rap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as
concrete, gabions or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives;
         f.   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover;
         g.   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity,
such as deep pools, riffles and other similar features, such features shall be
provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow
characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where
appropriate;
         h.   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the
modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality;
         i.   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry, and all
items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel;
         j.   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel
enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated
by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as
part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project;
         k.   Unless the modification is for a public flood control project,
there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the
floodway as a result of the modification; and
         l.   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
chapter.
   J.   Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
   K.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in the
floodway, including grading, filling and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
      1.   The construction area shall be minimized to preserve the maximum
vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the time soil
is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be
destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to the
initiation of improvements;
      2.   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be applied to
denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization shall be
provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any portion
of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may not be at
final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60) days;
      3.   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale fences, check dams, diversion ditches
and sediment traps and basins;
      4.   A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width
shall be preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along existing
channels. Construction vehicle use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary
stream crossings shall be constructed where necessary, to minimize erosion.
Necessary construction in or along channels shall be restabilized immediately;
      5.   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be designed
and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban Soil
Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the "Green
Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995).
   L.   Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects, the
permitting requirements of this chapter will be considered met if the applicant
can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic calculations that
the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively result in increased
flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
   M.   General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
      1.   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in chapter 3 of this title, must be used for
analysis of the base conditions. If the study data appears to be in error or
conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be contacted for approval and
concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data to use;
      2.   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of the
proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet the requirements of this chapter for the 100-year frequency flood
elevations of the designated floodway conditions and conditions with the
receiving stream at normal water elevations;
      3.   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
(5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
   N.   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision:
      1.   If the appropriate use would result in a change in the designated
floodway location or the 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant
shall submit to IDNR/OWR and to FEMA all the information, calculations and
documents necessary to be issued a conditional designated floodway map revision
and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional concurrence of the designated floodway
change before a permit is issued;
      2.   The final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA until
as built plans or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging or
excavating activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR;
      3.   In the case of nongovernment projects, the municipality in
incorporated areas and the county in unincorporated areas shall concur with the
proposed conditional designated floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval
can be given;
      4.   No filling, grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a
conditional approval is issued;
      5.   After initial filling, grading, dredging, or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
   O.   Professional Engineer Supervision: All engineering analyses shall be
performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer.
   P.   Construction Within Twenty Five Feet Of Channel: For all activities in
the floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the
channel, the following criteria shall be met:
      1.   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within at least
twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel;
      2.   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during the
construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
   Q.   Construction; Conditions: After receipt of conditional approval of the
designated floodway change and issuance of a permit and a Conditional Letter of
Map Revision, construction as necessary to change the designated floodway
designation may proceed but no buildings or structures or other construction
that is not an appropriate use may be placed in that area until the designated
floodway map is changed and a final Letter of Map Revision is received. The
designated floodway map will be revised upon acceptance and concurrence by
IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the as built plans.
(1987 Code § 8-7.5)
13-5-8: DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES IN DELEGATED COMMUNITIES REQUIRING STATE REVIEW:
For those projects listed below located in a designated floodway, the following
criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for their review and concurrence and/or
permit prior to the issuance of a permit by a community or county delegated
State permitting authority in the floodway:
   A.   Flood Profile Analysis: An engineer’s analysis of the flood profile due
to a proposed bridge pursuant to subsection
13-5-7D of this chapter.
   B.   Sources Of Flood Damage: An engineer’s determination that an existing
bridge or culvert crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis
indicating the proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection
13-5-7E of this chapter.
   C.   Alternative Sections, Equivalent Storage: Alternative transition
sections and hydraulically equivalent storage pursuant to subsections
13-5-7A, B and H of this chapter.
   D.   Government Projects: The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams,
as defined in section
13-1-2 of this title, and all other State, Federal or local units of government
projects, including projects of the Municipality or County.
   E.   Bridge Affected By Backwater: An engineer’s determination that a
proposed bridge affected by backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be
built with a smaller opening.
   F.   Revise Or Establish: Projects which revise or establish the floodway
and/or flood profiles.
   G.   In Public Water: Projects in public bodies of water.
(1987 Code § 8-7.6)
13-5-9: OTHER PERMITS:
   A.   Development Permit: In addition to the other requirements of this
title, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be
issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation
that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR.
   B.   Exceptions:
      1.   No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required if the project
meets the requirements of Regional Permit 3.
      2.   No permit from IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated
this responsibility to the City.
(1987 Code § 8-7.7)
13-5-10: PERMITS FOR DAMS:
   A.   Permit Required: Any work involving the construction, modification or
removal of a dam, as defined in section
13-1-2 of this title, per 17 Illinois Administrative Code part 3702 (Rules for
Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam.
   B.   Notification If No Permit: If the Building Officer finds a dam that
does not have an IDNR/OWR permit, the Building Officer shall immediately notify
the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office.
   C.   Unsafe Condition: If the Building Officer finds a dam which is believed
to be in unsafe condition, the Building Officer shall immediately notify the
owner of the dam, IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office, and the Illinois Emergency
Management Agency (IEMA).
(1987 Code § 8-7.8)
13-5-11: ACTIVITIES NOT REQUIRING REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER REVIEW:
The following activities may be permitted without a registered professional
engineer’s review. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of
this title, including the mitigation requirements:
Regional Permit 3 which authorizes, for example, underground and overhead
utilities, storm and sanitary sewer outfalls, sidewalks, patios, athletic
fields, playground equipment and streambank protection activities.
(1987 Code § 8-7.9)
CHAPTER 6: SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WHERE
FLOODWAYS NOT IDENTIFIED
Section
13-6-1: Scope
13-6-2: Development Permit
13-6-3: Application For Permit
13-6-4: Elevation Comparison
13-6-5: Preventing Increased Damages
13-6-6: Standards
13-6-7: Flood Carrying Capacity Maintained
13-6-8: Compensatory Storage
13-6-1: SCOPE:
In SFHA or floodplains, (including AE Zones, AH Zones, AO Zones and unnumbered
A Zones) where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more
than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative
effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and
passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-
year frequency flood elevation.
(1987 Code § 8-8.0)
13-6-2: DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
No person, firm, corporation or governmental body, not exempted by State law,
shall commence any development in a SFHA or floodplain without first obtaining
a development permit from the Building Officer. Application for a development
permit shall be made on a form provided by the Building Officer. The
application shall be accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale
showing property line dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes
in grade resulting from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer,
architect or surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and
additions to buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all proposed buildings subject to the requirements of chapter 7 of
this title.
(1987 Code § 8-8.1)
13-6-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
The application for a development permit shall also include the following
information:
   A.   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose and
intended use;
   B.   Site location (including legal description) of the property, drawn to
scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is proposed to be
in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
   C.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
   D.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as a
minimum:
      1.   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
      2.   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach showing
existing and proposed conditions, including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations using the North American Vertical Datum of 1988,
adjacent property lines and ownership, drainage and flood control easements,
distance between proposed activity and navigation channel (when the proposed
construction is in or near a commercially navigable body of water), floodplain
limit, location and orientation of cross sections, north arrow and a graphical
or numerical scale;
      3.   Cross section views of the project perpendicular to the flow of
floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions, including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view,
existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency
flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical
scales (horizontal and vertical); and
      4.   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed areas.
This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading activities and
the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be implemented to
mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a description of final
stabilization and revegetation measures, and the identification of a
responsible party to ensure post construction maintenance;
   E.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted showing
that the proposed work will meet the criteria of sections
13-6-5 through 13-6-8 of this chapter;
   F.   Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approvals that
may be required for this type of development.
(1987 Code § 8-8.1)
13-6-4: ELEVATION COMPARISON:
Based on the best available existing data according to Federal, State or other
sources, the Building Officer shall compare the elevation of the site to the
base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
   A.   No Available Information: Should no elevation information exist for the
site, the developer’s engineer shall calculate the elevation according to
subsection
13-3-1D of this title.
   B.   Land Not Applicable: Any development located on land that can be shown
to have been higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood
Insurance Rate Map identification is not in the SFHA and, therefor, not subject
to the requirements of this title.
   C.   Ground Elevation Documentation, Certification: The Building Officer
shall maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the
development site and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to
the date of the site’s first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
   D.   Other Required Permits: The Building Officer shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other Federal, State and local
permits, approvals or waivers that may be required for this type of activity.
The Building Officer shall not issue the development permit unless all required
Federal, State and local permits have been obtained.
(1987 Code § 8-8.2)
13-6-5: PREVENTING INCREASED DAMAGES:
No development in the SFHA, where a floodway has not been determined, shall
create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in flood heights or velocity
or threat to public health, safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic
and hydraulic functions of the floodway or channel, or impair existing water
quality or aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by
appropriate mitigation methods as called for in this title.
(1987 Code § 8-8.4)
13-6-6: STANDARDS:
Within all riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been determined, the
following standards shall apply:
   A.   Engineering Requirements Met: The developer shall have a registered
professional engineer state in writing and show through supporting plans,
calculations and data that the project meets the engineering requirements of
section
13-5-7 of this title for the entire floodplain as calculated under the
provisions of subsection
13-3-1D of this title.
      1.   As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study
performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR
and FEMA for acceptance as a designated floodway.
      2.   Upon acceptance of the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the developer
shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of chapter 5 of
this title for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be defined according
to the definition in section
13-1-2 of this title.
   B.   IDNR/OWR Permit: A development permit shall not be issued unless the
applicant first obtains an IDNR/OWR permit or a determination has been made
that an IDNR/OWR permit is not required.
   C.   Permits For Dams:
      1.   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
dam as defined in section 8-2 Illinois Administrative Code part 3702 (Rules for
Construction of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of
construction of a dam.
      2.   If the Building Officer finds a dam that does not have an IDNR/OWR
permit, the Building Officer shall immediately notify the IDNR/OWR Bartlett
Office.
      3.   If the Building Officer finds a dam which is believed to be unsafe
condition, the Building Officer shall immediately notify the owner of the dam,
the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office, and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency.
   D.   Permitted Activities Without Review Or Calculation: The following
activities may be permitted without a registered professional engineer’s review
or calculation of a base flood elevation and designated floodway. Such
activities shall still meet the other requirements of this title:
      1.   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 2.
      2.   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit 3.
      3.   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
Permit 4.
      4.   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 5.
      5.   Minor, nonobstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change in grade)
are covered by this permit.
      6.   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 7.
      7.   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 8.
      8.   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit 9.
      9.   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential buildings
meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 10.
      10.   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide Permit 11.
      11.   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge widenings
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide Permit 12.
      12.   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit 13.
      13.   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide Permit 14.
      14.   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located entirely
within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State floodway permit
requirements.
(1987 Code § 8-8.5)
13-6-7: FLOOD CARRYING CAPACITY MAINTAINED:
The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated watercourse shall
be maintained.
(1987 Code § 8-8.5a)
13-6-8: COMPENSATORY STORAGE:
   A.   Required: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use,
the volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or structure
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation shall be compensated
for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from
below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation.
   B.   Volume: The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and one-
half (1.5) times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
   C.   Streams, Watercourses: In the case of streams and watercourses, such
excavation shall be made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or
occupied.
   D.   Lost Storage Replaced: All floodplain storage lost below the existing
10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood
elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.
(1987 Code § 8-8.6)
CHAPTER 7: ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
Section
13-7-1: Requirements
13-7-2: Public Health And Safety
13-7-3: Carrying Capacity And Notification
13-7-4: Protecting Buildings
13-7-5: Residential, Nonresidential Buildings
13-7-6: Nonresidential Building Structurally Dry Floodproofed
13-7-7: Crawlspaces
13-7-8: Critical Facilities
13-7-9: Minor Accessory Structures
13-7-10: Existing Buildings
13-7-1: REQUIREMENTS:
In addition to the requirements found in chapters 4, 5 and 6 of this title, for
development in flood fringes, designated floodways, and SFHA or floodplains
where no floodways have been identified, the requirements of this chapter shall
be met.
(1987 Code § 8-9.0)
13-7-2: PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY:
Public health and safety standard requirements include:
   A.   Health: Public health standards.
(1987 Code § 8-9.1)
   B.   Hazardous, Toxic Materials: No developments in the SFHA shall include
locating or storing chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes,
fertilizers, flammable liquids, pollutants or other hazardous or toxic
materials below the FPE unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed and
anchored storage tank and certified by a professional engineer or floodproofed
building constructed according to the requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Public Utilities, Facilities: Public utilities and facilities, such as
sewer, gas and electric shall be located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(1987 Code § 8-9.2a)
   D.   Sewer, Water: Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
(1987 Code § 8-9.2b)
   E.   New, Replacement Systems: New and replacement water supply systems,
wells, sanitary sewer lines and on site waste disposal systems may be permitted
providing all manholes or other aboveground openings located below the FPE are
watertight.
(1987 Code § 8-9.3)
   F.   Other Activities: All other activities defined as development shall be
designed so as not to alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(1987 Code § 8-9.2c)
13-7-3: CARRYING CAPACITY AND NOTIFICATION:
For all projects involving channel modification, fill or stream maintenance
(including levees), the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse shall be
maintained. In addition, the City shall notify adjacent communities in writing
thirty (30) days prior to the issuance of a permit for the alteration or
relocation of the watercourse.
(1987 Code § 8-9.4)
13-7-4: PROTECTING BUILDINGS:
All buildings located within a 100-year floodplain also known as a SFHA, shall
be protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This
building protection criteria applies to the following situations:
   A.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or addition
to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or
seventy (70) square feet.
   B.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an existing
building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%) or
equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration shall be
figured cumulatively subsequently to the adoption of this title. If
substantially improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the
flood protection standards of this chapter.
   C.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs shall
be figured cumulatively subsequent to the adoption of this title. If
substantially damaged, the entire structure must meet the flood protection
standards of this title.
   D.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new manufactured home
on an existing site. The building protection requirements do not apply to
returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully occupied before it
was removed to avoid flood damage.
   E.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days per year; and
   F.   Repetitive loss to an existing building, as defined in section
13-1-2 of this title. This building protection requirement may be met by one of
the methods in sections
13-7-5 through
13-7-10 of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 8-9.5)
13-7-5: RESIDENTIAL, NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS:
   A.   Constructed On Permanent Landfill: A residential or nonresidential
building, when allowed, may be constructed on permanent landfill in accordance
with the following:
      1.   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above the flood
protection elevation; and
      2.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches (6")
deep before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the flood protection elevation;
and
      3.   The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection elevation.
However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer
certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages due to
hydrostatic pressures; and
      4.   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap or other structural measure; and
      5.   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not incorporate
debris or refuse materials; and
      6.   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface drainage
from or onto neighboring properties, and when necessary, stormwater management
techniques, such as swales or basins, shall be incorporated.
(1987 Code § 8-9.6)
   B.   Building Elevation: A residential or nonresidential building may be
elevated in accordance with the following:
      1.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
stilts, piles, walls or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base
flood or 100-year frequency flood. Designs must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or the permanent openings, one on
each wall, shall be not more than one foot (1') above existing grade, and
consist of a minimum of two (2) openings. The openings must have a total net
area of not less than one square inch for every one square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding below the base flood elevation; and
      2.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned
in relation to flood flows and adjoining structures so as to minimize exposure
to known hydrodynamic forces such as current, waves, ice and floating debris;
and
      3.   All areas below the flood protection elevation shall be constructed
of materials resistant to flood damage. The lowest floor (including basement)
and all electrical, heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and utility meters shall be located at or above the flood protection
elevation. Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation.
         a.   The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical,
heating, ventilating, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and utility
meters shall be located at or above the flood protection elevation; and
         b.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located
below the flood protection elevation, provided they are waterproofed; and
      4.   The areas below the flood protection elevation may only be used for
the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and not later modified or occupied as habitable space; and
      5.   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply with
these requirements may be certified by registered professional engineer or
architect.
      6.   Manufactured homes and travel trailers to be installed on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days, shall be elevated to or above the
flood protection elevation; and, shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement by being tied down in accordance with the Rules
and Regulations for the Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77
Illinois Administrative Code part 870. In addition, all manufactured homes
shall meet the following elevation requirements:
         a.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved: 1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 2) in a new
manufactured home park or subdivision; 3) in an expansion to an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision; or 4) in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial
damage from a flood, the top of the lowest floor shall be elevated to or above
the flood protection elevation.
         b.   In the case of manufactured homes placed or substantially
improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, the manufactured
home shall be elevated to that either the top of the lowest floor is above the
base flood elevation or the chassis is at least thirty six inches (36") in
height above grade and supported by reinforced piers or other foundations of
equivalent strength, whichever is less.
      7.   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet
the elevation and anchoring requirements of subsection B6 of this section
unless:
         a.   They are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days; and
         b.   They are fully licensed, ready for highway use, and used only for
recreation, camping, travel or seasonal use rather than as a permanent
dwelling. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its
wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utility and service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
(1987 Code § 8-9.7)
13-7-6: NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDING STRUCTURALLY DRY FLOODPROOFED:
Only a nonresidential building may be structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of
elevation); provided, that:
   A.   Certification: A registered professional engineer or architect shall
certify that the building has been structurally dry floodproofed below the
flood protection elevation, the structure and attendant utility facilities are
watertight and capable of resisting the effects of the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood.
   B.   Building Design: The building design shall take into account flood
velocities, duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the
effects of buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice.
   C.   Operable Floodproofing: Floodproofing measures shall be operable
without human intervention and without an outside source of electricity
(levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not considered floodproofing
for the purpose of this subsection).
(1987 Code § 8-9.8A)
13-7-7: CRAWLSPACES:
A building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below the flood
protection elevation; provided, that the following conditions are met:
   A.   Building Design: The building must be designed and adequately anchored
to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; and
   B.   Entry, Exit Of Floodwaters: Any enclosed area below the flood
protection elevation shall have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by
allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one
opening on each wall having a total net area of not less than one square inch
per one square foot of enclosed area. The openings shall be no more than one
foot (1') above grade; and
   C.   Interior Grade: The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood
protection elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade; and
   D.   Interior Height: The interior height of the crawlspace measured from
the interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundation wall must not
exceed four feet (4') at any point; and
   E.   Drainage System: An adequate drainage system must be installed to
remove floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable
period of time after a flood event; and
   F.   Resistant Materials: Portions of the building below the flood
protection elevation must be constructed with materials resistant to flood
damage; and
   G.   Utility Systems Elevated: Utility systems within the crawlspace must be
elevated above the flood protection elevation.
(1987 Code § 8-9.8B)
13-7-8: CRITICAL FACILITIES:
Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities shall be
located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new critical
facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation, whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
(1987 Code § 8-9.8C)
13-7-9: MINOR ACCESSORY STRUCTURES:
Tool sheds and detached garages and other minor accessory structures on an
existing single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor
below the flood protection elevation in accordance with the following:
   A.   No Habitation: The building is not used for human habitation; and
   B.   Construction Standards: All areas below the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material.
Structures located in a designated floodway shall be constructed and placed on
a building site so as not to block the flow of flood waters and shall also meet
the appropriate use criteria of chapter 5 of this title. In addition, all other
requirements of chapters 4, 5 and 6 of this title must be met; and
   C.   Anchoring: The structure shall be anchored to prevent flotation; and
   D.   Service Facilities: Service facilities such as electrical and heating
equipment shall be elevated or floodproofed to the flood protection elevation;
and
   E.   Value; Size: The building shall be valued at less than ten thousand
dollars ($10,000.00) and be less than five hundred (500) square feet in floor
size; and
   F.   Use: The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or
tools and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses
and cannot be modified later into another use; and
   G.   Permanent Opening: The building shall meet the permanent opening
criteria of subsection
13-7-5B1 of this chapter; and
   H.   Flammable, Toxic Materials: All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline,
paint, insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood
protection elevation; and
   I.   Elevation Documented; Insurance Implications: The lowest floor
elevation should be documented and the owner advised of the flood insurance
implications.
(1987 Code § 8-9.8D)
13-7-10: EXISTING BUILDINGS:
Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall also meet the
more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section
13-5-5 of this title. Nonconforming structures located in a designated floodway
may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally altered in
accordance with section
13-5-7 of this title. A nonconforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind or
other natural or manmade disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it
shall conform to this title.
(1987 Code § 8-9.9)
CHAPTER 8: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
Section
13-8-1: Scope
13-8-2: Review For Consistency With Requirements
13-8-3: Base Flood Elevation And Floodway Delineations
13-8-4: Preservation Of Natural Streams, Channels
13-8-5: Approval Outside Corporate Limits
13-8-6: Altering Flood Flows Or Increasing Flood Damage Prohibited
13-8-1: SCOPE:
The City Council shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that they
are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
(1987 Code § 8-10.0)
13-8-2: REVIEW FOR CONSISTENCY WITH REQUIREMENTS:
New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements and Integrated
Development Districts (IDDs) within the SFHA shall be reviewed to assure that
the proposed developments are consistent with chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7 of this
title and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for new
subdivisions, manufactured home parks and IDDs shall include a signed statement
by a registered professional engineer that the plat or plans account for
changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance with the Plat Act.
(1987 Code § 8-10.1)
13-8-3: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION AND FLOODWAY DELINEATIONS:
   A.   Required: Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks,
travel trailer parks, IDDs and additions to manufactured home parks and
additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation data and floodway delineations. (1987 Code § 8-10.2)
   B.   Unavailable; Calculation By Engineer: Where this information is not
available from an existing adopted study, the applicant's engineer shall be
responsible for defining the floodway and provide proof of no-rise.
(1987 Code § 8-10.2; amd. 2019 Code)
13-8-4: PRESERVATION OF NATURAL STREAMS, CHANNELS:
Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located and laid
out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and channels.
Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or other
public grounds.
(1987 Code § 8-10.3)
13-8-5: APPROVAL OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS:
The City Council shall not approve any IDD or plat of subdivision located
outside the corporate limits unless such agreement or plat is in accordance
with the provisions of this title.
(1987 Code § 8-10.4)
13-8-6: ALTERING FLOOD FLOWS OR INCREASING FLOOD DAMAGE PROHIBITED:
All other activities defined as development shall be designed so as not to
alter flood flows or increase potential flood damages.
(1987 Code § 8-10.5)
CHAPTER 9: VARIANCES
Section
13-9-1: Scope
13-9-2: Required Conditions
13-9-3: Notification To Applicant
13-9-4: Historic Site, Structure
13-9-1: SCOPE:
No variances shall be granted to any development located within a designated
floodway, as defined in section
13-1-2 of this title.
   A.   Application For Variance: Whenever the standards of this title place
undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to
the City Council for a variance.
(1987 Code § 8-11.1)
   B.   Review, Recommendation: The City Engineer shall review the applicant’s
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the City Council.
The City may attach such conditions to granting a variance as it deems
necessary to further the flood protection intent of this title.
(1987 Code § 8-11.1; amd. 2019 Code)
13-9-2: REQUIRED CONDITIONS:
No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all of the
following conditions are met:
   A.   Location Outside Not Available: The development activity cannot be
located outside the SFHA; and
   B.   Exception Hardship: An exceptional hardship would result if the
variance were not granted; and
   C.   Minimum Relief: The relief requested is the minimum necessary; and
   D.   No Additional Threat: There will be no additional threat to public
health, safety, beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic
habitat, or creation of a nuisance; and
   E.   Public Expense: There will be no additional public expense for flood
protection, lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief
operations, policing or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or
other public facilities; and
   F.   Existing Requirements Still Applicable: The provisions of chapters 4
and 6 of this title shall still be met; and
   G.   Not Designated Floodway: The activity is not in a designated floodway;
and
   H.   Unique Circumstances: The applicant’s circumstances are unique and do
not establish a pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP; and
   I.   No Altering Of Character: The granting of the variance will not alter
the essential character of the area involved including existing stream uses;
and
   J.   Other Permits Obtained: All other required State and Federal permits or
waivers have been obtained.
(1987 Code § 8-11.2)
13-9-3: NOTIFICATION TO APPLICANT:
The Building Officer shall notify an applicant in writing that a variance from
the requirements of chapter 7 of this title that would lessen the degree of
protection to a building will:
   A.   Premium Increase: Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance
up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars
($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
   B.   Life, Property Risks: Increase the risks to life and property; and
   C.   Acknowledgement In Writing: Require that the applicant proceed with
knowledge of these risks and that the applicant will acknowledge in writing
that he assumes the risk and liability.
(1987 Code § 8-11.3)
13-9-4: HISTORIC SITE, STRUCTURE:
Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site or
historic structure, as defined in section
13-1-2 of this title, historic structure, may be granted using criteria more
permissive than the requirements of sections
13-9-1 and
13-9-2 of this chapter, subject to the conditions that:
   A.   Minimum Necessary: The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure; and
   B.   Certification Not Removed: The repair or rehabilitation will not result
in the structure being removed as a certified historic structure.
(1987 Code § 8-11.4)
TITLE 14: ANNEXATIONS
CHAPTER 1: REIMBURSEMENTS TO CITY FOR EXPENSES IN ANNEXATION PROCEEDINGS
Section
14-1-1: Definitions
14-1-2: Property Owner To Reimburse City
14-1-3: Deposit Made By Property Owner
14-1-4: Annexation Proceedings Stayed Until Deposit Made
14-1-5: Statements And Bills Of Charges And Fees
14-1-6: Subsequent Demands For Additional Deposits
14-1-7: Funds Deposited In Special Account
14-1-8: Continuance For Deposits
14-1-9: Waiver Of Requirements
14-1-10: Return Of Unused Deposits To Property Owners
14-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ACRE: That measurement of land that is the dimensions of an acre
notwithstanding any roads, buildings or other physical structures or obstacles
located on, within or adjacent to said measurement.
RETAINED PERSONNEL: Any engineer, attorney, planner, economist or other
technical, professional or other expert paid or retained by the City to assist
or advise the City, directly or indirectly, in connection with any aspect of a
proposed annexation of territory to the City.
(1987 Code §§ 2-167, 2-169)
14-1-2: PROPERTY OWNER TO REIMBURSE CITY:
Property owners shall pay and reimburse the City for any and all City Council
and administrative expenses and costs and for any and all fees, salaries or
compensations incurred and charged to the City by the retained personnel of the
City in connection with the proposed annexation of any land to the City as set
forth in this chapter.
(1987 Code § 2-166)
14-1-3: DEPOSIT MADE BY PROPERTY OWNER:
   A.   Calculation: The property owner shall deposit with the City a sum to be
calculated, as set forth in this subsection, on the basis of the amount of
territory to be annexed to be used toward defraying the aforesaid expenses,
costs, fees, salaries and compensations:
      1.   Single-Family Residential: For single-family residential territory
up to one acre:
         a.   Where the owner of record is a land trust: Four hundred dollars
($400.00).
         b.   Where the owner of record is not a land trust: Two hundred
dollars ($200.00).
      2.   For Territory Up To Five Acres: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
      3.   For Territory Of Five Acres Or More: One thousand dollars
($1,000.00) plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) per acre for each acre in excess
of five (5) acres.
   B.   Time Of Payment: This deposit shall be paid to the City at the time
that a petition for annexation is filed or a proposed annexation agreement is
presented by the property owner, or at any time prior thereto that either the
Mayor, the City Council or Finance Director may request.
(1987 Code § 2-168)
14-1-4: ANNEXATION PROCEEDINGS STAYED UNTIL DEPOSIT MADE:
All proceedings in connection with such annexation shall be stayed until said
sum so designated is deposited with the City Clerk as aforesaid.
(1987 Code § 2-170)
14-1-5: STATEMENTS AND BILLS OF CHARGES AND FEES:
Any statement or bill submitted to the City by the retained personnel shall
segregate and identify the charges and fees incurred directly or indirectly
connected with said annexation; a copy of said statement or bill shall be
forwarded to the property owner at the time an amount to equal said charges and
fees are withdrawn from the specified account.
(1987 Code § 2-171)
14-1-6: SUBSEQUENT DEMANDS FOR ADDITIONAL DEPOSITS:
   A.   Permitted: At any time the balance in the property owner’s account
reaches one-fourth (1/4) of the original amount deposited, the Mayor or the
City Council may demand from the property owner a sum of money that, in
addition to the balance in the specified account, shall equal the amount
originally deposited hereunder or such lesser fraction thereof that the City
Council might, in such case, determine.
   B.   Stay Of Proceedings: All proceedings with regard to such annexation
shall be stayed until said subsequent demands for additional deposits shall be
paid by the property owner.
   C.   Notice: The Mayor or the City Council shall give notice of said demand
for payment to said property owner and a duplicate copy of said notice shall be
furnished to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   D.   Termination Of Proceedings: Any demand or subsequent demand of the City
Council, not deposited by the property owner within six (6) months of the date
of said demand, shall, at the discretion of the City Council and upon written
notice to the property owner, terminate the proposed annexation proceedings.
(1987 Code § 2-172)
14-1-7: FUNDS DEPOSITED IN SPECIAL ACCOUNT:
All funds required to be deposited by the property owner shall be deposited by
the City into a special account and shall be held in the name of the City for
the uses and purposes set forth in this chapter.
(1987 Code § 2-173)
14-1-8: CONTINUANCE FOR DEPOSITS:
The City Council may, for good cause shown by the property owner in writing to
said Council, grant continuances in writing to the property owner for the
deposits.
(1987 Code § 2-174)
14-1-9: WAIVER OF REQUIREMENTS:
The City Council may, in its discretion and upon written resolution, waive the
requirements of this chapter.
(1987 Code § 2-175)
14-1-10: RETURN OF UNUSED DEPOSITS TO PROPERTY OWNERS:
Upon the presentment of the final statement of the retained personnel and
within sixty (60) days of the disposition of the annexation proceedings,
including the approval and recording of any final plat, any balance of the
deposit remaining in the account, excluding interest, shall be returned and
repaid to the property owner. Any interest that may be earned in connection
with the deposit shall be retained by the City.
(1987 Code § 2-176)
TITLE 15: FINES, PENALTIES, AND FEES
CHAPTER 1: FINES AND PENALTIES
Section
15-1-1: Fines And Penalties Table
15-1-1: FINES AND PENALTIES TABLE:
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the following described offenses
shall be fined according to the following table.
Certain offenses may be settled and compromised by the offender if paid within
ten (10) days of being issued the ticket.
Column A lists the fine for each offense and column B is the settlement amount
if paid within ten (10) days of being issued.
Certain offenses may not be settled prior to court and the offender must appear
in court. Those are noted in column B.
  Column A Column B
                                                           Column A Column B
TITLE 4: BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 2: Alcoholic Liquor
4-2-14A          Alcohol; Peddling                         $200.00  must appear
4-2-14B          Alcohol; Premises Compliance              $200.00  must appear
4-2-14C          Alcohol; Minimum Age Of Bartenders/       $200.00  must appear
                 Servers
4-2-14D          Alcohol; Minimum Age To Sell Packaged     $200.00  must appear
                 Retail
4-2-14E          Alcohol; Closing Hours                    $200.00  must appear
4-2-14F          Alcohol; Use Of Premises After Closing    $200.00  must appear
                 Hours
4-2-14G          Alcohol; View From Street                 $200.00  must appear
4-2-15A1         Alcohol; Purchase/Acceptance/Possession   $200.00  must appear
                 Under 21
4-2-15A2         Alcohol; Consumption Under 21             $200.00  must appear
4-2-15B          Alcohol; Sale/Delivery To Minors          $200.00  must appear
4-2-15C          Alcohol; Misrepresenting Age By Person    $200.00  must appear
                 Under 21
4-2-15E          Alcohol; Parental Responsibility For      $200.00  must appear
                 Violations
Chapter 3: Adult Business and Uses
4-3D-5           Public Nudity                             $300.00  $275.00
Chapter 5: Coin Operated Devices
4-5-2            Gambling Devices Prohibited               $250.00  $225.00
4-5-3            Electronic Sweepstakes Machines or        $250.00  $225.00
                 Devices Prohibited
4-5-5            General Fine for Violating Title 4,       $250.00  $225.00
                 Chapter 5
Chapter 10: Pawnbrokers, Secondhand Dealers and Junk/Scrap Collection Vehicles
4-10-21          Junk/Scrap Collection of Vehicles         $500.00  $475.00
Chapter 13: Solicitors
4-13-3           Solicitation without permit               $200.00  $175.00
4-13-5           Regulations                               $200.00  $175.00
4-13-6           General Fine for Violating Title 4,       $200.00  $175.00
                 Chapter 13
TITLE 5: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1: Garbage and Refuse
5-1-3A           Refuse Containers                         $100.00  $75.00
5-1-4            Disposal of refuse                        $100.00  $75.00
5-1-5            Refuse collection, frequency              $100.00  $75.00
5-1-8            Storage of garbage containers             $100.00  $75.00
5-1-9            Accumulation of garbage                   $100.00  $75.00
Chapter 3: Food and Food Handlers
5-3-3            Inspections, Samples Required             $100.00  $75.00
5-3-4            Unwholesome Food                          $100.00  $75.00
5-3-5            Adulteration                              $100.00  $75.00
5-3-6            Sanitation on Premises                    $100.00  $75.00
5-3-7            Flies and Vermin                          $100.00  $75.00
5-3-8            Cleanliness, Health of Employees          $100.00  $75.00
5-3-10           General Fine for Violating Title 5,       $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 3
Chapter 4: Milk and Milk Products
5-4-3            Milk Standards                            $100.00  $75.00
5-4-4            General Fine for Violating Title 5,       $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 4
Chapter 5: Food Deliveries
5-5-2            Sanitation Requirements                   $100.00  $75.00
5-5-3            General Fine for Violating Title 5,       $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 5
Chapter 6: Restaurants
5-6-3            Permit Required                           $100.00  $75.00
5-6-4            Disease Control                           $100.00  $75.00
5-6-5            Construction, Reconstruction, Alteration  $100.00  $75.00
5-6-6            General Fine for Violating Title 5,       $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 6
Chapter 7: Nuisances
5-7-1            Posting signs, ROW                        $100.00  $75.00
5-7-2            Loudspeakers, Amplifiers for Advertising  $100.00  $75.00
5-7-3            Moving Signs                              $100.00  $75.00
5-7-4            General Fine for Violating Title 5,       $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 7
Chapter 9: Handbills
5-9-1            Throwing in Public Places                 $100.00  $75.00
5-9-2            Placing in Vehicles                       $100.00  $75.00
5-9-3            Prohibited Distribution                   $100.00  $75.00
5-9-4            Name, Address of Printer, Distributor     $100.00  $75.00
                 Required
Chapter 11: Ice Cream Trucks
5-11-3           License Required                          $100.00  $75.00
5-11-4           General Fine for Violating Title 5,       $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 11
TITLE 6: PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter 3: Police Alarm Systems
6-3-2            Police/Fire Alarms                        $100.00  $75.00
6-3-3            Wireless Alarm Network                    $100.00  $75.00
6-3-4            Fire Alarm Systems                        $100.00  $75.00
6-3-5            Renewal of Monitoring                     $100.00  $75.00
6-3-6            Network Equipment                         $100.00  $75.00
6-3-7            Automatic Dialer Alarms                   $100.00  $75.00
6-3-8            Audible Security Alarms                   $100.00  $75.00
6-3-9            False Alarms                              $100.00  $75.00
6-3-11           General Fine for Violating Title 6,       $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 3
Chapter 4: Animal Control
6-4-3            Dog License And Registration By County    $100.00  $75.00
                 Required
6-4-4A           Owner Duties For Care; Failure To Provide $100.00  $75.00
                 Sufficient Food/Water
6-4-4B           Owner Duties For Care; Failure To Provide $100.00  $75.00
                 Adequate Shelter/Protection
6-4-4C           Owner Duties For Care; Failure To Provide $100.00  $75.00
                 Proper Veterinary Care
6-4-4D           Owner Duties For Care; Failure To Provide $100.00  $75.00
                 Humane Care/Treatment
6-4-5            Vaccination Required                      $100.00  $75.00
6-4-6A           Cruel Treatment; Abuse                    $100.00  $75.00
6-4-6B           Cruel Treatment; Abandonment              $100.00  $75.00
6-4-7A           Keeping Of Animals Other Than Domestic    $100.00  $75.00
                 Animals
6-4-7B           Keeping Of Farm Animals Within City       $100.00  $75.00
                 Limits
6-4-7C           Keeping Of Exotic Animals Within City     $100.00  $75.00
                 Limits
6-4-8A           Running At Large; Domestic Animal         $100.00  $75.00
6-4-8B           Running At Large; Restraint, Owner        $100.00  $75.00
                 Permission Required
6-4-8C           Running At Large; Nuisance                $100.00  $75.00
6-4-10A          Nuisance Animals; Barking Dogs            $100.00  $75.00
6-4-10B          Nuisance Animals; Entry On The Private    $100.00  $75.00
                 Property Of Another
6-4-10C          Nuisance Animals; Damage To Property      $100.00  $75.00
6-4-10D          Nuisance Animals; Accumulation Of Feces   $100.00  $75.00
6-4-10E          Nuisance Animals; Removal Of Feces        $100.00  $75.00
6-4-10F          Nuisance Animals; Females In Heat         $100.00  $75.00
6-4-11A          Animal Bite; Notification Required        $100.00  $75.00
6-4-11B          Animal Bite; Disposal Prior To Release By $100.00  $75.00
                 Health Department
6-4-11C          Animal Bite; Failure To Comply With       $100.00  $75.00
                 Health Department
6-4-11D          Animal Bite; Expenses Borne By Owner      $100.00  $75.00
6-4-12           Impoundment                               $100.00  $75.00
6-4-13           Limitations On The Number Of Dogs         $100.00  $75.00
6-4-14           General Fine for Violating Title 6,       $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 4
Chapter 5: Offenses
Article A: Generally
6-5A-1           Compounding A Crime                       $200.00  $175.00
6-5A-2           Accountability For The Conduct Of Another $200.00  $175.00
6-5A-3           Nuisance Businesses                       $200.00  $175.00
6-5A-4A          Disorderly Conduct; Breach Of The Peace   $200.00  must appear
6-5A-4A1         Disorderly Conduct; False Report Of A     $200.00  must appear
                 Fire
6-5A-4A2         Disorderly Conduct; False Report Of A     $200.00  must appear
                 Bomb
6-5A-4A3         Disorderly Conduct; False Report Of A     $200.00  must appear
                 Crime
6-5A-4A4         Disorderly Conduct; Enters Private        $200.00  must appear
                 Property For A Lewd Purpose
6-5A-4A5a        Disorderly Conduct; Violent Act, Puts     $200.00  must appear
                 Another In Danger
6-5A-4A5b        Disorderly Conduct; Violent Act, Puts     $200.00  must appear
                 Property In Danger
6-5A-4A5c        Disorderly Conduct; Provokes Or Engages   $200.00  must appear
                 In A Fight
6-5A-4A5d        Disorderly Conduct; Interferes With       $200.00  must appear
                 Anothers Occupation
6-5A-4A5e        Disorderly Conduct; Obstructs Vehicle/    $200.00  must appear
                 Pedestrian Traffic
6-5A-4A5f        Disorderly Conduct; Incites A Disturbance $200.00  must appear
                 Or Riot
6-5A-4A5g        Disorderly Conduct; Abusive Threats Or    $200.00  must appear
                 Language
6-5A-4A5h        Disorderly Conduct; Loud/Unreasonable     $200.00  must appear
                 Noise
6-5A-4A5i        Disorderly Conduct; Failure To Obey An    $200.00  must appear
                 Order To Disburse
6-5A-4A5j        Disorderly Conduct; Abusive/Obscene       $200.00  must appear
                 Language In Public
6-5A-4A5k        Disorderly Conduct; Assembles 3 Or More   $200.00  must appear
                 For Violence
6-5A-4A5l        Disorderly Conduct; Assembles 3 Or More   $200.00  must appear
                 To Violate City Code
6-5A-4A5m        Disorderly Conduct; Under Influence On    $200.00  must appear
                 Private Street/Road
6-5A-4A6         Disorderly Conduct; Permits 2 Or More To  $200.00  must appear
                 Commit D.C.
6-5A-4A7         Disorderly Conduct; Interrupts Or         $200.00  must appear
                 Disturbs Lawful Assembly
6-5A-4A8         Disorderly Conduct; Mob Action            $200.00  must appear
6-5A-4A9         Disorderly Conduct; Disturbs The Peace Of $200.00  must appear
                 Others
6-5A-4A10        Disorderly Conduct; Loitering Without     $200.00  must appear
                 Lawful Business/Lewd Conduct
6-5A-5           Disturbing Religious Worship              $200.00  $175.00
6-5-6            Noise; Nuisance Noise                     $150.00  $125.00
6-5-6A           Noise; Horns, Signaling Devices, Etc.     $150.00  $125.00
6-5-6B           Noise; Radios, Boom Boxes, Personal Music $150.00  $125.00
                 Devices, Etc.
6-5-6C           Noise; Loudspeakers, Amplifiers For       $150.00  $125.00
                 Advertising
6-5-6D           Noise; Exhausts                           $150.00  $125.00
6-5-6E           Noise; Defect In Vehicle Or Load          $150.00  $125.00
6-5-6F           Noise; Construction Outside Of Allowable  $150.00  $125.00
                 Hours
6-5-6G           Noise; Adjacent To Schools, Courts,       $150.00  $125.00
                 Churches, Hospitals
6-5-6H           Noise; Drums                              $150.00  $125.00
6-5-6I           Noise; Pile Drivers, Hammers, Etc.        $150.00  $125.00
6-5-6J           Noise; Blowers                            $150.00  $125.00
6-5-6K           Noise; Internal Combustion Engines        $150.00  $125.00
6-5-6L           Noise; Machinery                          $150.00  $125.00
6-5A-6F          Construction Hours                        $100.00  $75.00
6-5A-7A          Vagrancy; No Lawful Means Of Support      $125.00  $100.00
6-5A-7B          Vagrancy; Unlawful Occupancy              $125.00  $100.00
6-5A-7C          Vagrancy; Begging                         $125.00  $100.00
6-5A-7D          Vagrancy; Fraudulent Schemes              $125.00  $100.00
6-5A-7E          Vagrancy; Common Law Vagrants             $125.00  $100.00
6-5A-8A          Loitering Prohibited                      $150.00  $125.00
6-5A-9           Assault                                   $250.00  must appear
6-5A-10          Battery                                   $250.00  must appear
6-5A-11          Reckless Conduct                          $250.00  must appear
6-5A-12          Resisting A Peace Officer                 $250.00  must appear
6-5A-13          Refusing To Aid An Officer                $250.00  must appear
6-5A-14          Employee and Subcontractor Work Crews of  $250.00  $225.00
                 Public Utility Franchise
6-5A-15          Criminal Trespass To Vehicles             $200.00  $175.00
6-5A-16         Criminal Trespass To Land                 $200.00  $175.00
6-5A-17          Taking Materials From Public Property     $200.00  $175.00
6-5A-19          Abandoned Refrigerator, Air Tight         $125.00  $100.00
                 Container
6-5A-20          Obstructing Passageways                   $150.00  $125.00
6-5A-21          Littering                                 $125.00  $100.00
6-5A-22          Retail Theft                              $150.00  $125.00
6-5A-23          Deceptive Practices                       $200.00  $175.00
6-5A-24A         Theft; By Exerting Unauthorized Control   $200.00  $175.00
6-5A-24B         Theft; By Deception                       $200.00  $175.00
6-5A-24C         Theft; By Obtaining Control Using Threats $200.00  $175.00
6-5A-24D         Theft; Obtaining Property Stolen By       $200.00  $175.00
                 Another
6-5A-25          Unlawful Restraint                        $200.00  $175.00
6-5A-26A         Gambling; Engaging In Gambling            $150.00  must appear
6-5A-26B         Gambling; Possession Of Gambling          $150.00  must appear
                 Materials
6-5A-27B         Graffiti; Graffiti And Damage To Property $250.00  must appear
                 Prohibited
6-5A-27C1        Graffiti; Owner Responsible For Removal   $150.00  $125.00
6-5A-28A         Theft, Defacement, Destruction, Removal   $200.00  $175.00
                 Of Governmental Signs
6-5A-29C         Street Gang Activity; Colors, Emblems Or  $200.00  must appear
                 Insignia
6-5A-29D         Street Gang Activity; Act, Utterance,     $200.00  must appear
                 Gesture Or Display
6-5A-30A         Alcohol; Consumption/Possession On Public $150.00  $125.00
                 Property
6-5A-30B         Alcohol; Consumption/Possession In        $150.00  $125.00
                 Business Without A License
6-5A-31B2        Tobacco; Sale/Delivery Without A License  $250.00  must appear
6-5A-31C1        Tobacco; Purchase Of Products Under 21    $150.00  $125.00
6-5A-31D1        Tobacco; Possession Of Products Under 18  $150.00  $125.00
6-5A-31E1        Tobacco; Sale Of Accessories To Minors    $250.00  must appear
6-5-31E2         Tobacco; Sale Of Bidi Cigarettes          $250.00  must appear
6-5-31E4         Tobacco; Use Of False I.D. To Obtain      $250.00  must appear
                 Products
6-5-31E5         Tobacco; Business Required To Post        $150.00  must appear
                 Warning To Minors
6-5-31F          Tobacco; Availability                     $250.00  must appear
6-5A-32          Nuisance Gatherings                       $500.00  must appear
Article B: Immorality
6-5B-1A          Public Indecency; Sexual Conduct Or       $200.00  must appear
                 Sexual Penetration
6-5B-1B          Public Indecency; Exposure Of The Body    $300.00  must appear
                 With Intent For Arousal
6-5B-2A          Obscene Literature, Pictures,             $300.00  must appear
                 Performances
Article C: Weapons
6-5C-2           Concealing Or Displaying Weapons          $300.00  must appear
6-5C-3           Discharge Of Firearms                     $300.00  must appear
6-5C-4A          Display/Sale Weapons; Permits, Licenses   $200.00  must appear
                 Required
6-5C-4B          Display/Sale Weapons; Customers Permitted $200.00  must appear
                 To Examine
6-5C-4C          Display/Sale Weapons; Employee Present    $200.00  must appear
6-5C-4D          Display/Sale Weapons; Weapons Incapable   $200.00  must appear
                 Of Firing
6-5C-4E          Display/Sale Weapons; Storage During Non- $200.00  must appear
                 Business Hours
6-5C-4F          Display/Sale Weapons; Allowance Of City   $200.00  must appear
                 Inspection
Article D: Drug Paraphernalia; Possession Of Cannabis
6-5D-1C          Possession Of Paraphernalia               $150.00  $125.00
6-5D-2B1         Possession/Consumption Under 21           $200.00  must appear
6-5D-2B2         Parent/Guardian Responsibilities          $200.00  must appear
6-5D-2C          Consumption In Or About A Public Place    $200.00  $175.00
6-5D-3           Persons Responsible For Unlawful          $200.00  must appear
                 Activities
Article E: Minors
6-5E-1A          Parental Responsibility; Permitting A     $150.00  must appear
                 Minor To Violate Code/Statute
6-5E-1B          Parental Responsibility; Parent/Guardian  $150.00  must appear
                 Responsible For Restitution
6-5E-2B          Curfew                                    $150.00  $125.00
6-5E-3B          Truancy                                   $125.00  $100.00
6-5E-3D          Truancy; Parental Responsibility          $125.00  $100.00
6-5E-3D          Truancy; Contributing To The Delinquency  $125.00  $100.00
                 Of A Truant
Chapter 6: Fireworks And Explosives
6-6-2            License Required For Discharge            $150.00  must appear
6-3-3            Public Displays Without Permit            $150.00  must appear
6-6-4            Sale, Storage And Possession Prohibited   $150.00  $125.00
Chapter 7: Open Fires
6-7-1            Scope; Applicability                      $150.00  $125.00
6-7-2            Proximity To Structures, Flammables       $150.00  $125.00
6-7-3            Prohibited Burning                        $150.00  $125.00
6-7-4            Outdoor Cooking                           $150.00  $125.00
6-7-5B1          Recreational Burning; Private Property    $150.00  $125.00
6-7-5B2          Recreational Burning; Permanent Outdoor   $150.00  $125.00
                 Fire Pit
6-7-5B3          Recreational Burning; Portable Fireplaces $150.00  $125.00
6-7-5B4          Recreational Burning; Attendance          $150.00  $125.00
6-7-5B5          Recreational Burning; Extinguishing       $150.00  $125.00
                 Equipment
6-7-5B6          Recreational Burning; Seasoned Dry        $150.00  $125.00
                 Firewood
6-7-5B7          Recreational Burning; Extinguish When     $150.00  $125.00
                 Unattended
6-7-5B8          Recreational Burning; Control Of Smoke    $150.00  $125.00
6-7-5B9          Recreational Burning; Nuisances           $150.00  $125.00
Chapter 8: Parades, Processions, Public Gatherings
6-8-2            Permit Required                           $50.00    
6-8-16           Interference With Parade Or Parade        $150.00  $125.00
                 Assembly
6-8-17           Driving Through Parades                   $200.00  $175.00
6-8-18           Parking On A Parade Route                 $25.00    
TITLE 7 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 2: General Regulations
7-2-1A1          Skateboarding Within Commercial Zoning    $50.00   $25.00
                 District
7-2-1B           Skateboarding Within A City Park/Bike     $50.00   $25.00
                 Path
7-2-2A1          Snowmobiles Prohibited Within City        $125.00  $100.00
                 Property
7-2-3B           Unauthorized Use Of Motorized             $125.00  $100.00
                 Recreational Device
7-2-4            Compression/Release Engine Brake Use      $125.00  $100.00
7-2-5B           Operation Of Non-Highway Vehicles;        $200.00  $175.00
                 Operation
7-2-5C           Operation Of Non-Highway Vehicles;        $150.00  $125.00
                 Registration
7-2-5D           Operation Of Non-Highway Vehicles;        $250.00  $225.00
                 Location
7-2-5E           Operation Of Non-Highway Vehicles; Time   $200.00  $175.00
Chapter 8: Restricted Road Traffic
7-8-1            Vehicle Traffic Restricted                $750.00  $725.00
7-8-3            General Fine for Violating Title 7,       $750.00  $725.00
                 Chapter 8
TITLE 8 - PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1: Streets, Sidewalks and Public Ways
8-1-7            Obstruction of street                     $200.00  $175.00
8-1-8            Street repair barricades                  $200.00  $175.00
8-1-9            Public land use                           $200.00  $175.00
8-1-10           Obstruct open ditches, drains             $200.00  $175.00
8-1-14A          Deposits on street                        $200.00  $175.00
8-1-14B1-B 2     Deposits on sidewalks                     $200.00  $175.00
8-1-14B3         Removal of sidewalk deposits              $200.00  $175.00
8-1-15           Burning on public streets                 $200.00  $175.00
8-1-17           Unlawful curb cut                         $200.00  $175.00
8-1-18           Snow and Ice Deposits Restricted          $200.00  $175.00
Chapter 2: Parks and Recreation
8-2-5            Damaging Property                         $200.00  $175.00
8-2-6            Maintenance, Use of Restrooms, Washrooms  $125.00  $100.00
8-2-7            Removal of Natural Resources              $125.00  $100.00
8-2-8            Permit Required for Structures, Utilities $200.00  $175.00
8-2-9            Damaging Plants                           $150.00  $125.00
8-2-10           Climbing, Sitting on Trees, Fixtures      $50.00   $25.00
8-2-11           Molesting Animals, Birds                  $250.00  $225.00
8-2-12           Feeding Noxious Substances to Animals,    $250.00  $225.00
                 Birds
8-2-13           Pollution of Waters                       $125.00  $100.00
8-2-14           Refuse and Trash Disposal                 $125.00  $100.00
8-2-15           Swimming                                  $50.00   $25.00
8-2-16           Structures on Beaches                     $200.00  $175.00
8-2-17           Place for Dressing, Undressing            $150.00  $125.00
8-2-18           Boating and Docking                       $50.00   $25.00
8-2-19           Firearms and Weapons                      $200.00  $175.00
8-2-20           Picnicking                                $50.00   $25.00
8-2-21           Camping                                   $100.00  $75.00
8-2-22           Games, Recreational Activities Limited    $50.00   $25.00
8-2-23           Horseback Riding                          $50.00   $25.00
8-2-24           Intoxicating Beverages                    $100.00  $75.00
8-2-25           Fireworks and Explosives                  $200.00  $175.00
8-2-26           Pets and Domestic Animals                 $50.00   $25.00
8-2-27           No Smoking in any Enclosed Park Facility  $125.00  $100.00
                 Building
8-2-28           Soliciting Alms, Contributions            $125.00  $100.00
8-2-29           Fires                                     $125.00  $100.00
8-2-30           Closed Areas                              $100.00  $75.00
8-2-31           Going Onto Ice                            $75.00   $50.00
8-2-32           Loitering and Boisterousness              $75.00   $50.00
8-2-33           Duty to Exhibit Permit                    $50.00   $25.00
8-2-34           Interference with Permittees              $75.00   $50.00
8-2-35           Vending and Peddling                      $75.00   $50.00
8-2-36           Advertising and Signs                     $75.00   $50.00
8-2-39           Permits for Group Activities              $75.00   $50.00
8-2-40           Airplanes Prohibited                      $200.00  $175.00
8-2-41           Vehicles and Certain Watercraft and       $200.00  $175.00
                 Motors Prohibited on McCullom Lake
8-2-42           Skateboards                               $75.00   $50.00
8-2-43           Charges for Park and Recreational         $50.00   $25.00
                 Facilities
Chapter 3: Trees, Shrubs and Noxious Growth
8-3A-2           Permits required                          $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-3           Permitted Street Tree Species             $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-4           Improvements Prohibited in Public Rights- $100.00  $75.00
                 of-Way
8-3A-5           Street Tree Spacing                       $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-6           Planting Distance from Curbs and Sidewalk $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-7           Distance from Street Corners and Fire     $100.00  $75.00
                 Hydrants
8-3A-8           Distance from Utilities                   $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-9           Removal of Public Trees, Shrubs           $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-10          Injuring Unlawful                         $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-11          Attaching Advertisements, Notices         $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-12          Removal of Vegetation Likely to Fall on   $100.00  $75.00
                 Public Ways
8-3A-13          Wires, Rope and Poles                     $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-14          Gas Leaks Causing Injury                  $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-15          Precautions During Excavations            $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-17          Tree Topping                              $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-18          Pruning and Corner Clearance on Private   $100.00  $75.00
                 Property
8-3A-19          Private Property Tree Care and Removal    $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-20          Stump Removal                             $100.00  $75.00
8-3A-21          General Fine for Violating Title 8,       $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 3, Article A
8-3B-1           Weeds, nuisance                           $100.00  $75.00
8-3B-2           Parkway maintenance                       $100.00  $75.00
8-3C-3           Permit Required                           $100.00  $75.00
8-3C-7           Tree Removal Conditions                   $100.00  $75.00
8-3C-11          General Fine for Violating Title 8,       $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 3, Article C
Chapter 4: McHenry Riverwalk
8-4-2            Skateboard, Roller Blades, In-line        $50.00   $25.00
                 Skates, Bicycles Prohibited
8-4-4            Fishing                                   $50.00   $25.00
Chapter 5: Excavating and Tunneling
8-5-1            Permit, street excavation                 $200.00  $175.00
8-5-8            Restore street surface                    $200.00  $175.00
Chapter 6: Encroachments
8-6-2            Encroachment Prohibited                   $100.00  $75.00
8-6-6            General Fine for Violating Title 8,       $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 6
TITLE 9: PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter 2: Water Use and Service Regulations
9-2A-2           Permits, Regulations                      $100.00  $75.00
9-2A-3           Fire Sprinkler Systems                    $100.00  $75.00
9-2A-4           Who May Turn on Service                   $100.00  $75.00
9-2A-5           Resale Prohibited                         $100.00  $75.00
9-2A-6           Tampering                                 $100.00  $75.00
9-2A-8           Outdoor Limitation on Use of Water        $100.00  $75.00
9-2C-1           Water meter required                      $100.00  $75.00
9-2C-4           Reading Meters                            $100.00  $75.00
9-2D-1           Private water wells prohibited            $100.00  $75.00
9-2D-2           Water connection required                 $100.00  $75.00
Chapter 4: Sewer Regulations
9-4A-3           Sewer connection required                 $100.00  $75.00
9-4B-17          Discharging to Storm Sewer                $100.00  $75.00
9-4D-5           Septic system approval                    $100.00  $75.00
TITLE 10: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1: Administration, Permits; Certificates; Fees, Penalty
10-1-3           No building permit                        $200.00  $175.00
10-1-6           Duration of permit                        $100.00  $75.00
10-1-8           Occupancy certificate required            $200.00  $175.00
10-1-9           Compliance with regulations               $100.00  $75.00
10-1-14          Street use restricted                     $100.00  $75.00
10-1-18          Burning construction waste                $200.00  $175.00
10-1-19          Waste material storage                    $100.00  $75.00
10-1-20          Construction safeguards                   $100.00  $75.00
10-1-22          Garage required                           $100.00  $75.00
10-1-25          Residential rental registration           $200.00  $175.00
10-1-28          General Fine for Violating Title 10,      $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 1
Chapter 2: Building Code
10-2-1           Compliance with International Building    $100.00  $75.00
                 Code
Chapter 6: Fuel Gas Code
10-6-1           Compliance with Fuel Gas Code             $100.00  $75.00
Chapter 7: Mechanical Code
10-7-1           Compliance with Mechanical Code           $100.00  $75.00
Chapter 8: Property Maintenance Code
10-8-1           International Property Maintenance Code   $100.00  $75.00
Chapter 10: Housing and Maintenance and Occupancy Code
10-10-5D         Storage/disposal of rubbish               $100.00  $75.00
10-10-5F         Refuse Containers Capacity                $100.00  $75.00
10-10-5G         Landlord provide refuse container         $100.00  $75.00
10-10-5H         Extermination required                    $100.00  $75.00
10-10-5I         Accumulation of rubbish, etc.             $100.00  $75.00
10-10-5J         Rodent harborage                          $100.00  $75.00
10-10-5L         Minimum heat requirements                 $100.00  $75.00
10-10-6A         Kitchen required                          $100.00  $75.00
10-10-6B         Water closet required                     $100.00  $75.00
10-10-6C         Lavatory sink required                    $100.00  $75.00
10-10-6D         Bathtub required                          $100.00  $75.00
10-10-7A         Dwelling unit, keep/good repair           $100.00  $75.00
10-10-7B         Gutters, good condition                   $100.00  $75.00
10-10-7C         Units, premises rodent free               $100.00  $75.00
10-10-7E         Accessory structure, good repair          $100.00  $75.00
10-10-7F         Plumbing pipes/fixtures, good repair      $100.00  $75.00
10-10-7G         Bathroom floors impervious/water          $100.00  $75.00
10-10-7H         Utility services maintained               $100.00  $75.00
10-10-7I         Negligent housing management              $100.00  $75.00
10-10-10         General Fine for Violating Title 10,      $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 10
Chapter 11: Electrical Code
10-11-6          Rough-in inspection                       $100.00  $75.00
Chapter 13: Fences
10-13-1          Fence permit required                     $100.00  $75.00
10-13-3          Fence standards                           $100.00  $75.00
10-13-4          Residential fences                        $100.00  $75.00
10-13-5          Nonresidential fences                     $100.00  $75.00
10-13-6          Dangerous, encroaching fences             $100.00  $75.00
Chapter 15: Parabolic Dish Type Antennas
10-15-2          Parabolic dish - residential              $100.00  $75.00
10-15-3          Parabolic dish - nonresidential           $100.00  $75.00
Chapter 16: Residential Teardown Sites and Infill Properties
10-16-12         Violation of Residential Teardown         $500.00  $475.00
                 Guidelines
Chapter 20: Signs
10-20-7          Prohibited Signs                          $100.00  $75.00
10-20-8          Nonconforming Signs                       $100.00  $75.00
10-20-9          Maintenance and Repair Required           $100.00  $75.00
10-20-12         Sign Standards                            $100.00  $75.00
Chapter 21: Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
10-21-3          Site Development Permit Required          $100.00  $75.00
10-21-22         General Fine for Violating Title 10,      $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 21
                                                                  
Chapter 22: Historic Preservation
10-22-6          Alteration, Construction, Demolition, and $100.00  $75.00
                 Maintenance
10-22-7          General Fine for Violating Title 10,      $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 22
TITLE 11: LAND USE REGULATIONS
Chapter 8A - Residential Districts Regulations
                 Temporary refuse containers and storage
11-8A-5          units                                     $100.00  $75.00
                   
Chapter 9 - Commercial Districts
11-9-8           General fine for violating Title 11,      $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 9
Chapter 12 - Off Street Parking and Loading
11-12-1G         Motor vehicle storage/repair              $100.00  $75.00
11-12-1J         Parking area maintenance                  $100.00  $75.00
11-12-2D         Parking area surfacing                    $100.00  $75.00
11-12-2H         Parking, RV                               $100.00  $75.00
11-12-2I         Parking, commercial vehicle               $100.00  $75.00
Chapter 14: Accessory Uses, Yards and Fences
11-14-4, Table 1 Yard obstructions                         $100.00  $75.00
11-14-4, Table 2 Accessory structures                      $100.00  $75.00
TITLE 12: SUBDIVISION CONTROL AND DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 1: General Provisions
12-1-5           Compliance with Technical Specifications  $100.00  $75.00
                 Manual
12-1-9           General Fine for Violating Title 12,      $100.00  $75.00
                 Chapter 1
 
(Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022; amd. Ord. 23-24, 5-1-2023; Ord. 23-26, 5-15-2023; Ord.
23-37, 7-17-2023; Ord. 23-42, 8-21-2023; Ord. 24-43, 8-19-2024)
CHAPTER 2: PARKING FINES
Section
15-2-1: Table Of Parking Fines
15-2-1: TABLE OF PARKING FINES:
Section Offense Fine
Section                       Offense                 Fine
7-4-9,                        No parking anytime      25.00
7-4-10
7-4-11,
7-4-12,
7-4-13,
7-4-14,
7-4-15,                       Overtime parking        25.00
7-4-17,
7-4-19,
7-4-20,
7-4-21
7-4-22                        Loading zone             
7-4-23                        School bus loading zone 25.00
7-4-24                        15 minute parking zone  25.00
7-4-27A                       Daily/season pass       50.00
7-4-27B                       Overtime parking        50.00
625 ILCS 5/11-209(h)          Parking, fire lane      100.00
625 ILCS 5/11-1301.3          Parking, disabilities   250.00
625 ILCS 5/11-1303(a) and (b) Parking, fire hydrant   100.00
Any other parking violation not listed above          25.00
 
Any parking fine not paid prior to adjudication court will incur an additional
$75.00 adjudication administrative fee.
(Ord. 22-40, 6-20-2022; amd. Ord. 23-24, 5-1-2023)
